CITY CODE
of
SOUTH WEBER CITY, UTAH
1998
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-16, passed 8-26-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of South Weber City, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-16, passed August 26, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE #98-11
   REVISING, CODIFYING, COMPILING AND ADOPTING
   THE CITY CODE OF SOUTH WEBER CITY
   Now therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of South Weber City as
follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of South Weber City, Utah prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official
Code and Law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, three (3) copies of which
shall be maintained in the office of the City Recorder, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official City Code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Mayor and City
Council.
   Section 7: Effective Date: The Code of Revised Ordinances shall be effective
on 29 June 1998.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of South Weber City, South Weber, Davis
County, Utah this 26th day of May 1998.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f16a5ed618c4ec2c872b44142ab358bc7c7f25cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1607.png]
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL CITY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-1-1: Incorporation - Classification
1-1-2: City Seal
1-1-1: INCORPORATION - CLASSIFICATION:
The Town of South Weber was incorporated in 1938 as a political subdivision of
the State of Utah and on March 16, 1971 with a population of 1,073 became a
third class city. Under reclassification by the State of Utah in 2003, South
Weber City, having a population of 1,000 or more but less than 10,000, became a
city of the fifth class. The City may be referred to as South Weber City or the
City of South Weber, and is a municipal corporation and a political subdivision
of the State of Utah. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-1-2: CITY SEAL:
The Corporate Seal of South Weber City, established and declared to be the
official Seal of the City, is circular in form with the City's logo of
mountains, river, and trees in the middle of the seal, and around the edge the
words, "South Weber City * 1971 * Davis County, Utah * 1938 *". (Ord. 17-01, 2-
28-2017)
CHAPTER 2
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-2-1: City Government Powers Vested In A Council
1-2-2: Mayor - Mayor Pro Tempore
1-2-3: Council
1-2-4: Meetings - Procedure And Conduct
1-2-5: Ordinances And Resolutions - Procedures
1-2-1: CITY GOVERNMENT POWERS VESTED IN A COUNCIL:
The powers of municipal government in South Weber City, which operates under a
six-member council form of government, are vested in a Council consisting of
six (6) members, one of which is a Mayor. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-2-2: MAYOR - MAYOR PRO TEMPORE:
   A.   The Mayor:
      1.   Is the Chief Executive Officer of the City to whom the City Manager
shall report;
      2.   Shall:
         a.   Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the City;
         b.   Ensure that all applicable statutes and City ordinances and
resolutions are faithfully executed and observed;
         c.   If the Mayor remits a fine or forfeiture under subsection A3 of
this section, report the remittance to the Council at the Council's next
meeting after the remittance;
         d.   Perform all duties prescribed by State Statute or City ordinance
or resolution;
         e.   Report to the Council the condition and needs of the City; and
         f.   Report to the Council any release granted under subsection A3d of
this section;
         g.   Execute all deeds on behalf of the City; and
      3.   May:
         a.   Recommend for Council consideration any measure that the Mayor
considers to be in the best interests of the City;
         b.   Remit fines and forfeitures;
         c.   If necessary, call on residents of the City over the age of
twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the State and
ordinances of the City;
         d.   Release a person imprisoned for a violation of a City ordinance;
         e.   With the Council's advice and consent:
            (1)   Assign or appoint a member of the Council to administer one
or more departments of the City; and
            (2)   Appoint a person to fill a City office or a vacancy on a
commission or committee of the City; and
         f.   At any reasonable time, examine and inspect the official books,
papers, records, or documents of the City or any officer, employee, or agency
of the City.
   B.   The Mayor:
      1.   Is, except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, a nonvoting
member of the Council;
      2.   Votes as a voting member of the Council:
         a.   On each matter for which there is a tie vote of the other Council
members present at a Council meeting; or
         b.   When the Council is voting on:
            (1)   Whether to appoint or dismiss a City Manager; or
            (2)   An ordinance that enlarges or restricts the Mayor's powers,
duties, or functions;
      3.   Is the Chair of the Council and presides at all Council meetings;
      4.   Exercises ceremonial functions for the City;
      5.   May not veto an ordinance, tax levy, or appropriation passed by the
Council;
      6.   May, within budget constraints, appoint one or more administrative
assistants to the Mayor.
   C.   If the Mayor is absent or unable or refuses to act, the Council may
elect a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tempore to preside at a Council
meeting and perform, during the Mayor's absence, disability, or refusal to act,
the duties and functions of Mayor.
   D.   The City Recorder shall enter in the minutes of the Council meeting the
election of a Council member as Mayor Pro Tempore under subsection C of this
section. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-2-3: COUNCIL:
   A.   The City Council:
      1.   Exercises any executive or administrative power and performs or
supervises the performance of any executive or administrative duty or function
that:
         a.   Has not been given to the Mayor under subsection
1-2-2A of this chapter or,
         b.   Has been given to the Mayor under subsection
1-2-2A of this chapter but is removed from the Mayor under subsection A2a(1) of
this section;
      2.   May:
         a.   Subject to subsections A3 and B of this section, adopt an
ordinance:
            (1)   Removing from the Mayor any power, duty, or function of the
Mayor under subsection
1-2-2A of this chapter; or
            (2)   Reinstating to the Mayor any power, duty, or function
previously removed under subsection A2a(1) of this section.
         b.   Adopt an ordinance delegating to the Mayor any executive or
administrative power, duty, or function that the Council has under this
subsection A;
         c.   Subject to subsection
1-2-2B2b(2) of this chapter:
            (1)   Appoint, subject to subsections C and D of this section, a
Manager to perform executive and administrative duties or functions that the
Council by ordinance delegates to the Manager, subject to subsection A3 of this
section; and
            (2)   Dismiss a Manager appointed under subsection A2c(1) of this
section; and
         d.   Assign any or all Council members, including the Mayor, to
supervise one or more administrative departments of the City; and
      3.   May not remove from the Mayor or delegate to a Manager appointed by
the Council:
         a.   Any of the Mayor's legislative or judicial powers or ceremonial
functions;
         b.   The Mayor's position as Chair of the Council; or
         c.   Any ex officio position that the Mayor holds.
   B.   Adopting an ordinance under subsection A2a of this section removing
from or reinstating to the Mayor a power, duty, or function provided for in
subsection
1-2-2A of this chapter requires the affirmative vote of:
      1.   The Mayor and a majority of all other Council members; or
      2.   All Council members except the Mayor.
   C.   1. As used in this subsection C, "interim vacancy period" means the
period of time that:
         a.   Begins on the day on which a Municipal general election described
in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-201 is held to elect a Council member; and
         b.   Ends on the day on which the Council member-elect begins the
Council member's term.
      2.   a. The Council may not appoint a Manager during an interim vacancy
period.
         b.   Notwithstanding subsection C2a of this section:
            (1)   The Council may appoint an Interim Manager during an interim
vacancy period; and
            (2)   The Interim Manager's term shall expire once a new Manager is
appointed by the new administration after the interim vacancy period has ended.
         c.   This subsection C2 does not apply if all the Council members who
held office on the day of the Municipal general election whose term of office
was vacant for the election are re-elected to the Council for the following
term.
   D.   A Council that appoints a Manager in accordance with this section may
not enter into an employment contract that contains an automatic renewal
provision with the Manager.
   E.   The Council:
      1.   Is the legislative body of the City and exercises the legislative
powers and performs the legislative duties and functions of the City;
      2.   Shall pass all resolutions and ordinances, appropriate funds and
adopt the annual budget, set all mill levies or taxes, review Municipal
administration, and perform all duties that may be required by law; and
      3.   May:
         a.   Adopt rules and regulations, not inconsistent with statute, for
the efficient administration, organization, operation, conduct, and business of
the City;
         b.   Prescribe by resolution additional duties, powers, and
responsibilities for any elected or appointed Municipal official, unless
prohibited by statute;
         c.   Require by ordinance that any or all appointed officers reside in
the City;
         d.   Create any office that the Council considers necessary for the
government of the City;
         e.   Provide for filling a vacancy in an elective or appointive
office;
         f.   Take any action allowed under Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-
84; and
         g.   Perform any function specifically provided for by statute or
necessarily implied by law. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-2-4: MEETINGS - PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT:
   A.   Regular Meetings:
      1.   The City Council shall hold regular meetings on the second and
fourth Tuesday of each month at City Hall, 1600 East South Weber Drive, South
Weber, Utah.
      2.   Regular Council meetings shall begin promptly at six o'clock (6:00)
P.M., provided that:
         a.   If the meeting date is a legal holiday, then the meeting shall be
held at the same time and place described in subsection A1 of this section on
the next day which is not a legal holiday; and
         b.   The City Council may, by resolution, provide for a different time
and place for holding regular meetings of the City Council.
   B.   Special Meetings: If at any time the business of the City requires a
special meeting of the City Council, such meeting may be ordered by the Mayor
or any two (2) members of the City Council. The order shall be entered in the
minutes of the City Council. The order shall provide at least three (3) hours'
notice of the special meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the City
Recorder on each member who did not sign the order by delivering the notice
personally or by leaving it at the Council member's usual place of abode. The
personal appearance by a Council member at any specially called meeting
constitutes a waiver of the notice required in this subsection.
   C.   Open Meetings: Every meeting of the Council shall comply with the Open
and Public Meetings Act, Utah Code Annotated 52-4-101 et seq. A meeting is open
to the public unless closed under Utah Code Annotated sections 52-4-204, 52-4-
205, and 52-4-206.
   D.   Quorum:
      1.   The number of Council members necessary to constitute a quorum is
three (3), excluding the Mayor.
      2.   No action of the City Council shall be official or of any effect
except when a quorum is present. Fewer than a quorum may adjourn from time to
time.
   E.   Voting:
      1.   How Vote Taken: A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all
ordinances, resolutions and any action which would create a liability against
the City and in any other case at the request of any member of the City Council
by a "yes" or a "no" vote and shall be recorded. Every resolution or ordinance
shall be in writing before the vote is taken.
      2.   Minimum Vote Required: The minimum number of votes required to pass
any ordinance, resolution or to take any action by the City Council, unless
otherwise prescribed by law, shall be a majority of the members of the Council,
but shall never be less than three (3).
         a.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the Council having fewer
favorable votes than three (3) shall be deemed defeated and invalid, except a
meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a majority vote of the City
Council even though such majority vote is less than three (3).
         b.   A majority of the members of the City Council, regardless of
number, may fill any vacancy in the City Council.
      3.   Reconsideration: Any action taken by the City Council shall not be
reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless the number of members
of the City Council present at the special meeting is equal to or greater than
the number of members present at the meeting when the action was approved.
(Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-2-5: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS - PROCEDURES:
   A.   Power Exercised By Ordinance: The City Council may pass any ordinance
to regulate, require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity,
business, conduct or condition authorized by statute or any other provision of
law. An officer of the City shall not be convicted of a criminal offense where
the officer relied on or enforced an ordinance the officer reasonably believed
to be a valid ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive
damages that the official acted in good faith in enforcing an ordinance or that
the officer enforced an ordinance on advice of legal counsel.
   B.   Penalty For Violation: Unless otherwise specifically authorized by
statute, the City Council may provide a penalty for the violation of any City
ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum Class B misdemeanor fine under
Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a term of imprisonment up to six (6)
months, or by both the fine and term of imprisonment. The City Council may
prescribe a minimum penalty for the violation of any City ordinance and may
impose a civil penalty for the unauthorized use of City property, including,
but not limited to, the use of parks, streets and other public grounds or
equipment.
   C.   Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the City Council shall
contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
      1.   A number;
      2.   A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the
ordinance;
      3.   A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
      4.   An ordaining clause which states, "Be it ordained by the City of
South Weber:";
      5.   The body or subject of the ordinance;
      6.   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of
the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance
which prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of the
City ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and
refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
      7.   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the
date when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting;
      8.   A line for the signature of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem to sign the
ordinance; and
      9.   A place for the City Recorder to attest the ordinance and affix the
Seal of the City.
   D.   Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
      1.   Ordinances passed or enacted by the City Council shall be signed by
the Mayor, or if absent, by the Mayor Pro Tempore, or by a quorum of the City
Council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be void
or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah Code
Annotated subsections 10-3-704(1), (2), (3), or (4).
      2.   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication
or posting or thirty (30) days after final passage by the City Council,
whichever is closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become
effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so
provided in the ordinance.
   E.   Publication and Posting of Ordinances:
      1.   Before an ordinance may take effect, the City Council adopting an
ordinance, except an ordinance enacted under Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-
706 to 10-3-710, shall deposit a copy of the ordinance in the Office of the
City Recorder and post a complete copy of the ordinance, or a summary if the
full ordinance is extensive, as required by state law.
      2.   Any ordinance, code, or book, other than the State Code, relating to
building or safety standards, City functions, administration, control or
regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further publication
or posting, if reference is made to the code or book and at least one copy has
been filed for use and examination by the public in the Office of the City
Recorder prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the City Council. Any State
law relating to building or safety standards, City functions, administration,
control or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further
publication or posting if reference is made to the State Code. The ordinance
adopting the code or book shall be published in the manner provided in Utah
Code Annotated sections 10-3-709 and 10-3-710.
   F.   Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage:
      1.   The City Recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that
purpose, all ordinances passed by the City Council. The City Recorder shall
give each ordinance a number, if the City Council has not already so done, and
shall indicate upon the face of the ordinance the date adopted. Immediately
following the passage of each ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the
City Recorder shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the date of
passage and of the date of publication or posting, as required. The record and
memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage, and publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
      2.   The City Recorder shall keep all ordinances of a local, private or
temporary nature, including franchises, grants, dedication, bond issues and tax
levies, in a separate book of “special ordinances” properly indexed and
organized according to date adopted. The first number of such an ordinance
shall be the last two (2) digits of the year the ordinance is adopted, followed
by a dash which is followed by a number indicating the order in which such
special ordinance was adopted during the year.
      3.   Failure to comply with this subsection shall not affect or render
invalid any ordinance of the City.
   G.   Resolutions:
      1.   Purpose: Unless otherwise required by law, the City Council may
exercise all administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited to
establishing water and sewer rates, establishing charges for garbage collection
and fees charged for City services, establishing personnel policies and
guidelines, and regulating the use and operation of the City property.
Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution.
      2.   Form: Any resolution passed by the City Council shall be in a form
and contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
      3.   Publication; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective
without publication or posting and may take effect on passage or at a later
date as the City Council may determine, but resolutions may not become
effective more than three (3) months from the date of passage.
   H.   Public Hearings: The City Council shall not hold a public hearing for
resolutions, ordinances, applications, amendments or other agenda items unless
specifically required by State law or upon a procedural motion approved by the
City Council. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017; amd. Ord. 2024-02, 2-13-2024)
CHAPTER 3
CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
1-3-1: Office Created
1-3-2: Appointment
1-3-3: Term
1-3-4: Powers And Duties
1-3-5: Role Of The City Council
1-3-6: Salary
1-3-7: Performance Review
1-3-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the Office of City Manager of South Weber City, Utah.
(Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-3-2: APPOINTMENT:
The appointment of a City Manager shall be by the City Council, including the
Mayor. Once appointed, the Mayor shall sign the contract between the City
Manager and the City on behalf of the City. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-3-3: TERM:
The City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, except that
the City Council may employ the Manager for a term not to exceed five (5)
years. The term of employment may be renewed at any time. Any person serving as
Manager may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the City
Council, including the Mayor. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017; amd. Ord. 2023-12, 8-22-
2023)
1-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The City Manager shall:
      1.   Be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City to whom all
employees of the City report;
      2.   Exercise the administrative powers, authority, and duties of the
City;
      3.   Carry out the policies and programs established by the Council;
      4.   Report to and coordinate regularly with the Mayor;
      5.   Notify the Mayor and City Council of any emergency existing in any
department;
      6.   Attend meetings of the City Council with the right to take part in
the discussion but not to vote and may recommend to the City Council for
adoption measures deemed necessary or expedient;
      7.   Hire and, when deemed necessary, suspend or remove City employees,
except that the City Recorder and the City Treasurer shall be appointed or
removed only by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council;
      8.   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices,
and agencies of the City except as otherwise provided by law;
      9.   Act as the Budget Officer for the City and perform or cause to be
performed all of the duties of such office as set forth in the Uniform
Municipal Fiscal Procedures Act, including the preparation and submittal of the
annual budget to the Council;
      10.   Execute all contracts and agreements on behalf of the City; and
      11.   Perform such other duties as may be required by this Code or by the
City Council through ordinance, resolution, or directive.
   B.   The City Manager may examine and inspect the books, records, and
official papers of any office, department, agency, board or commissions of the
City and make investigations and require reports from all personnel.
   C.   In the Manager's temporary absence, the City Manager shall designate a
city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Manager. If
the City Manager does not or cannot designate a city employee, then the
designation shall be made by the Mayor.
(Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017; amd. Ord. 2023-16, 11-28-2023)
1-3-5: ROLE OF THE CITY COUNCIL:
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with
the City administration solely through the City Manager. Neither the Council
nor any member thereof or the Mayor shall give orders to any subordinate of the
City Manager, either publicly or privately. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-3-6: SALARY:
The salary of the City Manager shall be set from time to time by resolution of
the City Council. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-3-7: PERFORMANCE REVIEW:
The City Council and Mayor shall review the performance of the City Manager six
(6) months after the City Manager is hired. After that time, unless there is a
concern, the City Manager's performance shall be evaluated at least annually.
During the review process, the City Council and Mayor may grant a step increase
according to the City's compensation scale, but the City Manager shall have no
legal claim to a step increase. (Ord. 19-07, 3-12-2019)
CHAPTER 4
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-4-1: Creating Offices - Filling Vacancies
1-4-2: Compensation
1-4-3: Officials' Bonds
1-4-4: Oaths
1-4-5: Official Neglect And Misconduct
1-4-6: City Recorder, City Treasurer, Director Of Finance, And Ex Officio
Auditor
1-4-7: City Attorney - Prosecutor
1-4-8: Private Work Prohibited
1-4-9: Performance Reviews
1-4-10: Ethics And Disclosure
1-4-1: CREATING OFFICES - FILLING VACANCIES:
   A.   Offices Created By Council: The City Council may create any office
deemed necessary for the government of the City and provide for filling
vacancies in elective and appointive offices.
   B.   Mayor To Appoint And Fill Vacancies: The Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, may appoint and fill vacancies in all offices
provided for by law or ordinance.
   C.   Continuation In Office: All appointed officers shall continue in office
until their successors are appointed and qualified. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-4-2: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Established: The City Council shall from time to time enact by
resolution the salaries to be paid the employees of the City. (Ord. 17-01, 2-
28-2017)
   B.   Benefits: In addition to the salary paid the officers and employees of
the City, they shall receive the following benefits:
      1.   Vacation and sick leave on such basis as the City Council may from
time to time establish by resolution.
      2.   State retirement. (Ord. 17-02, 2-28-2017)
   C.   Serving In Two Or More Positions: Whenever any person serves in two (2)
or more positions either as officers or employees of this City, unless
otherwise specifically provided in the employment agreement by ordinance or by
resolution, that person shall receive the salary or compensation of the office
or employment paying the greater amount.
   D.   Reimbursement For Travel Expenses: In addition to all other
compensation or salaries, any officer or employee of the City may receive,
following the submission to the City Recorder of a claim, travel expenses and
per diem established by the Utah State Department of Finance for expense
actually incurred by the person for attending any meeting, conference, seminar
or training session, provided attendance is approved by the City Council. (Ord.
17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-4-3: OFFICIALS' BONDS:
   A.   Inasmuch as South Weber City is a city of the fifth class, no bond
shall be required of the City's elected officials. Other officers of the City
identified in this section shall furnish a personal bond with good and
sufficient sureties or corporate surety bond payable to the City in such penal
sum as established in this section, conditioned for the faithful performance of
the duties of their offices and the payment of all money received by such
officers according to law and the ordinances of the City, or such officers may
be included within public employee blanket bonds at such amounts as stated in
this section.
   B.   The premium charged by a corporate surety for any bond required by the
City or for crime or theft insurance shall be paid by the City.
   C.   If bonds are posted, they shall be filed with the City Recorder, except
the bond of the City Recorder shall be filed with the City Treasurer.
   D.   Officials' bonds or insurance shall be provided in the following
amounts:
      1.   City Treasurer: Five percent (5%) of the City's budgeted gross
revenue for the previous year but not less than three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00); and
      2.   City Recorder: Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   E.   The Treasurer's bond may be substituted with crime or theft insurance
in the amount specified by Rule 4 of the Utah Money Management Council and Utah
Code Annotated 51-7-15 of the State Money Management Act.
   F.   Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated 10-3-821, the City Treasurer's bond
shall be superseded by any rule, regulation, or directive of the State Money
Management Council. (Ord. 2019-06, 2-19-2019)
1-4-4: OATHS:
   A.   Constitutional Oath Of Office: All officers, whether elected or
appointed, before entering on the duties of their respective offices shall
take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office.
   B.   Filing: The oath of office required under this section shall be
administered by any Judge, notary public or by the City Recorder. Elected
officials shall take their oath of office at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
first Monday in January following their election or as soon thereafter as is
practical. Appointed officers shall take their oath at any time before entering
on their duties. All oaths of office shall be filed with the City Recorder.
   C.   Acts Of Officials Not Voided: No official act of any City officer shall
be invalid for the reason that he failed to take the oath of office. (Ord. 17-
01, 2-28-2017)
1-4-5: OFFICIAL NEGLECT AND MISCONDUCT:
   A.   In case any City officer shall at any time wilfully omit to perform any
duty, or wilfully and corruptly be guilty of oppression, malconduct,
misfeasance, or malfeasance in office, the person is guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor, as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-826, shall be
removed from office, and is not eligible for any City office thereafter.
   B.   As used in this section,
   MALCONDUCT: Means a public officer's corrupt violation of assigned duties by
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance.
   MALFEASANCE: Means a wrongful or unlawful act by a public officer.
   MISFEASANCE: Means the tort of excessive, malicious, or negligent exercise
of statutory powers by a public officer.
   OPPRESSION: Means an offense consisting in the abuse of discretionary
authority by a public officer who has an improper motive, as a result of which
a person is injured. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-4-6: CITY RECORDER, CITY TREASURER, DIRECTOR OF FINANCE, AND EX OFFICIO
AUDITOR:
   A.   Appointment: The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall appoint a qualified person to each of the Offices of City
Recorder, City Treasurer, and Director of Finance.
   B.   Separation Of Powers: The Director of Finance may not assume the duties
of the City Treasurer.
   C.   Ex Officio Auditor: The Finance Director is the ex officio City Auditor
and shall perform the duties of that office.
(Ord. 17-06, 5-9-2017; amd. Ord. 2023-16, 11-28-2023)
1-4-7: CITY ATTORNEY - PROSECUTOR:
The City Attorney or Prosecutor may prosecute violations of City ordinances,
and under State law, infractions and misdemeanors occurring within the
boundaries of the City and has the same powers in respect to the violations as
are exercised by a County Attorney, including, but not limited to, granting
immunity to witnesses. The City Attorney or Prosecutor shall represent the
interests of the State or the City in the appeal of any matter prosecuted in
any Trial Court by the City Attorney or Prosecutor. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-4-8: PRIVATE WORK PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any employee of the City to authorize or render
services or City equipment for use on any private person's property and which
is a benefit to such private person, including snow removal, sewer or water
line repair, or transporting garbage. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-4-9: PERFORMANCE REVIEWS:
   A.   The City Manager shall review the performance of Department Directors,
the City Treasurer, and City Recorder six (6) months after their hire date.
After that time, unless there is a concern, the performance of Department
Directors, the City Treasurer, and City Recorder shall be evaluated annually in
May and on other occasions as the need arises.
   B.   Department directors shall review the performance of their subordinates
six (6) months after their subordinates' hire dates. After that time, unless
there is a concern, the performance of the subordinate shall be evaluated
annually in May and on other occasions as the need arises. (Ord. 19-07, 3-12-
2019)
1-4-10: ETHICS AND DISCLOSURE:
   A.   Policy. It is the policy of South Weber City to hold its elected
officials, appointed officials, and employees to the highest standards of
ethical conduct, and to require these persons to disclose actual or potential
conflicts of interest between their public duties and their personal interests.
   B.   Federal and State Requirements. All City officers and employees shall
comply with the applicable provisions of Federal and State law regarding
ethics, including but not limited to the Utah Municipal Officers’ and
Employees’ Ethics Act, Utah Code Ann. 10-3-1301 et seq., as amended (“Ethics
Act”), which Ethics Act makes it a crime to do any of the following:
      1.   Disclose or improperly use private, controlled, or protected
information acquired by reason of an official position or in the course of
official duties to further substantially the officer’s or employee’s personal
economic interests or to secure special privileges or exemptions for the
officer or employee or others. Private, controlled, or protected information is
information that has been classified as such under the Governmental Records
Access and Management Act, Utah Code Ann 63G-2-101 et seq., as amended.
      2.   Use or attempt to use an official position to further substantially
the officer’s or employee’s personal economic interest or to secure special
privileges for the officer, employee, or others.
      3.   Knowingly receive, accept, take, seek, or solicit, directly or
indirectly for the officer, employee, or another, a gift of substantial value
or a substantial economic benefit tantamount to a gift that would tend to
improperly influence a reasonable person in the person’s position to depart
from the faithful and impartial discharge of the person’s public duties or that
a reasonable person in that position should know under the circumstances is
given to him or her primarily for the purpose of rewarding the person for
official action taken. The State exceptions to this requirement apply to City
officers and employees. According to these exceptions, it is permitted for a
City officer or employee to receive an occasional nonpecuniary gift having a
value of less than $50, an award publicly presented in recognition of public
services, any bona fide loan made in the ordinary course of business, or a
political campaign contribution.
      4.   Receive compensation for assisting any person or entity in any
transaction with the city or town without making a written and oral disclosure
to the mayor and public.
   C.   Disclosure and Recusal. All City officers and employees shall comply
with the disclosure requirements of the Ethics Act:
      1.   Written Disclosure.
         a.   Every appointed or elected officer or municipal employee who is
an officer, director, agent, or employee or the owner of a substantial interest
in any business entity which is subject to the regulation of the City shall
disclose the position held and the nature and value of his interest upon first
becoming appointed, elected, or employed by the City, and again at any time
thereafter if the person’s position in the business entity has changed
significantly or if the value of their interest in the entity has increased
significantly since the last disclosure.
         b.   The disclosure shall be made in a sworn statement filed with the
mayor. The mayor shall report the substance of all such disclosure statements
to the members of the City Council, or may provide to the members of the City
Council copies of the disclosure statement within 30 days after receiving the
same.
         c.   Written disclosure is also required anytime an officer or
employee accepts compensation to assist a person in their business with the
city. Such disclosure must contain the following:
            (1)   The name and address of the officer or employee;
            (2)   The name and address of the person or business entity being
assisted or in which the officer or employee has a substantial interest;
            (3)   A brief description of the transaction as to which service is
rendered or is to be rendered, and of the nature of the service performed or to
be performed.
      2.   Oral Disclosure during an Open Meeting.
         a.   Every city officer or employee who is an officer, director,
agent, employee, or owner of a substantial interest in any business entity
which does or anticipates doing business with the City shall publicly disclose
the nature of such interest.
         b.   Any personal interest or investment by a city officer or employee
which creates a conflict between the employee’s or officer’s personal interests
and his or her public duties shall be disclosed in an open meeting.
         c.   The disclosure statement shall be made during an open meeting to
the members of the body of which the officer is a member or the employee is
employed prior to any discussion by such body concerning matters relating to
such business entity. The disclosure statement shall be entered into the
minutes of the meeting.
         d.   Disclosure by a City employee is satisfied if the employee makes
the disclosure to the employee’s immediate supervisor and any other municipal
officer or employee who may rely upon the employee’s representations in
evaluating or approving the matter.
      3.   Recusal Required.
         a.   It is required that city officers and employees recuse themselves
from voting or acting on any matter for which written or oral recusal is
required.
         b.   If an officer or employee is uncertain whether they have a
conflict of interest requiring disclosure and recusal, it is the responsibility
of that officer or employee to seek advice from the Mayor, City Manager, or the
City Attorney prior to any discussion or action being taken on the matter
presenting the potential conflict. Recusal is required for actual conflicts of
interest and recommended for potential conflicts of interest.
   D.   Penalties; Dismissal; Rescission of Prohibited Transaction.
      1.   Violations of the Ethics Act carry criminal penalties.
      2.   Dismissal. In accordance with the requirements of the Ethics Act,
any person who knowingly and intentionally violates the above-referenced
requirements must be dismissed from employment or removed from office as is
required by the Act.
      3.   Rescission. For any transaction entered into in connection with a
violation of the Ethics Act or the recusal requirements of this section, the
City may rescind or void any contract or subcontract entered into pursuant to
that transaction without returning any part of the consideration received by
the City.
   E.   Definitions and Interpretation. All provisions of this section shall be
interpreted using definitions and language from the Ethics Act and the corpus
of judicial decisions and State Ethics Commission (Political Subdivisions
Ethics Commission) decisions and guidance interpreting the Ethics Act. (Ord.
2022-05, 3-22-2022)
CHAPTER 5
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Conduct
1-5-2: Election - Terms
1-5-3: Eligibility And Residency Requirements
1-5-4: Primary Election
1-5-5: Campaign Finance Disclosure Requirements
1-5-1: CONDUCT:
Elections for Mayor and Council members shall be conducted according to the
municipal elections section of Utah Code Annotated subsections 20A-9-404(1) and
(2). (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-5-2: ELECTION - TERMS:
   A.   The election and terms of office of the Offices of Mayor and two (2)
Council members shall be filled in Municipal elections held in 1977. The terms
shall be for four (4) years. These offices shall be filled thereafter every
four (4) years in Municipal elections.
   B.   The offices of the other three (3) Council members shall be filled in a
Municipal election held in 1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These
offices shall be filled thereafter every four (4) years in Municipal elections.
   C.   The offices shall be filled in at-large elections which shall be held
at the time and the manner provided for electing Municipal officers.
   D.   Where both two-year and four-year terms are to be filled by election or
appointment, the election ballot or appointment shall clearly state which
persons are to be elected or appointed to the shorter term and to the longer
term.
   E.   Vacancies in the Office of Mayor or City Council shall be filled as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-5-3: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Declaration Of Candidacy: A person may become a candidate for any City
office if:
      1.   The person is a registered voter;
      2.   The person has resided within the City for the twelve (12)
consecutive months immediately before the date of the election; and
      3.   The person meets the other requirements of Utah Code Annotated
section 20A-9-203.
   B.   Annexed Areas: A person living in an area annexed to the City meets the
residency requirement of this section if that person resided within the area
annexed to the City for the twelve (12) consecutive months before the date of
the election.
   C.   Residency Maintained: Each elected officer of the City shall maintain
residency within the boundaries of the City during the term of office.
   D.   Residence Outside City: If an elected officer of the City establishes a
principal place of residence as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-2-
105 outside of the City during the term of office, the office is automatically
vacant.
   E.   Continuous Absence From City: If an elected City officer is absent from
the City any time during the term of office for a continuous period of more
than sixty (60) days without the consent of the City Council, the City office
is automatically vacant. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-5-4: PRIMARY ELECTION:
   A.   When Required: This section provides for the candidates for Mayor and
Council members to be nominated at a primary election if required. A primary
election will be held only when the number of candidates filing for an office
exceeds twice the number to be elected, such as:
      1.   When one person to be elected, such as a Mayor, three (3) or more
must file to require a primary election;
      2.   When two (2) Council members are to be elected, five (5) or more
must file to require a primary election; and
      3.   When three (3) Council members are to be elected, seven (7) or more
must file to require a primary election.
   B.   Placement On Ballot: The candidates nominated at the primary election,
plus candidates that were not required to run in the primary are to be placed
on the November ballot. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-5-5: CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Definitions: Whenever the following words or terms are used in this
chapter, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them unless the
context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
   CANDIDATE: Any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective
office of the City; or is nominated by a committee or party; or received
contributions or made expenditures or consents to another person receiving
contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing about such
person's nominations or election to such office; or causes on his behalf, any
written material or advertisement to be printed, published, broadcast,
distributed, or disseminated which indicates any intention to seek such office.
   CONTRIBUTION: Monetary and nonmonetary contributions such as in-kind
contributions and contributions of tangible things, but shall not include
personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering
their time on behalf of a candidate.
   ELECTION: Both primary and general elections.
   EXPENDITURE: A purchase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, or
gift of money or anything of value made for the purpose of influencing the
nomination or election of any candidate.
   B.   Filing Of Disclosure Reports: Each candidate for elective offices shall
file with the City Recorder dated, signed, and sworn financial reports, which
comply with this section.
   C.   Time Of Filing: The reports required by this section shall be filed at
least once seven (7) days before the primary and general Municipal elections
and at least once thirty (30) days after the Municipal election.
   D.   Contents Of Statements: The statement filed seven (7) days before the
election shall include:
      1.   A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00)
received by the candidate, and name of the donor;
      2.   An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or
less received by the candidate; and
      3.   A list of each expenditure for political purposes made during the
campaign period, and the recipient of each expenditure.
The statement filed thirty (30) days after the elections shall include:
      1.   A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00)
received after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven (7) days before
the election, and the name of the donor; and
      2.   A list of all expenditures for political purposes made by the
candidate after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven (7) days before
the election, and the recipient of each expenditure.
   E.   Public Information: The statements required by this section shall be
public documents and shall be available for public inspection and copying
during all regular City business hours.
   F.   Penalty For Noncompliance: Any candidate who fails to comply with this
section is guilty of an infraction.
   G.   Severability: If any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
section is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, said portion shall be severed and such declarations shall not
affect the validity of the remainder of this section. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
CHAPTER 6
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-6-1: Title
1-6-2: Acceptance
1-6-3: Amendments
1-6-4: Code Alterations
1-6-5: Incorporation Of Statutes
1-6-6: Civil Liability
1-6-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of South Weber City and shall
be known and cited as the SOUTH WEBER CITY CODE. This Code is hereby published
by authority of the City Council and shall be supplemented to incorporate the
most recent legislation of the City. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this Code by title in any legal documents. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-6-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code as hereby presented in printed form shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-
2017)
1-6-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its
proper place in each copy of this Code. Each replacement page shall be properly
identified and inserted in each individual copy of this Code. (Ord. 17-01, 2-
28-2017)
1-6-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Recorder shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the Office of the City
Recorder. Any person having custody of a copy of this Code shall make every
effort to maintain the Code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the Office of
the City Recorder. Code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and
shall be returned to the Office of the City Recorder when directed so to do by
order of the City Council. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-6-5: INCORPORATION OF STATUTES:
Any reference or citation to any statute shall not be interpreted or construed
to include, incorporate or make the citation or statute part of this Code,
unless the provisions of this Code specifically include, incorporate or make
the citation or statute part of this Code by reference or incorporation, and
any such reference or citation not specifically included or incorporated may be
changed, amended or deleted without publication on an order of the City
Council. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-6-6: CIVIL LIABILITY:
No provision of this Code shall create any civil liability on the City, its
officers or employees, whether or not this Code imposes mandatory or
directional duties and whether or not the City, its officers or employees,
perform or do not perform such duties. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
CHAPTER 7
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-7-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-7-2: Court Proceedings
1-7-3: Severability Clause
1-7-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the City passed prior
to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included
in this Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal,
subject to the saving clauses contained in this chapter, and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the City; and all special ordinances.
   B.   Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided
in subsection A of this section shall not affect any debt or fee which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-7-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Scope Of Section: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. (Ord. 17-01, 2-
28-2017)
1-7-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
of this Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
CHAPTER 8
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Construction Of Words
1-8-2: Definitions - General
1-8-3: Headings
1-8-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number only,
or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite
gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto. The use of any verb in the
present tense shall include the future and past tense when applicable.
   B.   All words and phrases shall be constructed and understood according to
the common use and understanding of the language. Technical words and phrases
and such other words and phrases as may have acquired a particular meaning in
law shall be construed and understood according to such particular meaning.
   C.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been
changed in the content of this Code to "title", "chapter", "section", and
"subsection", or words of similar import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such changes are not meant to amend passage and effective dates
of such original ordinances.
   D.   Whenever any act, conduct or offense is prohibited or required and no
reference is made to location, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the act, conduct or offense prohibited or required shall be within
the boundaries of this City.
   E.   Any reference made in this Code to a City officer, official, or
employee by title only shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of
the City of South Weber". (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-8-2: DEFINITIONS - GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION: The execution of Municipal laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations or public policy.
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   BUSINESS: Includes all activities engaged in within the City carried on for
the purpose of gain or economic profit, except that the acts of employees
rendering service to employers shall not be included in the term business,
unless otherwise specifically provided.
   CHIEF OF POLICE OR CHIEF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The Davis County Sheriff
or any Deputy of the Davis County Sheriff's Office assigned to act as Chief of
Police or chief law enforcement officer by the Davis County Sheriff.
   CITY: The City of South Weber, Davis County, Utah.
   CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of South Weber, Utah.
   CITY RECORDER: The individual appointed to act as the City Recorder of the
City.
   CODE: The City Code of the City of South Weber, Utah.
   COUNTY: Davis County, Utah.
   FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   HIGHWAY OR ROAD: Includes public bridges and may be equivalent to the words
"county way", "county road", "common road", and "State road".
   LEGISLATIVE DECISION: The creation, amending or altering of Municipal laws,
ordinances, rules, regulations, or public policy.
   LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation and includes any certificate, permit or license issued
by the City.
   NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
   OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this Code.
   OFFICERS OR OFFICIALS: Any elected or appointed person employed by the City,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business, or
profession.
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right, or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged, or diminished, and
every right or interest therein.
   PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
   REASONABLE TIME: In all cases where any ordinance requires that an act be
done in a reasonable time or that reasonable notice be given, such reasonable
time for such notice shall be deemed to mean such time as may be necessary for
the expeditious performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.
   RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the
consumer.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   STATE: The State of Utah.
   STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, sidewalks, gutters and culverts, crosswalks, and intersections.
   TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   TIME COMPUTED: The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any
ordinance or in any resolution or order of the City, when expressed in days,
shall be determined by excluding the first day and including the last day,
except if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, then the last day shall
be the day next following such Sunday or legal holiday which is not a Sunday or
legal holiday. When time is expressed in hours, Sunday and all legal holidays
shall be excluded.
   WEEK: Shall be construed to mean any seven-day period.
   WHOLESALER OR WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined,
relates to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles, or things to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WRITTEN OR IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the
proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write,
by such person's proper mark. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-2017)
1-8-3: HEADINGS:
The headings of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the title, chapter, or section and shall
not be deemed or taken to be titles of such titles, chapters, or sections, nor
be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning
or intent of the provisions of any division thereof, nor unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such titles, chapters, or
sections, including the headings, are amended or reenacted. (Ord. 17-01, 2-28-
2017)
CHAPTER 9
GENERAL CRIMINAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-9-1: Criminal Penalty
1-9-2: Offenses Designated-Classified; And Sentencing
1-9-3: Administrative Remedies
1-9-1: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
   A.   Criminal Penalty for Violation of Ordinance: Unless otherwise
specifically authorized by State Statute, the City Council may provide a
criminal penalty for the violation of any City ordinance by a fine not to
exceed the maximum Class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated Section
76-3-301, or by a term of imprisonment up to six (6) months, or by both the
fine and term of imprisonment.
   B.   Term of Imprisonment for Misdemeanors: A person who has been convicted
of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
      1.   In the case of a Class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six
(6) months;
      2.   In the case of a Class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days.
   C.   Infractions:
      1.   A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be
subject to a fine, forfeiture, and disqualification, or any combination.
      2.   Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is
specified, the person may be fined as for a Class C misdemeanor.
   D.   Fines of Persons: A person convicted of an offense may, in addition to
any term of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
      1.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction is of a Class B
misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) when the conviction is of a
Class C misdemeanor conviction or infraction conviction.
   E.   Fines of Corporations: The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon a
corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an
offense defined in this Code, or the ordinances of the City, or for an offense
defined outside of this Code over which this City has jurisdiction, for which
no special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by the
court, not exceeding:
      1.   Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the conviction is for a Class
B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction is for a Class
C misdemeanor conviction or for an infraction conviction. (Ord. 2022-01, 3-22-
2022)
1-9-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED-CLASSIFIED; AND SENTENCING:
   A.   Sentencing:
      1.   A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this Code or the
ordinances of this City shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   Ordinances enacted after the effective date of this Code which
involve an offense shall be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance
with this chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   B.   Designation of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or
infractions.
   C.   Misdemeanors Classified:
      1.   Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
         a.   Class B misdemeanors; and
         b.   Class C misdemeanors.
      2.   An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful in this Code or any ordinance of this City when no
other specification as to punishment or category is made, shall be a Class B
misdemeanor.
   D.   Infractions:
      1.   Infractions are not classified.
      2.   Any offense which is made an infraction in this Code or other
ordinances of this City, or which is expressly designated an infraction and any
offense designated by this Code or other ordinances of this City which is not
designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified is an
infraction.
   E.   Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this Code
or any ordinance enacted is a continuing violation, a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or
continues to occur. (Ord. 2022-01, 3-22-2022)
1-9-3: ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES:
The City has sole discretion in deciding whether to enforce code violations
through civil or criminal means, or both. The enactment of this Chapter shall
in no way interfere with the City’s right to enforce the violation of City
ordinances civilly through its Administrative Code Enforcement program. The
City may use any of the remedies available under the law in both civil and
criminal prosecution of code violations. (Ord. 2022-01, 3-22-2022)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
1-10-1: Establishment Of Administrative Code Enforcement Program
1-10-2: General Provisions And Definitions
1-10-3: General Offenses And Authority
1-10-4: Administrative Code Enforcement Procedures
1-10-5: Hearing Officer
1-10-6: Hearing Procedures; Administrative And Judicial Remedies
1-10-7: Orders, Abatement, And Cost Recovery
1-10-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM:
There is hereby established in South Weber City the Administrative Code
Enforcement Program (“ACE Program”). The procedures to be followed in the
administration of this program are located in Title 1, Chapter 10 of the City
Code. The ACE Program may be used by the City for the administrative
enforcement of City Code violations in accordance with the procedures outlined
in this Chapter. (Ord. 2022-01, 3-22-2022)
1-10-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS:
This Chapter shall be known as “Administrative Code Enforcement.” This Chapter
shall also be known as Title 1, Chapter 10 of the South Weber City Code. It may
be cited and pleaded under either designation.
   A.   Declaration Of Purpose. The City Council of South Weber City finds that
the enforcement of the South Weber City Code throughout South Weber City is an
important public service. Code enforcement is vital to the protection of the
public’s health, safety, welfare, and quality of life. A comprehensive code
enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative
remedies is critical to gaining compliance with City ordinances.
   B.   Scope. The provisions of this Chapter may be applied to all violations
of the City Code. It has been designed as an additional remedy for the City to
use in achieving compliance with its ordinances and regulations.
The provisions of this Chapter do not invalidate any other title, chapter, or
ordinance, but shall be read in conjunction with those titles, chapters, and
ordinances as an additional remedy available for enforcement of those
ordinances.
   C.   Criminal Prosecution Right. The City has sole discretion in deciding
whether to file a civil or criminal case for the violation of any of its
ordinances. The enactment of this administrative remedy shall in no way
interfere with the City’s right to prosecute City ordinance violations as
criminal offenses. The City may use any of the remedies available under the law
in both civil and criminal prosecution. Although most minor City Code
violations should be enforced through this Chapter, the City may choose to file
a criminal prosecution under any of the following circumstances:
      1.   The violator has one prior violation of the City Code within the
last year;
      2.   The violation caused bodily injury, substantial bodily injury, or
serious bodily injury to an individual, all of which shall have the same
definition in Utah Code Annotated § 76-1-601;
      3.   The violator, in a single criminal episode, violated one or more
provisions of the Utah Criminal Code as well as one or more provisions of the
City Code, and all violations are being charged as a single criminal episode as
defined in Utah Code Annotated § 76-1-401;
      4.   The violation caused a significant health or safety risk to the
public.
   D.   No Mandatory Duty - Civil Liability. It is the intent of the City
Council that in establishing performance standards or establishing the
authority to act by a City officer or employee, these standards shall not be
construed as creating a mandatory duty if the officer or employee fails to
perform his or her directed duty or duties.
   E.   Definitions. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this
Chapter, shall be constructed as defined in this Section, unless a different
meaning is specifically defined elsewhere in this Chapter and specifically
stated to apply:
               Any action the City may take on public or private property and any adjacent
ABATEMENT:     property as may be necessary to remove or alleviate a violation, including
               demolition, removal, repair, boarding, and securing or replacement of property.
ADMINISTRATIVE A citation issued to a responsible person, which gives notice of a violation and
CITATION:      the civil fee for such violation. Administrative Citations are typically used for
               minor violations.
CITY:          The area within the territorial city limits of South Weber City.
               Any ordinance passed by the City Council and any other title, chapter, ordinance,
CITY CODE:     regulation, or amendment lawfully codified pursuant to Utah law including Utah
               Code Annotated § 10-3-707.
CITY COUNCIL:  The City Council of South Weber City.
CODE           The person who has been designated by the City Manager of South Weber City to
ENFORCEMENT    coordinate and schedule hearings, mail out notices of hearings, send out notices
COORDINATOR:   of costs and itemized bills, and perform other duties as specified in this
               Chapter.
               Any person designated by the City Manager with the responsibility to enforce the
CODE           City Code and ordinances passed by the City Council and who performs the duties
ENFORCEMENT    specified herein. The Code Enforcement Officer may or may not be a member of the
OFFICER:       Davis County Sheriff Department. Code Enforcement Officers include the City
               Manager, City Building Official/Public Works Director, Community and Planning
               Director, City Engineer, City Fire Chief, and their designees.
CODE
ENFORCEMENT    A bond posted by a responsible person to ensure compliance with the City Code,
PERFORMANCE    applicable state law, a judicial action, or a Hearing Officer Order.
BOND:
CODE           A lien recorded to collect outstanding civil penalties, administrative fees, and
ENFORCEMENT    costs.
TAX LIEN:
FINANCIAL      Any person that holds a recorded mortgage or deed of trust on a property.
INSTITUTION:
               Incapacitating illness, death, lack of proper notice, unavailability due to
GOOD CAUSE:    unavoidable, unpreventable, or extenuating emergency or circumstance, imminent
               and irreparable injury, and acts of nature adverse to performing required acts.
HEARING        The Hearing Officer presiding over the Administrative Code Enforcement Program
OFFICER:       established pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 10 of the City Code.
HEARING        An order issued by a Hearing Officer. The order may include an order to abate the
OFFICER ORDER: violation, pay civil penalties and administrative costs, or take any other action
               as authorized or required by this Chapter and City ordinances.
IMMINENT LIFE  Any condition that creates a present, extreme, and immediate danger to life,
OR SAFETY      property, health, or public safety.
HAZARD:
LEGAL          Any interest that is represented by a document, such as a deed of trust,
INTEREST:      quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic’s lien,
               or other similar instrument that is recorded with the County Recorder.
MINOR          An isolated violation not causing injury, creating a nuisance, or rising to the
VIOLATION:     level of criminal behavior for which no abatement or remedial action is required.
NOTICE OF      A document issued by the City representing that a property complies with the
COMPLIANCE:    requirements outlined in a notice of violation, administrative citation, or
               Hearing Officer Order.
               A document or form that indicates that all outstanding civil penalties and costs
               have been either paid in full, or that the City has negotiated an agreed amount,
NOTICE OF      or that a subsequent administrative or judicial decision has resolved the
SATISFACTION:  outstanding debt. In addition to the satisfaction of the financial debt, the
               property must also be in compliance with the requirements outlined in the notice
               of violation.
NOTICE OF      A written notice prepared by a Code Enforcement Officer that informs a
VIOLATION:     responsible person of code violations and orders them to take certain steps to
               correct the violations.
OATH:          Includes affirmations and oaths.
               Any person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association,
PERSON:        club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager,
               lessee, agent, sergeant, officer, or employee of any of them, or any other entity
               that is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties.
PROPERTY       The record owner of real property based on the county recorder’s records.
OWNER:
               a.   Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist that constitutes a
               threat to the public’s health, safety, and welfare, or that significantly
PUBLIC         obstructs, injures, or interferes with the reasonable or free use of property in
NUISANCE:      a neighborhood or community or by any considerable number of persons; and
               b.   Also has the same meaning as set forth in South Weber City Code, the Utah
               Code, or Utah common law.
               A person including the property owner and any person or entity, whether as owner,
               agent, or occupant, who commits, aids in committing, contributes to, causes,
               supports, retains, or permits a City Code violation in the City, regardless of
RESPONSIBLE    whether that violation occurs on real property. Every successive owner or tenant
PERSON:        of a property or premises who fails to correct a City Code violation upon or in
               the use of property or premises caused by a former owner or tenant is also a
               responsible person. In cases where there is more than one responsible person, the
               City may proceed against one, some, or all of them.
               Relevant, reliable, factual, and credible evidence that is sufficient to convince
SUBSTANTIAL    a reasonable mind that a violation of the City Code has been committed.
EVIDENCE:      Substantial evidence does not mean that all or the majority of the evidence is in
               support of the decision made.
WRITTEN:       Includes handwritten, typewritten, photocopied, computer printed, or facsimile.
 
   F.   Acts Include Causing, Aiding, Or Abetting. Whenever any act or omission
is made unlawful in this Chapter, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding,
or abetting such act or omission.
   G.   Service Of Process.
      1.   Whenever service is required to be given under this Chapter for
enforcement purposes, a Code Enforcement Officer or the Code Enforcement
Coordinator (or designees) shall serve the document by any of the following
methods, unless otherwise provided:
         a.   Regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the
owner(s) or other responsible person(s);
         b.   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property.
If not inhabited, the notice must also be mailed as described in (a) above;
         c.   Personal service pursuant to Utah Rules of Civil Procedure 4; or
         d.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation where the
identity or whereabouts of the person to be served are unknown and cannot be
ascertained through reasonable diligence, where service is impracticable under
the circumstances, or where there exists good cause to believe that the person
to be served is avoiding service of process.
      2.   For violations of Title 10, or any land use ordinance as defined in
Utah Code Annotated Section 10-9a-102, whenever service is required to be given
under this Title for enforcement purposes, the document shall be served in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated § 10-9a-803, as amended, which requires
written notice, by mail or hand delivery, of each ordinance violation to the
address of the owner of record on file in the office of the county recorder or
person designated in writing by the owner of record as the owner’s agent for
the purpose of receiving notice of an ordinance violation.
         a.   Service by regular mail in the manner described above shall be
deemed served three business days, not including the day it was mailed, after
the date of mailing.
         b.   If service complies with the requirements of this Section, it
shall be deemed a valid service even if a party claims not to have received the
service and it shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under
this Chapter.
         c.   The failure to serve all responsible person(s) shall not affect
the validity of any proceedings.
   H.   Constructive Notice Of Recorded Documents. Whenever a document is
recorded with the County Recorder as authorized or required by this Chapter or
applicable state codes, recordation shall provide constructive notice of the
information contained in the recorded documents. (Ord. 2022-01, 3-22-2022)
1-10-3: GENERAL AUTHORITY AND OFFENSES:
   A.   General Enforcement Authority.
      1.   Whenever a Code Enforcement Officer finds that a violation of the
City Code or City ordinances has occurred or continues to exist, the
appropriate administrative enforcement procedure may be used as outlined in
this Chapter.
      2.   So long as authorized in this Chapter, a Code Enforcement Officer
has the authority and power necessary to investigate and gain compliance with
the provisions of the City Code and City ordinances. These powers may include
the power to issue notices of violation and administrative citations, inspect
public and private property, abate violations on public and private property,
and use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under the
City Code or applicable state law.
   B.   Adoption Of Policy And Procedures. The Hearing Officer is authorized to
develop policies and procedures relating to the hearing procedures, scope of
hearings, and subpoena powers subject to the requirements of this Chapter, City
Code, and state law. The City Council shall determine other matters relating to
the Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Program.
   C.   Authority To Inspect.
      1.   A Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter upon any property
or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of the City Code or City
ordinances are being obeyed and to make any examinations and surveys as may be
necessary in the performance of the enforcement duties. This may include the
taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence.
      2.   All inspections, entries, examinations, and surveys shall be done in
a reasonable manner based upon cause. Except as otherwise authorized in this
Chapter, if the responsible person refuses to allow a Code Enforcement Officer
to enter the property, then the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain a search
warrant or other judicial order.
   D.   Power To Cite. Each Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to cite any
person whenever there is substantial evidence to believe that the person has
committed a violation of the City Code or City ordinances.
   E.   False Information Or Refusal Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to willfully make a false statement or refuse to give his or her name or
address with intent to deceive or interfere with a city employee when in the
performance of his or her official duties under the provisions of this Chapter.
   F.   Failure To Obey A Subpoena. It is unlawful for any person to refuse or
fail to obey a subpoena issued for an administrative code enforcement hearing.
Failure to obey a subpoena constitutes contempt and may be prosecuted as an
infraction.(Ord. 2022-01, 3-22-2022)
1-10-4: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Authority. Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in
violation of any provisions of the City Code or City ordinances that
constitutes a violation may be abated by the City pursuant to the procedures
set forth in this Chapter.
   B.   Notice Of Violation; Administrative Abatement.
      1.   Whenever a Code Enforcement Officer determines that a violation of
the City Code or City ordinances has occurred or continues to exist, the Code
Enforcement Officer may choose to proceed under these administrative abatement
procedures.
      2.   If the administrative abatement procedure is used, a notice of
violation shall be issued to the responsible person(s). The notice of violation
shall include the following information:
         a.   Name of responsible person(s);
         b.   Street address or location of violation;
         c.   Date violation observed;
         d.   All codes or ordinances violated and an explanation as to how the
code or ordinance was violated;
         e.   A statement explaining the type of remedial action required to
permanently correct outstanding violations, which may include corrections,
repairs, demolition, removal, or other appropriate action;
         f.   Specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of
violation, which date shall be at least ten (10) calendar days from the date of
service;
         g.   Explanation of the consequences if the responsible person fails
to comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice of
violation, which may include criminal prosecution, civil penalties,
administrative citations, revocation of permits, recordation of the notice of
violation on the property, withholding of future municipal permits, abatement
of the violation, costs, administrative fees, and any other legal remedies;
         h.   A statement that civil penalties will begin to accrue or be
imposed immediately on expiration of the date to correct violations;
         i.   The amount of the civil penalty on each violation and a statement
as to whether the penalty will accrue daily until the property is brought into
compliance;
         j.   That only one notice of violation is required for any 12-month
period, and that civil penalties or fines will begin or be imposed immediately
upon any subsequent violations of the notice; and
         k.   Procedures to request a hearing as provided in this Chapter and
consequences for failure to request one.
      3.   The responsible person may request a hearing on renewed violations
by following the same procedure as provided for in the original notice.
      4.   The notice of violation shall be served by one of the methods of
service listed in this Chapter.
      5.   More than one notice of violation may be issued against the same
responsible person if it encompasses different dates or different violations.
   C.   Failure To Bring Property Into Compliance. If the responsible person
fails to bring a violation into compliance within the time specified in the
Notice of Violation, civil penalties as provided in this Chapter shall be owed
to the City.
   D.   Inspection.
      1.   It shall be the duty of the responsible person served with a Notice
of Violation to request an inspection when his or her property has been brought
into compliance. It is prima facie evidence that the violation remains on the
property if no inspection is requested.
      2.   Civil penalties accumulate daily until the property has been
inspected and a notice of compliance is issued.
      3.   Reinspection fees shall be assessed if more than one inspection is
necessary.
   E.   Emergency Abatement.
      1.   Authority.
         a.   Whenever the City Manager, Building Official, or Fire Marshal
determines that an imminent life or safety hazard exists that requires
immediate correction or elimination, the City may exercise the following powers
without prior notice to the responsible person:
            (1)   Order the immediate vacation of any tenants, and prohibit
occupancy until all repairs are completed;
            (2)   Post the premises as unsafe, substandard, or dangerous;
            (3)   Board, fence, or secure the building or site;
            (4)   Raze and grade that portion of the building or site to
prevent further collapse, and remove any hazard to the general public;
            (5)   Make emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any imminent
life or safety hazard; or
            (6)   Take any other action appropriate to eliminate the emergency.
         b.   The City has the authority, based on cause, to enter the property
without a search warrant or court order to accomplish the above listed acts to
abate the safety hazard.
         c.   The responsible person shall be liable for all costs associated
with the abatement of the life safety hazard. Costs may be recovered pursuant
to this Chapter.
      2.   Procedures.
         a.   The City shall pursue only the minimum level of correction or
abatement as necessary to eliminate the immediacy of the hazard. Costs incurred
by the City during the emergency abatement process shall be assessed and
recovered against the responsible person through the procedures outlined in
this Chapter.
         b.   The City may also pursue any other administrative or judicial
remedy to abate any remaining violations.
      3.   Notice of Emergency Abatement.
         a.   After an emergency abatement, the City shall notify the owner or
responsible person of the abatement action taken.
         b.   The notice shall be served within ten days of completion of the
abatement.
   F.   Demolitions.
      1.   Authority. Whenever the City Manager, Building Official or Fire
Marshal determines that a property or building requires demolition, any one of
them may order demolition or removal of the offending structure, or exercise
any or all of the powers listed in this Chapter, once appropriate notice has
been given to a responsible person pursuant to applicable building codes, fires
codes, and state law. The responsible person shall be liable for all costs
associated with the demolition. Costs may be recovered pursuant to this
Chapter.
      2.   Procedures. Once all the notice requirements of the applicable laws
have been met, the property will be abated pursuant to the abatement remedy.
Other applicable remedies may also be pursued.
   G.   Administrative Citations.
      1.   Declaration of Purpose.
         a.   The City Council finds that there is a need for an alternative
method of enforcement for minor violations of the City Code. The City Council
further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement for minor violations is
an administrative citation program.
         b.   The procedures established herein shall be in addition to
criminal, civil, administrative, or any other legal remedy established by law
that may be pursued to address violations of the City Code or City ordinances.
      2.   Authority.
         a.   Any person violating any provision of the City Code or City
ordinances may be issued an administrative citation by a Code Enforcement
Officer as provided in this Section.
         b.   A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of an administrative
citation issued by the Officer and shall be payable directly to the City
Treasurer’s Office.
         c.   Penalties assessed by means of an administrative citation shall
be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this Chapter.
      3.   Procedures.
         a.   Upon discovering any violation of the City Code or City
ordinances, a Code Enforcement Officer may issue an administrative citation to
the responsible person in the manner prescribed in this Section.
         b.   The administrative citation shall be issued on a form meeting the
requirements of this Chapter.
         c.   Once the responsible person(s) has been located, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall attempt to obtain the signature of that person(s) on
the administrative citation. If the responsible person(s) refuses or fails to
sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal shall not affect the
validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings. If the Code Enforcement
Officer is unable to locate the responsible person for the violation, then the
administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person(s) in the
manner prescribed this Chapter.
         d.   Except for violations of Title 10 of South Weber Code, if no one
can be located at the property, then the administrative citation may be posted
in a conspicuous place on or near the property and a copy subsequently mailed
to the responsible person(s) in the manner prescribed in Section
1-10-2 of this Chapter.
         e.   The administrative citation shall also contain the signature of
the Code Enforcement Officer.
         f.   The failure of any person with an interest in the property to
receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under
this Part, except for violations of Title 10 as specified in Section
1-10-2.
      4.   Contents of Administrative Citation. An administrative citation
shall include:
         a.   The date and location of the violations and the approximate time
the violations were observed;
         b.   The Code sections violated and the subject matter of those
sections;
         c.   The amount of penalty imposed for the violations;
         d.   An explanation as to how the penalty shall be paid, the time
period by which the penalty shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to
pay the penalty;
         e.   Notice of the right and the procedures to request a hearing;
         f.   The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer and the signature
of the responsible person, if he or she can be located, as outlined in this
Chapter; and
         g.   Any other information deemed helpful or necessary by the Code
Enforcement Administrator.
   H.   Civil Penalties, Fines, And Fees.
      1.   In General. As specified in the notice of violation or
administrative citation, civil penalties may be assessed daily until the
violation is corrected or immediately if an administrative citation is issued.
Interest shall be assessed per City policy on all outstanding civil penalties
balances until the case has been paid in full. The City may use one form for
both notices of violation and administrative citations. Payment of the
penalties, fines, and fees shall not excuse the failure to correct the
violations, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City if the
violation is not corrected.
      2.   Amount. Unless specified otherwise in the more specific section of
the City Code or the City’s Consolidated Fee Schedule, the minimum penalties
shall be as follows:
         a.   Fees for General City Code Violations:
            (1)   Administrative Citations:
               (A)   First Offense: $100
               (B)   Second Offense (within one calendar year from first
offense): $200
               (C)   Third (or more) Offense (within one calendar year from
first offense): $400
            (2)   Civil Penalties per Notice of Violation or Hearing Officer
Order:
               (A)   $100 per day per violation, accruing until the violation
is brought into compliance
         b.   Hearing Fee for Default Hearings or Administrative Code
Enforcement Hearings: $100 if Responsible Person is unsuccessful or fails to
appear after proper notice.
      3.   At the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer or Hearing
Officer, the City may impose penalties up to the maximum allowed by Utah Code
Annotated § 10-3-703, as amended.
      4.   Non-Payment of Citation.
         a.   If the responsible person fails to make any payments within the
time period specified in the notice, the City may send additional notices, file
a small claims action, refer the matter to a collection agency, or pursue any
remedy in law or equity.
         b.   Interest may be assessed on all outstanding amounts at a rate of
up to 20% per annum.
         c.   The City has the authority to collect all costs associated with
the filing of such actions, including administrative fees and service costs.
      5.   Modification of Civil Penalties.
         a.   Upon completion of the required action pursuant to the notice of
violation, administrative citation, or administrative enforcement order, the
Hearing Officer may modify the civil penalties on a finding of good cause as
defined in this Chapter.
         b.   Civil penalties may be waived or modified by the Hearing Officer
if there is a finding of good cause based on the responsible person’s claim of
nonconforming use, as defined per state law, or conditional use, as defined by
the City Code, and:
            (1)   The City’s ability to verify the claim; or
            (2)   The responsible person’s filing of an application for either
use before the date of the Notice of Violation or Administrative Citation.
         c.   Reductions and Waivers for Animal Violations.
            (1)   The Code Enforcement Coordinator and Hearing Officer may
grant reductions and waivers of fines for animal violations under the following
circumstances:
               (A)   $25.00 reduction may be given for first time offenders
with good cause.
               (B)   Offenders with a history of non-payment should generally
not receive a reduction or waiver of fines or fees.
               (C)   At the City’s discretion, flexible monthly plans may be
set up according to responsible person’s needs. (Ord. 2022-01, 3-22-2022)
1-10-5: HEARING OFFICER:
   A.   A Hearing Officer shall preside over hearings and proceedings for the
ACE Program in the City.
   B.   The City Manager shall act as the Hearing Officer unless the position
is otherwise appointed by the City Manager. If the position of the Hearing
Officer is appointed, the City Manager shall determine, if any, the salary,
compensation, and benefits of the Hearing Officer.
   C.   The Hearing Officer position may be a merit, volunteer, or contract
position and is subject to all personnel rules.
   D.   The Hearing Officer may not be disciplined for any decision made while
conducting a hearing if the decision is lawful and made in accordance with City
ordinances, City policy and procedure, and policies and ordinances pertaining
to the ACE Program.
   E.   The Hearing Officer shall be trained and knowledgeable in the City
Code, due process, rules of evidence, civil procedure, administrative law and
procedure, nuisance law, and zoning law.
   F.   The Hearing Officer position is not a supervisory position. The Hearing
Officer is supervised by the City Manager or designee. (Ord. 2022-01, 3-22-
2022)
1-10-6: HEARING PROCEDURES; ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REMEDIES:
   A.   Declaration Of Purpose. The City Council finds that there is a need to
establish uniform procedures for administrative code enforcement hearings
conducted pursuant to this Chapter. It is the purpose and intent of the City
Council to afford due process of law to any person who is directly affected by
an administrative action. Due process of law includes notice, an opportunity to
participate in the administrative hearing including the opportunity to call
witnesses, present evidence, and cross-examine witnesses, and an explanation of
the reasons justifying the administrative action. These procedures are also
intended to establish a forum to efficiently, expeditiously, and fairly resolve
issues raised in any administrative code enforcement action.
   B.   Policies And Procedures Of Hearings. The Hearing Officer may develop
policies and procedures to regulate the hearing process for any violation of
the City Code that is handled pursuant to the administrative abatement
procedures, the emergency abatement procedures, the demolition procedures, or
the administrative citation procedures. Such policies and procedures shall be
consistent with this Chapter and other City ordinances and codes.
   C.   Powers Of The Hearing Officer.
      1.   The Hearing Officer has the authority to hold hearings, determine if
violations of City ordinances exist, order compliance with City ordinances, and
enforce compliance as provided in this Chapter on any matter subject to the
provisions of the Chapter.
      2.   The Hearing Officer may continue a hearing based on good cause-as
defined in this Chapter-shown by one of the parties to the hearing. The Hearing
Officer must enter on the record the reason for granting a continuance.
      3.   The Hearing Officer may issue subpoenas for witnesses, documents,
and other evidence where such is deemed necessary to decide the issues at the
hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees,
shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena. The Hearing Officer shall
develop policies and procedures relating to the issuance of subpoenas in
administrative code enforcement hearings, including the form of the subpoena
and related costs. In the absence of any adopted policies, the Hearing Officer
shall follow the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure.
      4.   The Hearing Officer has continuing jurisdiction over the subject
matter of an administrative code enforcement hearing for the following
purposes:
         a.   Granting a continuance;
         b.   Ordering compliance by issuing a Hearing Officer Order using any
remedies available under the law; and
         c.   Ensuring compliance of that Order, which includes the following
powers:
            (1)   To authorize the City to enter and abate a violation,
            (2)   To modify an Order issued by the Hearing Officer Order, or
            (3)   To grant a new hearing where extraordinary circumstances
exist.
      5.   The Hearing Officer has the authority to require the responsible
person to post a code enforcement performance bond to ensure compliance with an
Order issued by the Hearing Officer.
      6.   The Hearing Officer is subject to disqualification for bias,
prejudice, interest, or any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified
in a court of law. Rules and procedures for disqualification and replacement
shall be in accordance with the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure.
   D.   Request For Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing.
      1.   A person served with one of the following documents or notices has
the right to request an administrative code enforcement hearing if the request
is filed within ten calendar days from the date of service:
         a.   Notice of violation;
         b.   Notice of itemized bill for costs;
         c.   Administrative citation; or
         d.   Notice of emergency abatement.
      2.   The request for hearing shall be made in writing and filed with the
Code Enforcement Coordinator, who then shall provide a copy of the request to
the Hearing Officer and serve the request to all parties. The request shall
contain the case number, the address of the violation, the signature of the
responsible party, and the reason for the hearing including justifications for
the offense, defenses, and requests for waiver or reduction in fines.
      3.   As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of the
request for hearing, the Code Enforcement Coordinator shall schedule a date,
time, and place for the hearing.
      4.   Failure to request a hearing as provided shall constitute a waiver
of the right to a hearing and a waiver of the right to challenge the action.
   E.   Notification Of Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing.
      1.   Written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be
served by the Code Enforcement Coordinator or Code Enforcement Officer to the
responsible person as soon as practicable prior to the date of the hearing.
      2.   The format and contents of the hearing notice shall be in accordance
with rules and policies promulgated by the Hearing Officer. In the absence of
such rules, the format and contents of the hearing shall be drafted by the Code
Enforcement Coordinator to be consistent with this Chapter.
      3.   The notice of hearing shall be served by any of the methods of
service listed in this Chapter.
   F.   Default Hearings And Orders.
      1.   If the responsible person fails to request an administrative code
enforcement hearing before the expiration of the ten-day deadline, the case
shall be set for a default hearing by the Code Enforcement Coordinator. The
Code Enforcement Coordinator shall notify the responsible person of the date,
time, and place of the hearing by one of the methods listed in this Chapter.
      2.   A default hearing shall also be scheduled for all cases that have
outstanding or unpaid civil penalties, fines, fees, or costs due to the City
before collection, if a hearing on that case has not already been held.
      3.   At the default hearing, the responsible person shall have the
opportunity to present evidence to show that good cause exists, as defined in
the Chapter, to do one or more of the following:
         a.   Waive or reduce the fines which have accumulated;
         b.   Postpone an abatement action by the City; or
         c.   Excuse the responsible person’s failure to request a hearing
within the ten-day period.
      4.   If the evidence shows that the violations existed, the Hearing
Officer shall enter an order requiring abatement of the violations and the
payment of all fines, costs, and fees. Fines and costs shall run until the City
issues a notice of compliance stating when the violations were abated. The
order by the Hearing Officer shall not suspend further accrual of fines and
costs.
   G.   Procedures At Administrative Code Enforcement Hearings.
      1.   Administrative code enforcement hearings are intended to be informal
in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply; however, an
informal exchange of discovery may be required. The request for discovery must
be in writing and filed at least ten (10) business days before the hearing.
Failure to request discovery shall not be a basis for a continuance.
      2.   Complainant information is protected and shall not be released
unless the complainant is a witness at the hearing.
      3.   The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow
the procedures promulgated by the Hearing Officer.
      4.   The City bears the burden of proof at an administrative code
enforcement hearing to establish the existence of a violation of the City Code
or City ordinances.
      5.   The standard of proof to be used by the Hearing Officer in deciding
the issues at an administrative hearing is whether there is substantial
evidence in the record that the violations exist and that the person before the
Judge is the responsible person.
      6.   Hearsay evidence, as defined by the Utah Rules of Evidence, is
admissible so long as such hearsay evidence is not the only evidence relied
upon by the Hearing Officer.
      7.   Each party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses
that are in attendance and present evidence in support of his or her case. A
written declaration signed under penalty of perjury may be accepted in lieu of
a personal appearance so long as the declaration is not the only evidence
relied upon by the Hearing Officer. Testimony may be given by telephone or
other electronic means so long as the testimony by telephone or electronic
means is not the only evidence relied upon by the Hearing Officer.
      8.   All hearings are open to the public. They shall be recorded by audio
recording.
      9.   Hearings may be held at the location of the violation if the Hearing
Officer so chooses, and means are provided for an audio recording of the
proceeding.
      10.   The responsible person has a right to be represented by an
attorney.
      11.   No new hearing shall be granted, unless the Hearing Officer
determines that extraordinary circumstances exist which justify a new hearing.
   H.   Failure To Attend Administrative Code Enforcement Hearings. Any party
whose property or actions are the subject of any administrative code
enforcement hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to have
waived the right to a hearing, which will result in a default judgment for the
City provided that proper notice of the hearing has been provided. The City
shall not be required to put on evidence or prove that a violation was
committed by the Responsible Person in such an event, and an entry of a default
judgment shall have the same effect as if there was a judgment on the merits of
the case.
   I.   Hearing Officer Order.
      1.   The parties may enter into a stipulated agreement, which must be
signed by both parties or verbally stipulated on the record during the
administrative code enforcement hearing. This agreement or stipulation shall be
entered as the Hearing Officer Order. Entry of this agreement or stipulation
shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and the right to appeal.
      2.   Once all evidence and testimony are completed, the Hearing Officer
shall issue a Hearing Officer Order that affirms, modifies, or rejects the
notice, citation, or action by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Hearing
Officer may increase or decrease the total amount of civil penalties and costs
that are due pursuant to the City’s fee schedule and the procedures in this
Chapter.
      3.   The Hearing Officer may order the City to enter the property and
abate all violations, which may include removing animals kept in violation of
the City Code.
      4.   The Hearing Officer may revoke a kennel permit, an animal license,
or the right to possess animals as provided in the City Code.
      5.   As part of the Hearing Officer Order, the Hearing Officer may reduce
or stay civil penalties on the condition that the responsible person complete
compliance by specified deadlines.
      6.   The Hearing Officer may schedule subsequent review hearings as may
be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to ensure compliance
with the Hearing Officer Order.
      7.   The Hearing Officer may order the responsible person to post a
performance bond to ensure compliance with the order.
      8.   The Hearing Officer Order shall become final on the date of the
signing of the Order.
      9.   The Hearing Officer Order shall be served on all parties by any one
of the methods listed in this Chapter.
   J.   Failure To Comply With Order.
      1.   After the Hearing Officer issues a Hearing Officer Order, the Code
Enforcement Officer and Hearing Officer may monitor the violations and
determine compliance.
      2.   Upon the failure of the responsible person to comply with the terms
and deadlines set forth in the Hearing Officer Order, the City may use all
appropriate legal means to recover the civil penalties and administrative costs
to obtain compliance.
   K.   Administrative Enforcement Appeals.
      1.   Any person adversely affected by any decision made in the exercise
of the provisions of this Chapter may file a petition for review of the
decision or order to district court within thirty (30) days after the decision
is rendered.
      2.   No person may challenge in district court the Hearing Officer’s
decision until that person has exhausted his or her administrative remedies
herein.
      3.   Unless otherwise provided by the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure or
local court rules, within 120 days after submitting the petition, the party
petitioning for appeal shall request a copy of the record of the proceedings,
including transcripts of hearings when necessary. The Code Enforcement
Coordinator shall not submit copies of files or transcripts to the reviewing
court until the party petitioning for appeal has paid all required costs. The
petitioning party’s failure to properly arrange for copies of the record, or to
pay the full costs for the record, within 180 days after the petition for
review was filed shall be grounds for dismissal of the petition, unless
otherwise provided by the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure or local court rules.
      4.   If a transcript of a hearing cannot be prepared because the tape
recording is incomplete or unintelligible, the district court may, in its
discretion, remand the matter to the Hearing Officer for a supplemental
proceeding to complete the record. The district court may limit the scope of
the supplemental proceeding to issues that, in the court’s opinion, need
clarification.
      5.   The district court’s review is limited to the record of the
administrative decision that is being appealed. The court shall not accept nor
consider any evidence that is not part of the record of that decision.
      6.   The courts shall:
         a.   Presume that the Hearing Officer’s decision and orders are valid;
and
         b.   Review the record to determine whether or not the decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. (Ord. 2022-01, 3-22-2022)
1-10-7: ORDERS, ABATEMENT, AND COST RECOVERY:
   A.   Recordation Of Notices Of Violation And Hearing Officer Orders.
      1.   Declaration of Purpose.
         a.   The City Council finds that there is a need for alternative
methods of enforcement for violations of the City Code and City ordinances that
are found to exist on real property. The City Council further finds that an
appropriate method of enforcement for these types of violations is the issuance
and recordation of notices of violation and Hearing Officer Orders.
         b.   The procedures established in this shall be in addition to
criminal, civil, or any other remedy established by law that may be pursued to
address the violation of the City Code or City ordinances.
      2.   Authority. Whenever a Code Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement
Coordinator determines that a property or violation has not been brought into
compliance as required in this Chapter, the Code Enforcement Coordinator has
the authority to record the notice of violation or Hearing Officer Order with
the Recorder’s Office of Davis County.
      3.   Procedures for Recordation.
         a.   If a Code Enforcement Officer issues a notice of violation or
administrative citation to a responsible person, and the property remains in
violation after the deadline established in the notice of violation or is not
corrected after the administrative citation is issued, and no request for an
administrative hearing has been filed, the Code Enforcement Coordinator shall
record a notice of violation with the Recorder’s Office of Davis County.
         b.   If an administrative hearing is held, and an order is issued in
the City’s favor, the Code Enforcement Coordinator shall record the Hearing
Officer’s Hearing Officer Order with the Recorder’s Office of Davis County.
         c.   The recordation shall include the name of the property owner, the
parcel number, the legal description of the parcel, a copy of the notice of
violation, administrative citation, or order, and any other relevant
information.
         d.   The recordation does not encumber the property, but merely places
future interested parties on notice of any continuing violation found upon the
property.
      4.   Service of Notice of Recordation. A notice of the recordation shall
be served on the responsible person and the property owner pursuant to any of
the methods of service set forth in this Chapter.
      5.   Failure to Request. The failure of any person to file a request for
an administrative code enforcement hearing when served with a notice of
violation shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing
and shall not affect the validity of the recorded notice of violation.
      6.   Notice of Compliance-Procedures.
         a.   When the violations have been corrected, the responsible person
or property owner may request an inspection of the property from a Code
Enforcement Officer.
         b.   Upon receipt of a request for inspection, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall reinspect the property as soon as practicable to determine
whether the violations listed in the notice of violation, administrative
citation, or the order have been corrected, whether all necessary permits have
been issued, and/or whether final inspections have been performed.
         c.   The Code Enforcement Officer, in conjunction with the Code
Enforcement Coordinator, shall serve a notice of compliance to the responsible
person or property owner in the manner provided in this Chapter if the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that:
            (1)   All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation or
order have been corrected;
            (2)   All necessary permits have been issued and finalized;
            (3)   All civil penalties, fines, and costs assessed against the
property have been paid or satisfied; and/or
            (4)   The party requesting the notice of compliance has paid all
administrative fees and costs.
         d.   If a request to issue a notice of compliance is denied, then,
upon request, the Code Enforcement Officer, in conjunction with the Code
Enforcement Coordinator, shall serve the responsible person with a written
explanation setting forth the reasons for the Code Enforcement Officer’s
denial. The written explanation shall be served by any of the methods of
service listed in this Chapter.
      7.   Withholding the Issuance of Municipal Permits and Business Licenses.
         a.   The City may withhold permits and business licenses until a
notice of compliance has been issued by a Code Enforcement Officer.
         b.   The City may withhold business licenses, permits for kennels,
permits for any alteration, repair, or construction pertaining to any existing
or new structures or signs on the property, and any permits pertaining to the
use and development of the real property or the structure.
         c.   The City may, in its sole discretion, issue permits or business
licenses that are necessary to obtain a notice of compliance or that are
necessary to correct serious health and safety violations.
      8.   Cancellation of Recorded Notice of Violation or Hearing Officer
Order. In conjunction with the Code Enforcement Officers, the Code Enforcement
Coordinator shall record the notice of compliance with the County Recorder’s
Office. Recordation of the notice of compliance shall have the effect of
canceling the recorded notice of violation, administrative citation, or
recorded Hearing Officer Order but shall not cancel any outstanding fines,
fees, or costs.
   B.   Abatement Of Violation.
      1.   Authority to Abate.
         a.   A Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter upon any
property or premises to abate the violation of the City Code and City
ordinances.
         b.   A Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to assess all costs for
the abatement to the responsible person and use any remedy available under the
law to collect the costs.
         c.   If additional abatement is necessary within two years, treble
costs may be assessed against the responsible person(s) for the actual
abatement.
      2.   Procedures for Abatement.
         a.   Once the procedures set forth in this Chapter have been complied
with, the violation may be abated by City personnel or by a private contractor
acting under the direction of the City.
         b.   These City personnel or private contractors may enter upon
private property in a reasonable manner to abate the ordinance violation as
specified in the notice of violation or Hearing Officer Order.
         c.   If the responsible person abates the violation before the City
performs the actual abatement pursuant to a notice of violation, administrative
citation, or Hearing Officer Order, a Code Enforcement Officer may still assess
all costs incurred by the City against the responsible person.
         d.   When the abatement is completed, a report describing the work
performed and an itemized account of the total abatement costs shall be
prepared by the Code Enforcement Officer overseeing the abatement. The report
shall contain the names and addresses of the responsible persons of each parcel
and the tax parcel numbers.
         e.   The Code Enforcement Coordinator shall serve the notice of costs
and the itemized bill of costs through any of the means in Section 20.01.09.
The notice shall demand full payment within twenty days to the City Treasurer.
   C.   Recovery Of Costs.
      1.   Declaration of Purpose.
         a.   The City Council finds that there is a need to recover costs
incurred by Code Enforcement Officers and other City personnel who spend
considerable time inspecting and reinspecting properties throughout the City to
ensure compliance with the City Code or City ordinances.
         b.   The City Council further finds that the assessment of costs is an
appropriate method to recover expenses incurred for actual costs of abating
violations, reinspection fees, filing fees, attorney fees, hearing officer
fees, title search, and any additional actual costs incurred by the City for
each individual case.
         c.   The assessment and collection of costs shall not preclude the
imposition of any administrative or judicial civil penalties or fines for
violations of the City Code or City ordinances.
      2.   Authority.
         a.   Whenever actual costs are incurred by the City on a property to
obtain compliance with provisions of the City Code and City ordinances, a Code
Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement Coordinator may assess costs against
the responsible person.
         b.   Once a notice of violation has been issued, the property shall be
inspected one time if the responsible person requests an inspection in writing.
Any additional inspections shall be subject to reinspection fees pursuant to
the City fee schedule.
      3.   Notification of Assessment of Reinspection Fees.
         a.   Notification of reinspection fees may be provided in the notice
of violation served to the responsible person.
         b.   Reinspection fees assessed or collected pursuant to this Section
shall not be included in any other costs assessed.
         c.   The failure of any responsible person to receive notice of the
reinspection fees shall not affect the validity of any other fees imposed under
this Section.
      4.   Failure to Timely Pay Costs. The failure of any person to pay
assessed costs by the deadline specified in the invoice shall result in a late
fee pursuant to City ordinances.
   D.   Administrative Fees. The Code Enforcement Officers and Code Enforcement
Coordinator are authorized to assess administrative fees for costs incurred in
the administration of the code enforcement program, such as investigation of
violations, preparation for hearings, hearings, and the collection process. The
fee assessed shall be the amount set forth in this Chapter or in the City fee
schedule.
   E.   Injunctions. In addition to any other remedy provided under the City
Code or state codes, including criminal prosecution or administrative remedies,
any provision of the City Code may be enforced by injunction issued in the
Second District Court upon a suit brought by the City.
   F.   Performance Bonds.
      1.   As part of any notice, order, or action, the Hearing Officer has the
authority to require any responsible person to post a performance bond to
ensure compliance with the City Code, City ordinances, or any judicial action.
      2.   If the responsible person fails to comply with the notice, order, or
action, the bond will be forfeited to the City.
   G.   Code Enforcement Tax Liens.
      1.   Declaration of Purpose. The City Council finds that recordation of
code enforcement tax liens will assist in the collection of civil penalties,
administrative costs, and administrative fees assessed by the administrative
code enforcement hearing program or judicial orders and lessen the cost to City
taxpayers of code enforcement. The City Council further finds that collection
of civil penalties, costs, and fees assessed for code enforcement violations is
important in deterring future violations and maintaining the integrity of the
City’s code enforcement system. The procedures established in this Section
shall be used to complement existing administrative or judicial remedies that
may be pursued to address violations of the City Code or City ordinances.
      2.   Tax Liens for Abatement Costs.
         a.   Once the City has abated a property for weeds, garbage, refuse,
or unsightly or deleterious objects or structures, the Code Enforcement
Coordinator shall prepare three copies of the Itemized Statement of Costs
incurred in the removal and destruction of the violations and deliver them to
the City Treasurer within ten days after completion of the work of removing the
violations.
         b.   The Code Enforcement Coordinator shall serve the Responsible
Person by any of the methods in this Chapter a copy of the Itemized Statement
of Costs informing him or her that a code enforcement tax lien is being
recorded for actual costs of abatement. Payment shall be due within twenty
calendar days from the date of mailing.
         c.   Upon receipt of the Itemized Statement of costs, the City
Treasurer shall record a Code Enforcement Tax Lien against the property with
the county treasurer’s office.
         d.   The failure of any person with a financial interest in the
property to receive the notice of the lien shall not affect the validity of the
lien or any proceedings taken to collect the outstanding costs of abatement.
      3.   Tax Liens for Judgments. Once a judgment has been obtained from the
appropriate court imposing costs, fines, or fees against the responsible
person, the Code Enforcement Coordinator may record a code enforcement tax lien
against any real property owned by the responsible person.
      4.   Cancellation of Code Enforcement Tax Lien.
         a.   Once payment in full is received for the outstanding civil
penalties and costs, or the amount is deemed satisfied pursuant to a subsequent
administrative or judicial order, the Code Enforcement Coordinator shall either
record a notice of satisfaction of judgment, or provide the property owner or
financial institution, through any of the means of service in Section 20.01.09,
with the notice of satisfaction of judgment so that it can record this notice
with the county recorder’s office.
         b.   The notice of satisfaction of judgment shall include the same
information as provided for in the original code enforcement tax lien.
         c.   Such notice of satisfaction of judgment shall cancel the code
enforcement tax lien.
   H.   Recover Of Costs By Writ Of Execution. After obtaining a judgment, the
City may collect the obligation by use of all appropriate legal means. This may
include the execution on personal property owned by the responsible person by
filing a writ with the applicable court.
   I.   Recovery Of Costs By Writ Of Garnishment. After obtaining a judgment,
the City may collect the obligation by use of all appropriate legal means. This
may include the garnishment of paychecks, financial accounts, and other income
or financial assets by filing a writ with the applicable court. (Ord. 2022-01,
3-22-2022)
TITLE 2
REVENUE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
PROCUREMENT
SECTION:
2-1-1: Purpose And Scope
2-1-2: Definitions
2-1-3: Application
2-1-4: Procurement Officers; Duties And Authority
2-1-5: Authorization Limits
2-1-6. Standard Procurement Processes
2-1-7: Cancellation And Rejection Of Bids And Proposals
2-1-8: Bonds And Bid Security
2-1-9: Contracts And Change Orders
2-1-10: Protest Of Specifications Or Award Of Procurement Contract; Appeal
2-1-11: Budget Limitation
2-1-12: Delivery Of Supplies
2-1-13: Inventory Management
2-1-14:    Design Professional Services
2-1-15:    Petty Cash
2-1-16.    City Purchasing Cards
2-1-17:    Disposal Of Surplus Property
2-1-18:    Advertising Requirements
2-1-19:    Ethics
2-1-20:    Violations
2-1-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and guidelines for the
procurement of supplies, services, and construction for the City of South
Weber, and to ensure that all such purchases and encumbrances are of acceptable
quality and are made equitably, efficiently and economically. A second purpose
of this chapter is to establish procedures for the disposal of City surplus
property. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BUILDING IMPROVEMENT:              The construction or repair of a public
                                   building or structure.
                                   A capital asset purchase greater than
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE:               $10,000 and a life expectancy of three years
                                   or more or extends the life of the asset.
CHIEF PROCUREMENT OFFICER:         The City Manager.
CITY:                              The City of South Weber, Utah.
CLASS C ROAD IMPROVEMENT PROJECT:  The construction and maintenance of a class
                                   C road.
                                   Work that would apply to any new City
                                   roadbed either by addition to existing
                                   systems or relocations; resurfacing of
CONSTRUCTION OF CLASS C ROADS:     existing roadways with more than two inches
                                   of bituminous pavement; or new structures or
                                   replacement of existing structures, except
                                   the replacement of drainage culverts.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS:            The supplies and services used to complete a
                                   construction project.
                                   A building improvement, public works
                                   project, or class C road improvement
CONSTRUCTION PROJECT:              project. Construction project does not mean
                                   the routine operation, repair, or
                                   maintenance of existing structures,
                                   buildings, or real property.
                                   The director of a department, including
                                   Public Works, Finance, Recreation, and Fire,
DEPARTMENT HEAD:                   that oversees the professional,
                                   administrative, and managerial duties
                                   pertaining to the operations and performance
                                   of their respective department.
                                   An individual licensed as an architect,
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL:               professional engineer, professional land
                                   surveyor, or an individual certified as a
                                   commercial interior designer.
                                   Professional services within the scope of
                                   the practice of architecture, professional
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:      engineering, professional land surveying,
                                   master planning and programming services, or
                                   commercial interior design.
                                   The procurement of supplies, services, or
                                   construction materials that cannot be
                                   purchased through normal procurement methods
                                   due to an existing or imminent emergency
                                   condition. An emergency condition is a
EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT:             situation which creates an immediate and
                                   serious threat to public health, life,
                                   safety, or property. An emergency condition
                                   is usually, but not always, the result of
                                   floods, natural disasters, epidemics, riots,
                                   or critical equipment failures.
EMPLOYEE:                          An individual duly employed and authorized
                                   by the City to make purchases for the City.
                                   A procurement document used for seeking
                                   competition for large expenditure purchases
                                   or small expenditure purchases that may
                                   ultimately exceed the aggregate threshold
INVITATION FOR BIDS:               for a small expenditure purchase, and which
                                   is submitted electronically or in a sealed
                                   envelope to prevent its contents from being
                                   revealed or known before the deadline for
                                   the submission of bids.
                                   The keeping of a road facility in a safe and
                                   stable condition to which it was constructed
                                   or improved, and includes the reworking of
                                   an existing surface by the application of up
                                   to and including two inches of bituminous
                                   pavement; the installation or replacement of
MAINTENANCE OF CLASS C ROADS:      guardrails, seal coats, and culverts; the
                                   grading or widening of an existing unpaved
                                   road or flattening of shoulders or side
                                   slopes to meet current width and safety
                                   standards; and horizontal or vertical
                                   alignment changes necessary to bring an
                                   existing road into compliance with current
                                   safety standards.
                                   Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing,
                                   leasing with an option to purchase, or
                                   otherwise encumbering the City as a means of
                                   acquiring supplies, services, or
PROCUREMENT:                       construction materials, and all functions
                                   that pertain to obtaining any supply,
                                   service, or construction materials,
                                   including the solicitation of sources,
                                   selection, award, and all phases of contract
                                   administration.
                                   Auditing, banking, insurance, legal, and
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:             other forms of professional consulting, but
                                   not design professional services.
                                   The construction of a park or recreational
                                   facility, a pipeline, culvert, dam, canal,
                                   or other system for water, sewage, storm
PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT:              water, or flood control, or street lighting.
                                   Public works project does not include the
                                   replacement or repair of existing
                                   infrastructure on private property.
                                   A procurement document issued by the
                                   purchaser to formalize a purchasing
                                   transaction or contract with a supplier. A
PURCHASE ORDER:                    purchase order encumbers funds that were
                                   properly appropriated for a particular
                                   purchase from an approved budget account. A
                                   purchase order is sent to a supplier to
                                   initiate or place an order.
                                   An electronic or written offer to sell goods
QUOTE:                             or services at a certain price, under
                                   specified conditions.
                                   A document used to solicit proposals to
                                   provide a procurement item to a procurement
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS:             unit, including all other documents that are
                                   attached to that document or incorporated in
                                   that document by reference.
                                   A document used to solicit the
REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS:        qualifications, experience, training, and
                                   ability to perform a given task or project.
                                   A person who submits a bid that conforms in
                                   all material aspects to the bid
RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: specifications, and who has the capability
                                   in all respects to perform in full the
                                   contract or purchase order requirements in a
                                   timely manner.
                                   Are submitted in a sealed envelope to
SEALED BIDS:                       prevent its contents from being revealed or
                                   known before the deadline for the submission
                                   of bids.
                                   The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by
                                   a contractor, not involving the delivery of
                                   a specific end-product other than reports
SERVICES:                          that are merely incidental to the required
                                   performance. Services does not include
                                   employment agreements or collective
                                   bargaining agreements.
                                   The procurement of supplies or services that
SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT:           are only available from a single supplier or
                                   manufacturer.
                                   The process of notifying prospective bidders
                                   that the City wishes to receive quotes,
SOLICITATION:                      bids, or proposals for supplies or services.
                                   The process may consist of public
                                   advertising, invitations to bid, or requests
                                   for proposals to prospective bidders.
                                   All personal property, including but not
SUPPLIES:                          limited to goods, equipment, materials and
                                   printing. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd.
                                   Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
 
2-1-3: APPLICATION:
   A.   All procurement-related expenditures of the City shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter and applicable provisions of State law including,
but not limited to, the Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act set forth at Utah Code
Ann. §10-6-101, et seq., as amended. Any expenditure involving federal
assistance funds shall comply with applicable federal law and regulations. Any
expenditure involving the construction, maintenance or improvement of a class C
road or work using class C funds shall comply with Utah Code Ann. 72-6-108 and
72-6-109, as amended.
   B.   Procurement-related expenditures not covered under this chapter shall
follow the Utah Procurement Code, Utah Code Ann. 63G-6a-101 et seq.
   C.   All procurement shall follow the ethical standards of the Utah
Municipal Officers’ and Employees’ Ethics Act, Utah Code Ann. 10-3-1301, et
seq.
   D.   The City shall maintain records pertaining to purchases and
encumbrances made under this chapter in accordance with the Utah Government
Records Access and Management Act, Utah Code Ann 63G-2-101 et seq.
   E.   No check or warrant to cover any claim against appropriations may be
drawn until the claim has been processed according to the relevant provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-4: PROCUREMENT OFFICERS; DUTIES AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   The City Council shall approve all procurement by the City. The City’s
procurement authority is hereby delegated as provided in this chapter.
   B.   The City Manager shall act as the Chief Procurement Officer. The Chief
Procurement Officer, or designee, shall review all procurements or encumbrances
made to ensure accuracy and compliance with this chapter.
   C.   The Chief Procurement Officer or Mayor may sign contracts as
specifically authorized in advance by the City Council.
   D.   The Chief Procurement Officer shall be responsible for all purchasing
and may delegate the following duties to the Purchasing Agent, who shall be the
Finance Director, or to a Department Head as necessary:
      1.   administering and interpreting this chapter in accordance with any
applicable federal, state and local laws, and finance department policies and
procedures for carrying out the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   procuring or supervising the procurement of all supplies and
services needed by the City, including preparation of specifications, and
negotiating and obtaining the authorized signatures on procurement contracts
and purchase orders;
      3.   exercising general supervision and control over all inventories or
supplies of the City and the inspection of and accounting for all such
inventories or supplies;
      4.   preparing and maintaining forms and reports as are reasonably
necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations of
the City;
      5.   keeping generally informed of current developments in the field of
procurement, including market conditions and new products;
      6.   providing a copy of all contracts and agreements to the City
Recorder immediately upon their execution; and
      7.   administering the sale, trade, exchange, or disposal of the City’s
surplus personal property. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-
2023)
2-1-5: AUTHORIZATION LIMITS:
   A.   Department heads may authorize purchase of supplies, services and
materials which do not exceed $4,999 and may sign the contracts pertaining
thereto, provided the purchases are made in accordance with procedures set
forth in this chapter and there are funds in the department budget to cover the
purchases to be made.
   B.   Purchases of supplies, services, or construction materials between
$5,000 and $9,999 require prior approval of the Department Head and the Chief
Procurement Officer. The Chief Procurement Officer shall verify that the
procedures set forth in this chapter have been accurately followed prior to
giving approval and shall ensure there are sufficient funds budgeted and
available to cover the purchases to be made.
      1.   A purchase order shall be submitted for approval for the purchase of
all supplies, services or construction in excess of $5,000, except in
circumstances permitted by this chapter such as emergency purchases or for
service contracts entered between the City and contracted party, which specify
the cost of service.
   C.   Purchases of supplies, services, or construction materials of more than
$10,000 require the approval of the Department Head, Chief Procurement Officer,
and the City Council. The Chief Procurement Officer shall verify that the
procedures set forth in this chapter have been accurately followed prior to the
City Council giving approval. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-
27-2023)
2-1-6: STANDARD PROCUREMENT PROCESSES:
Table: Procurement Summary
 
Amount          Authorization   Process         Policy Reference
$0 - $999       Department Head Small           2-1-060.A.1.a
$1,000 - $4,999 Department Head Small or Exempt 2-1-060.A or C
 
$5,000 - $9,999   City Manager Small or Exempt 2-1-060.A or C
$10,000 - $24,999 City Council Small or Exempt 2-1-060.A or C
$25,000 +         City Council Large or Exempt 2-1-060.B or C
 
   A.   Small Purchases.
      1.   The City’s policy and procedure governing purchases under $25,000 is
as follows:
         a.   Before making a purchase less than $1,000, the Department Head
responsible for purchase shall use means which are reasonable under the
circumstances to assure that the City is getting good value and a reasonable
price.
         b.   A purchase of goods or services greater than $1,000 but not
exceeding $25,000 shall be awarded after solicitation of price quotes from
enough prospective vendors to reasonably ensure that the City received a
competitive price, unless an exempt expenditure process in 2.1.060.C is
followed. Solicitations may be made electronically or in writing. The
Purchasing Agent or Department Head shall evaluate the quotes received to
determine the lowest responsible and responsive quote. Such quotes shall be
recorded and kept by the City.
         c.   It is unlawful for a person to intentionally or knowingly divide
a procurement into small procurements with the intent to make the procurement
qualify as a small purchase or meet the small purchase threshold of $25,000.
         d.   Purchases for construction, job order contracting, design
professional services, other professional services, information technology, and
goods may not exceed an annual cumulative threshold of $25,000 from the same
source, unless the Chief Procurement Officer gives written authorization to
exceed the threshold that includes the reasons for exceeding the threshold.
   B.   Large Purchases.
      1.   The City’s policy and procedure governing purchases of $25,000 and
over is as follows:
         a.   A purchase of goods or services $25,000 or over shall be awarded
with a bidding procedure, unless an exempt expenditure process in 2.1.060.C is
followed.
      2.   Bidding Procedures.
         a.   Type of Purchases and Bid Limits. The following purchases and bid
limits require bidding procedures:
            (1)   Capital equipment purchases estimated to cost $25,000 or
more; and
            (2).   Building improvement or public works projects estimated to
cost $25,000 or more.
         b.   Plans and Specifications. The City shall cause plans and
specifications to be prepared and approved prior to any Invitation for Bids.
         c.   Invitation for Bids. An Invitation for Bids shall be prepared by
the City and shall include:
            (1)   A description of the goods or services to be purchased or
work to be performed;
            (2)   Contract terms, conditions and bond requirements applicable
to the purchase or work;
            (3)   The criteria that will be used to evaluate the bid;
            (4)   Notification of the location where plans, specifications and
other information may be obtained;
            (5)   The time and place of the bid opening; and
            (6)   The right of the City to reject any and all bids.
         d.   Publication. Public notice of an invitation for bids shall follow
applicable state law.
         e.   Amendment. The City may amend, supplement, or cancel an
Invitation for Bids at any time prior to the opening of the bids when deemed in
the best interest of the City.
         f.   Submission. All bids received by the City shall be received
according to the instructions in the Invitation for Bid. The bids shall not be
opened or reviewed prior to the time set for opening of the bids, except as
provided in subsection
2-1-6. B.2.g.
         g.   Correction or Withdrawal of Bids. The City may permit correction
or withdrawal of bids prior to any bid opening. After bid opening, no changes
in bid prices may be permitted. However, the City, in its discretion and upon a
showing of hardship by the bidder, may allow the withdrawal of a bid containing
a substantial error. Any decision to permit the correction or withdrawal of
bids shall be supported, in writing, by the City.
         h.   Opening Bids. Bids shall be opened in public and in the presence
of one or more documented witnesses at the time and place designated in the
Invitation for Bids. Bids shall be opened by the Chief Procurement Officer or
designee.
         i.   Recording Bids. The total amount of each bid and the name of the
bidder shall be read aloud as the bids are opened, and such information shall
be recorded and open to public inspection.
         j.   Evaluating Bids. At the time of opening, the bids shall be
briefly reviewed by the City to determine the apparent lowest responsible and
responsive bidder based on the criteria set forth in the Invitation for Bids.
Bids shall thereafter be fully evaluated within a reasonable time by the
Purchasing Agent or designee to determine the lowest responsive and responsible
bidder, whose bid or quote conforms in all material aspects to the bid
specifications, and who has the capacity in all respects to perform in full the
contract or purchase order requirements in a timely manner. The Purchasing
Agent or designee may not use criteria not described in the Invitation for Bids
to evaluate a bid.
         k.   Determination. The City may request additional information with
respect to the responsibility of a bidder. The unreasonable failure of a bidder
to promptly supply information or proof regarding responsibility may be grounds
for a determination of non-responsibility or non-responsiveness of the bidder.
         l.   Award. Following full evaluation of the bids, the City Council
may accept, reject, or modify the determination and thereupon award the
contract or reject any and all bids.
         m.   Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total
amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public
interest will not permit the delay of re-soliciting bids, the Chief Procurement
Officer or designee shall resolve a tie bid using the following considerations:
            (1)   Bidder closest to the point of delivery;
            (2)   Bidder who received the previous award;
            (3)   Bidder who will provide the earliest delivery date; or
            (4)   By drawing lots.
         n.   Single Bids. In the event only one bid is received, the
Purchasing Agent shall determine whether it is in the best interests of the
City to re-solicit for additional bids or proceed with a procurement award
using the single bid received.
         o.   No Bids or Proposals. In the event no bids or proposals are
received, the Purchasing Agent shall determine whether the delay of re-
soliciting bids or proposals will be detrimental to the public interest. If a
delay in re-soliciting bids or proposals will be detrimental to the public
interest, the Purchasing Agent may purchase the supplies or services with as
much competition as practicable under the circumstances.
         p.   Dividing the Cost of a Construction Project. The cost of a
construction project may not be divided to avoid exceeding the bid limit.
However, the cost of a construction project that exceeds the bid limit may be
divided if the selection procedures comply with the requirements of this
chapter with respect to each part of the construction project that results from
dividing the cost.
         q.   Exceptions. Any exceptions to the procedures set forth in this
section must be in the best interest of the City and must have prior written
approval of the Chief Procurement Officer or designee.
   C.   Exemptions from Small and Large Purchases.
      1.   The following expenditures are exempt from the small and large
purchases procedures of this chapter, but shall be made with as much
competition as practical under the circumstances:
         a.   Procurement under City, County, State, or Federal Contracts or
Pre-Qualified Lists. An expenditure for which requests for qualifications,
competitive bidding or price negotiation according to a procedure comparable to
the City’s process has already occurred at the City, county, state or federal
level.
         b.   Service Contracts and Professional Services. Service contracts
and professional services, but not design professional services, are
expenditures that, by their nature, are not reasonably adapted to award by
competitive bidding. The Chief Procurement Officer or designee shall award
service contracts and professional services contracts based on the Chief
Procurement Officer’s evaluation of the provider’s professional qualifications,
service ability, experience, cost of services, and other applicable criteria as
may be established. A Request for Proposal or Request for Qualifications may be
used to make such a determination. Prior to entering into a service or
professional services contract, the Chief Procurement Officer shall determine
that it is within the best interest of the City to do so, and that as many
providers as practical have been considered for the service. Once a service or
professional services contract has been issued, any periodic payments do not
require additional approval from the Chief Procurement Officer, provided the
contract payments have been properly budgeted. A department may proceed with a
service contract or the purchase of professional services according to the
terms and conditions of an existing City contract.
            (1)   Request for Proposals
               (A)   Form. When the City is unsure of what procurement item is
required or the abilities of various providers, the Chief Procurement Officer
or Purchasing Agent may prepare a Request for Proposals, which shall include
such specifications as are known and the various skills and qualifications
needed, to be used to obtain a procurement item.
               (B)   Evaluating Proposals. Proposals shall be evaluated within
a reasonable time by an evaluation committee comprised of at least three city
employees to determine which proposal provides the best value to the City. The
committee shall evaluate each responsive and responsible proposal, which
proposal conforms in all material aspects to the proposal specifications, and
which demonstrates the proposal has the capacity in all respects to perform in
full the contract or purchase order requirements in a timely manner. Evaluation
criteria for a proposal may include items such as experience, qualifications,
approach to the project, references, management plans, schedule of delivery,
cost, and other subjective or objective criteria. At any time during the
evaluation process, the evaluation committee may request additional information
from a proposer or proposers, including oral interviews or presentations.
Criteria not described in the Request for Proposals may not be used to evaluate
a proposal. See section
2-1-14 for soliciting design professional services using a Request for
Proposals or Requests for Qualifications.
               (C)   Sole Source. Expenditures for goods or services which, by
their nature, are not reasonably adapted to award by competitive bidding,
including goods or services which can be purchased only from one source;
contracts for additions to and repair and maintenance of equipment already
owned by the City which may be more efficiently added to, repaired or
maintained by a certain person or firm; and equipment which, by reason of the
training of City personnel or an inventory of replacement parts, is compatible
with the existing equipment owned by the City. Prior to any expenditure under
this subsection, the Chief Procurement Officer shall determine, in writing,
that the requirements of this subsection have been satisfied.
               (D)   Interlocal Agreement: An expenditure made in conjunction
with an interlocal agreement between the City and another governmental entity
in compliance with the Interlocal Cooperation Act, Utah Code Title 11, Chapter
13.
               (E)   Emergency Procurement. The existence of an emergency
condition may create an immediate and serious need for supplies, services,
repairs, or construction that cannot be met through normal procurement methods
and policy. An emergency procurement of supplies, services, repairs, or
construction shall be made using as much competition as practical under the
circumstances. Emergency procurement shall be limited to only those supplies,
services, repairs, or construction necessary to mitigate the emergency.
Following an emergency expenditure, and as soon as practicable, a purchase
order shall be submitted by the department for which the emergency purchase was
made. Such purchase orders shall be treated as regular purchase orders and
shall require the appropriate approval signatures as stated in this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-7: CANCELLATION AND REJECTION OF BIDS AND PROPOSALS:
The City reserves the right to cancel an Invitation for Bids, Request for
Proposals, or to reject any or all bids or proposals. Any cancellation or
rejection shall be in writing. If, after cancellation or rejection of all bids
or proposals, the City decides to make the purchase or encumbrance, it shall,
when required by State law, reinitiate the Invitation for Bids or Request for
Proposals process. If after repeating the process, no satisfactory bid or
proposal is received, the City may negotiate or make the improvement or
acquisition or enter such other agreements as it deems necessary or desirable.
(Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-8: BONDS AND BID SECURITY:
   A.   Performance and Payment Bonds. Prior to entering any contract, the City
may require performance and payment bonds to be provided in such form and
amounts as required by law and by the City as reasonably necessary to protect
the best interest of the City.
   B.   Bid Security. Contracts for construction projects may require a bid
security in an amount equal to at least five percent of the amount of the bid.
(Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-9: CONTRACTS AND CHANGE ORDERS:
   A.   The City may award exclusive and nonexclusive contracts. Unless a
contract specifically states it is exclusive, it shall be deemed nonexclusive.
“Nonexclusive” means that the City may award a contract to more than one
contractor for similar supplies or services as deemed appropriate.
   B.   A contract for supplies, services, or construction materials shall have
a stated end date and may be entered into for any stated period of time deemed
to be in the best interest of the City. The term of the contract and the
conditions of renewal or extension, if any, shall be included in the
solicitation. No contract may be renewed indefinitely.
   C.   Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall
be subject to the availability and appropriations of funds by the City Council.
   D.   Contracts and purchase orders may be amended, modified or supplemented
only by written amendment to the contract or purchase order, executed by the
parties thereto.
   E.   The City Recorder shall countersign all contracts made on behalf of the
City or to which the City is a party. Department heads shall provide the City
Recorder with a fully conformed original copy of all procurement contracts upon
their execution. The City Recorder shall maintain an indexed record of all
procurement contracts.
   F.   In the event a construction project has a change order or a price
variance due to unknown or unforeseen circumstances, conditions, or factors
affecting the outcome of the project, the Chief Procurement Officer shall
notify the City Council of any condition that would exceed 20% of the original
bid amount. Change orders in construction project contracts that cause the
contract price to exceed the total project budget shall not be approved until
reviewed and approved as a budget adjustment by the City Council. (Ord. 2020-
01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-10: PROTEST OF SPECIFICATIONS OR AWARD OF PROCUREMENT CONTRACT; APPEAL:
   A.   Grievance: Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or contractor who
is aggrieved with the solicitation or award of a procurement contract may
protest to the Purchasing Agent.
   B.   Protest of Specifications: A protest regarding the specifications of a
solicitation shall be submitted in writing to the Purchasing Agent prior to the
opening of the bid and must list the pertinent facts giving rise to the
protest.
   C.   Protest of Contract or Purchase Award: A protest regarding the award of
a procurement contract or purchase award shall be submitted in writing to the
Purchasing Agent within five business days of the award of a procurement
contract or purchase award and must list the pertinent facts giving rise to the
protest. Untimely protests will not be considered.
   D.   Stay of Proceedings: In the event of a timely protest, the City shall
not proceed further with the solicitation or with the award of the contract or
purchase until the protest is sustained or rejected by the Purchasing Agent,
unless an immediate award of the contract or purchase is required to protect
substantial interests of the City.
   E.   Protest Review: The Purchasing Agent shall determine if the protest is
timely filed. If the Purchasing Agent determines the protest is timely filed,
the protest shall be dismissed if the Purchasing Agent determines the protest
alleges facts that, if true, do not provide an adequate basis for the protest.
Otherwise, the Purchasing Agent shall uphold the protest.
   F.   Appeal: Any person aggrieved of a determination of a Department Head,
the Purchasing Agent or Chief Procurement Officer in connection with the
provisions of this chapter may appeal the determination or action to the City
Council within five business days from the Purchasing Agent’s decision by
filing a written appeal to the City Recorder, stating the reasons therefor. The
City Council shall schedule a hearing on the matter within ten days of the
Recorder’s receipt of the appeal. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08,
6-27-2023)
2-1-11: BUDGET LIMITATION:
No expenditure or encumbrance shall be made for any supplies, services, or
construction project that exceeds the funded amount in the City budget, except
as may be provided in an emergency situation. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd.
Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-12: DELIVERY OF SUPPLIES:
When supplies are delivered, the Purchasing Agent or the Department Head who
requested the supplies shall inspect the supplies received to assure that the
correct quantity and quality have been delivered. If the supplies delivered are
satisfactory, the supplies shall be accepted and a copy of the packing slip,
invoice, or other delivery document (or an electronic copy of such) shall be
forwarded to accounts payable for review, payment, and filing. (Ord. 2020-01,
4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-13: INVENTORY MANAGEMENT:
Department heads shall exercise supervision of all inventories of tangible City
property within the control of or assigned to their departments. All City
property located in warehouses and similar storage areas shall be inventoried
annually. Accountability for the property shall reside with the respective
Department Head. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-14: DESIGN PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
The Purchasing Agent may establish criteria in a Request for Qualifications or
Request for Proposals by which the qualifications of a design professional will
be evaluated as provided by Utah Code Ann. 63G-6a-1502.5. The Purchasing Agent
shall follow all requirements of Utah Code Ann. 63G-6a-1501 et seq. in securing
design professional services, including appointing an evaluation committee of
at least three members. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-15: PETTY CASH:
The City shall maintain a petty cash fund in which the total amount of cash,
vouchers and receipts shall not exceed $300. The petty cash fund shall be kept
in a locked box maintained by the City Treasurer. A City employee may receive
up to $50 from the petty cash fund for any lawful and necessary expenditure to
be made on behalf of the City and shall sign a petty cash voucher showing the
amount received and an explanation of the intended use of the money. Within
three business days after making the expenditure, the employee shall return any
excess money to the petty cash fund and staple the itemized receipt for the
expenditure to the petty cash voucher. Employees shall not receive any money
from the petty cash fund for personal use. When money in the petty cash fund
falls below $100, the City Treasurer shall draft a check to the petty cash fund
to raise the amount of currency in the fund to $300. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020;
amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-16: CITY PURCHASING CARDS:
   A.   City employees and officials who have been issued a City purchasing
card may use such card for City purchases and are encouraged, whenever
possible, to use vendors with whom the City has an existing account. The card
holder must deem that using the purchasing card is in the best interest of the
City and would expedite the purchase process.
   B.   All purchases made with City purchasing cards shall require a receipt.
The receipt shall be turned in to the City Treasurer with the purchasing card
monthly statement.
   C.   The City Treasurer shall review all purchasing card statements.
   D.   Personal purchases of any type on a City-issued purchasing card are
strictly prohibited.
   E.   Each employee who has access to a City purchasing card shall sign a
purchasing card use agreement.
   F.   Employees using City purchasing cards shall comply with section
2-1-19 of this code. Anyone found in violation of this section may be subject
to disciplinary action up to and including termination and may be subject to
prosecution under the law. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-
2023)
2-1-17: DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY:
   A.   Real Property.
      1.   The City Council may authorize by resolution the disposal, including
by sale, lease, or other lawful manner, of real property for the benefit of the
City as provided by Utah Code Ann. 10-8-2, as amended. A significant parcel of
real property is a parcel greater than one acre or that has a reasonable value
more than $100,000.
      2.   The Chief Procurement Officer shall make an initial determination
that real property is surplus. Surplus real property may include real property
that is not needed for City infrastructure; property whose cost to maintain
outweighs its value to the City; property that is part of a trade that will
benefit the City, the sale of which will realize significant financial benefits
to the City; or the disposal of which is otherwise in the public interest.
      3.   Before the City may dispose of a significant parcel of real
property, the City shall provide notice and hold a public meeting at which the
City Council shall accept public comment on the proposed disposition.
      4.   All disposal, leases, or subleases of such real property of the City
other than a significant parcel of real property, shall be made, as nearly as
possible, under the same conditions and limitations as required by this chapter
for the purchase of property, including notice and bidding procedures.
      5.   The City Council may authorize at its discretion and under such
terms and conditions as it deems desirable, fair and appropriate, considering
the intended use, property tax value and the interests of the City, the sale of
any surplus real property, through public auction or other method designed to
best serve the interests of City residents and produce a fair return; the trade
or exchange or any surplus real property; or the lease or sublease of any
surplus real property.
   B.   Personal Property.
      1.   Whenever personal property is no longer needed by a City department,
the Department Head having control of such property shall notify the Chief
Procurement Officer or designee. The Chief Procurement Officer or designee
shall notify other City departments of the availability of such property. If
the property is requested, the Chief Procurement Officer or designee shall
supervise the transfer of such property to the department requesting the
property.
      2.   If City personal property becomes surplus, unused, obsolete,
unsuitable for public use, or otherwise no longer needed, the property shall be
disposed of as follows:
         a.   City personal property that is included in the fixed asset
register shall not be disposed of, or sold through public auction, until such
property is declared surplus by the City Council. Once this property is
declared surplus by the City Council, it may be sold to the highest bidder by
the Purchasing Agent through an approved public auction service provider or
through public auction.
         b.   City personal property that was not originally included in the
fixed asset register may be sold to the highest bidder by the Purchasing Agent
through an approved public auction service provider or by conducting a public
auction.
      The Chief Procurement Officer shall have the right to reject any bids or
offers for City personal property when in the best interest of the City.
         c.   If a surplus item remains unsold after reasonable attempts to
sell it through public auction, the Chief Procurement Officer may sell the
surplus item to any person for such price as the Chief Procurement Officer
deems appropriate or may dispose of the item at the Chief Procurement Officer’s
discretion.
         d.   Personal property that is fully consumed in its use for official
City business shall be disposed of in any reasonable manner approved by the
Purchasing Agent.
         e.   Monetary proceeds from the sale or other disposition of items
pursuant to this section which were an enterprise fund asset or purchased with
enterprise fund revenues shall be credited to the respective enterprise fund.
All other proceeds shall be credited to the City’s general fund.
         f.   Where personal property is of such a size, shape, or is so unique
as to be unmarketable, the requirements of this section may be waived and such
property may be sold or otherwise disposed of in any reasonable manner, with
the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08,
6-27-2023)
2-1-18: ADVERTISING REQUIREMENTS:
All procurement solicitations shall conform to the following advertising
requirements, as applicable. Unless otherwise stated, procurement solicitations
may be posted in E-Procurement websites rather than advertised in a printed
medium.
   A.   Invitations for Bids and Requests for Proposals shall be advertised a
minimum of five days in advance of the bid due date at least once in a
generally and widely available medium, which may include newspapers, business
journals or posted on an E-Procurement website.
   B.   Invitations for Bids for building improvement and public works projects
shall be published in accordance with applicable state law.
   C.   Invitations for Bids for class C road improvement projects shall be
advertised in accordance with applicable state law.
   D.   Notice to surplus real property shall be provided at least 14 calendar
days before the opportunity for public comment by posting the property with
notice of the consideration of designating it surplus and mailing notice to
each owner of real property within 300 feet of the property that is the subject
of the proposed disposition as shown on the last assessment rolls of the county
in which the property is located.
   E.   Notice for the sale of surplus personal property shall be advertised at
least ten business days prior to the sale or opening of bids at least once in
generally and widely available medium, or posted on a public surplus company
website. The notice shall describe the property to be sold, the terms of sale
and the place and time of such sale or bid opening. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020;
amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-19: ETHICS:
   A.   Disclosure of Pecuniary Interest. Officers or employees of the City
having a direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any contract entered into by
the City shall disclose such interest. All officers and employees shall comply
with applicable provisions of State law regarding ethics, including the Utah
Municipal Officers’ and Employees’ Ethics Act, Utah Code Ann. 10-3-1301, et
seq., as amended and adopted by the City.
   B.   Personal Use. Purchase of supplies, services, or equipment by the City
for personal use by officers or employees of the City is prohibited.
   C.   Disciplinary Action. A violation of this section by officers or
employees of the City may be cause for disciplinary action up to and including
termination, in accordance with the disciplinary procedures set forth in the
Personnel Policies and Procedures of the City. (Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd.
Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
2-1-20: VIOLATIONS:
Any purchase or contract executed in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or applicable state law shall be void as to the City, and any funds
expended thereupon may be recovered by the City through appropriate action.
(Ord. 2020-01, 4-14-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-08, 6-27-2023)
CHAPTER 2
RECREATION, ARTS, AND PARKS (RAP) TAX
SECTION:
2-2-1: Purpose And Scope
2-2-2: Application And Use
2-2-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a local sales and use tax to fund
Recreation, Arts, and Parks (RAP) facilities and programs as approved in
proposition #14 in the 2021 General Municipal Election for the city of South
Weber. (Ord. 2021-16, 12-7-2021)
2-2-2: APPLICATION AND USE:
   A.   0.1% sales and use tax shall be implemented on qualifying taxable
transactions within South Weber to fund Recreation, Arts, and Parks (RAP)
facilities and programs. The RAP tax shall be levied for a period of ten years
beginning January 1, 2022 and may be reauthorized at that time in accordance
with state code.
   B.   All revenues received from the RAP tax levied herein shall be used
solely for the purposes of funding recreations, arts, and parks facilities and
programs.
   C.   The use and distribution of all RAP revenues shall be authorized by the
City Council through the annual budget process.
   D.   Taxes shall be collected by the State Tax Commission and distributed as
provided by law.
(Ord. 2021-16, 12-7-2021)
CHAPTER 3
IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
2-3-1: Findings And Purpose
2-3-2: Impact Fees Levied
2-3-3: Service Area
2-3-4: Adjustment Of Impact Fee
2-3-5: Administrative Challenges And Appeals Procedure
2-3-6: Accounting, Expenditure And Refund Of Impact Fees
2-3-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
The City Council hereby finds and determines:
   A.   There is a need for public facilities for new developments which have
not been constructed and are required to be consistent with the City's general
plan and to protect the public's health, safety, and welfare.
   B.   The rapid and continuing growth of South Weber City necessitates the
imposition and collection of impact fees pursuant to law that require
development to pay its fair share of the cost of providing public facilities
occasioned by the demands and needs of the development project at service
levels necessary to promote and preserve the public health, safety, and
welfare.
   C.   The impact fees established by this chapter are based upon the costs
which are generated through the need for new facilities and other capital
acquisition costs required, incrementally, by new development within the City.
   D.   The impact fees established by this chapter do not exceed the
reasonable cost of providing public facilities occasioned by development
projects within the City.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
2-3-2: IMPACT FEES LEVIED:
   A.   Impact fees are hereby imposed as a condition of the issuance of a
building permit by the City for any development activity which creates
additional demand and need for public facilities in the following City systems:
culinary water, sewer, storm drainage, transportation, parks, recreation, and
public safety fire station.
   B.   The City shall also collect the Central Weber Sewer District and Weber
Basin Water Conservancy District's treated water impact fee for developments
creating additional demand on that system and remit the same to each respective
district.
   C.   Impact fees are hereby levied for the City service area for the systems
identified in this section as set forth in the City's consolidated fee
schedule.
   D.   All impact fees shall be paid prior to the City issuing a building
permit.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
2-3-3: SERVICE AREA:
The entire area of the City and any areas outside of the City served by such
systems are designated and established as one service area with respect to the
City's culinary water, sewer, storm drainage, transportation, parks,
recreation, and public safety fire station systems, including the Central Weber
Sewer District and Weber Basin Water Conservancy District's Treated Water
System.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
2-3-4: ADJUSTMENT OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   The City may adjust the impact fees imposed pursuant to this chapter as
necessary in order to:
      1.   Respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases;
      2.   Ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly;
      3.   Permit the adjustment of the amount of the fee based upon studies
and data submitted by an applicant as approved by the City Council in order to
ensure that the fee represents the proportionate share of the costs of
providing such facilities which are reasonably related to and necessary in
order to provide the services in question to anticipated future growth and
development activities; and
      4.   Allow credits against impact fees for dedication of land for
improvement to or new construction of any system improvements as defined by the
Utah Impact Fees Act.
   B.   The City Manager shall have the authority to make such adjustments
based upon information submitted by an applicant and any recommendations from
the City Engineer.
   C.   The City Manager may adopt policies consistent with this chapter and
any resolutions passed by the City Council to assist in the implementation,
administration, and interpretation of this chapter.
   D.   If the applicant, person or entity is not satisfied with the decision
of the City Manager, an appeal may be made to the City Council under the
procedures set forth in section
2-3-5 of this chapter.
   E.   Each applicant shall be entitled to a credit or refund, if applicable,
for any impact fees previously paid for the same building permit or development
activity.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
2-3-5: ADMINISTRATIVE CHALLENGES AND APPEALS PROCEDURE:
Any person or entity required to pay an impact fee who believes the fee does
not meet the requirements of law may file a written request for information
with the City as provided by the Utah Impact Fees Act and any other relevant
information relating to the impact fee.
   A.   Any person or entity residing in or owning property within the City who
believes the fee does not meet the requirements of the law or wishes to
challenge the fee shall file a written appeal within thirty (30) calendar days
after payment of any impact fee with the City Recorder setting forth in detail
all factual and legal grounds in support of the appeal. Upon receipt of the
appeal, the City Manager shall make a recommendation to the City Council and
schedule a public hearing before the City Council on the appeal for the purpose
of receiving input from all interested persons. The City Council shall
thereafter render its decision on the appeal no later than thirty (30) days
after the date the appeal was filed.
   B.   Any person or entity who has failed to comply with these administrative
remedies may not file or join an action challenging the validity of any impact
fee.
   C.   Any person or entity who was a party to an appeal under this section
who is adversely affected by the decision of the City Council may petition the
District Court for a review of the decision within ninety (90) days of a
decision upholding an impact fee by the City Council or within one hundred
twenty (120) days after the date the challenge to the impact fee was filed,
whichever is earlier. Such a declaratory judgment action or petition for review
challenging the validity of the fee shall be filed in the District Court for
Davis County.
   D.   In the event a petition is filed with the court, the City shall
transmit to the reviewing court the record of its proceedings, including the
minutes, findings, orders and, if available, a true and correct transcript of
its proceedings.
   E.   If the proceeding was audio recorded, a transcript of that audio
recording is a true and correct transcript for the purposes of subsection D of
this section.
   F.   If there is a record:
      1.   The District Court review is limited to the record provided by the
City; and
      2.   The court may not accept or consider any evidence outside the City
record unless that evidence was offered to the City and the court determines
that it was improperly excluded by the City.
   G.   If there is an inadequate record, the court may call witnesses and take
evidence.
   H.   The court shall affirm the decision of the City if the decision was
supported by substantial evidence in the record.
   I.   The Judge may award reasonable attorney fees and costs to the
prevailing party in any action brought under this section.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
2-3-6: ACCOUNTING, EXPENDITURE AND REFUND OF IMPACT FEES:
The impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into a
separate interest-bearing ledger account and may only be used for capital
improvements for which the fees were collected. The accounting, expenditure,
and refund of all such impact fees collected shall be handled in accordance
with the provisions of the Utah Impact Fees Act.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose
3-1-2: License Required
3-1-3: Application For License
3-1-4: Fee; Term; Payment For License
3-1-5: Certificate Of License
3-1-6: Combination License
3-1-7: Transfer Of License
3-1-8: Compliance With Other Agency Regulations
3-1-9: Inspections; Right Of Entry
3-1-10: Reciprocal Recognition; Delivery Of Goods
3-1-11: Revocation Or Denial Of License
3-1-12: Penalty
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
This title is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the safety,
health and prosperity, improving the morals, peace, good order, comfort and
convenience of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and protecting property
therein. (Ord. 97-16, 12-9-1997)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or operate any
business in the city which generates annual gross income of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) or more, or use any property for any such business, without
first making application for and obtaining a license from the city for such
business, and paying in advance the license fee required therefor as provided
in this chapter. The provisions of this title shall not apply to any business
conducted for charitable or benevolent purposes, or any church affair, festival
or bazaar or to judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators,
including sales by the Davis County sheriff. (Ord. 97-16, 12-9-1997; amd. Ord.
98-24, 10-27-1998)
3-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Contents: All applications for licenses shall be made in writing and
submitted to the city business license official upon a prepared form, which may
be obtained from the business license official. Each application shall show the
following: (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
      1.   The name and address of the person desiring a license. If the
applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners shall be
included in the application. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and
addresses of all officers and directors shall be included in the application.
      2.   The kind of license desired, stating the business to be performed,
practiced or carried on.
      3.   The class of license desired, if such licenses are divided into
classes.
      4.   The place where such business is to be carried on, giving the street
number, if such business is to be carried on in any building or enclosure, or
stated location.
      5.   The period of time for which such license is desired to be issued.
      6.   A certificate of inspection from the fire department, certifying
that the premises where the business will be operated has been inspected and
approved for the operation of the business.
      7.   Such other facts and information as may be required by ordinance,
the statutes of the state and the city. (Ord. 97-16, 12-9-1997)
   B.   Filing; Fee Accompanied: Each application for a license under this
title shall be filed by the applicant with the city business license official
and shall be accompanied by the license fee required to be paid for the
issuance of the license desired. In the event the applicant decides to withdraw
the application before a business license is issued, one-half (1/2) of the fee
paid shall be nonrefundable. Applications received by the city business license
official shall be numbered in the order of their receipt and shall be filed in
numerical sequence.
   C.   Investigation:
      1.   Required: After receipt of an application for a license, such
application shall be submitted to the appropriate official for investigation as
required by this chapter.
      2.   Officials And Agencies: Within ten (10) business days after receipt
by the city business license official of each application for a license, the
business license official, at his or her discretion, may refer the application
to the Davis County sheriff, building inspector, fire department, health
department or other official or body, for the purpose of investigation and
inspection of:
         a.   The general reputation and character of the person making the
application, or directly interested therein;
         b.   The general reputation of those who would patronize the business
if such license were granted;
         c.   The nature and kind of the applicant's business;
         d.   Where the application is for the continued operation of a
business theretofore permitted by the laws of the city, whether such business
has been conducted in a lawful manner and in accordance with the standards of
the city as a whole;
         e.   Whether the operation of the business has and will meet the
health and safety requirements required for similar businesses; and
         f.   Any other fact or facts which might have an effect on the
granting or denial of the license.
      3.   Report Of Investigation: Upon being requested to do so by the city
business license official, the Davis County sheriff, building inspector, fire
inspector, health inspector or other official or body shall conduct the
investigation and inspection provided for in this subsection C, and within
fifteen (15) business days after receiving such request, the person shall
submit a report of the investigation to the business license official, together
with his recommendations as to whether the license should be granted or denied.
   D.   Disposition Following Investigation: After receiving the report and
recommendation prescribed in subsection C3 of this section, the business
license official shall make such disposition respecting the granting or denying
of the license applied for, or may order further investigation concerning the
application as the official shall, in his or her sole discretion, deem
necessary to effect the purpose of the provisions in this title. (Ord. 09-12,
10-13-2009)
   E.   Approval; Issuance: In the event the business licensing official shall
approve any application for a license pursuant to the provisions of this
section, such approval shall be endorsed on the application by the business
licensing official. The business licensing official shall then forthwith issue
a license certificate in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
97-16, 12-9-1997)
   F.   Denial; Appeal To City Council: In the event the business licensing
official shall deny any application for a license, the reasons for such denial
shall be placed on the application so denied by the business licensing official
who shall return the application, together with one-half (1/2) of the amount of
fees deposited. The licensing official shall also inform the applicant of his
or her right to appear before the city council to appeal the denial. If the
applicant makes such an appearance, upon presentation to the city council of
sufficient reasons why such application should not be denied, the city council
may in its discretion set aside the denial and approve the application. If the
application is approved, the city council shall dispose of the matter in
accordance with subsection E of this section. The applicant will resubmit to
the city the amount of the fee that was refunded by the licensing official.
(Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
   G.   Renewal: Unless otherwise noted on the license certificate, all
business licenses must be renewed annually. In the event a business allows its
business license to expire, it shall be required to reapply for a license by
filing a new business license and following all of the procedures outlined
above. Any business license which is allowed to expire and is not renewed
within one year of its expiration shall be deemed to be abandoned and the
business must cease operations if it has not already done so. (Ord. 98-24, 10-
27-1998)
3-1-4: FEE; TERM; PAYMENT FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Established: License fees for all businesses and classes of business
licenses shall be set by resolution of the city council. Copies of the current
resolution and fee schedule shall be available at the city offices during the
city's business hours. (Ord. 02-7, 5-28-2002)
   B.   License Period:
      1.   Calendar Year: All licenses issued shall be valid for a period of
one calendar year. Those new licenses which are approved after the calendar
year begins are only valid through the remaining months of the calendar year.
Exception: New licenses issued after November 1 shall be valid through December
31 of the following year.
      2.   Temporary License: A "temporary business" is any business that
operates within the city for less than ninety (90) calendar days each year that
has either a temporary or permanent location/structure. If the structure is
temporary in nature, it shall be removed from the premises no more than ten
(10) business days after the license has expired. A license fee for a temporary
business shall be payable prior to the commencement of business. The license
shall be effective for the period as stated on the license, but shall not
exceed ninety (90) days. All regulations contained herein shall apply to a
temporary license.
      3.   Renewal: At the time of annual renewal, an inspection may be made to
assure compliance with the ordinances of the city. If any changes have been
made to the business, a new license may be required. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
   C.   No Prorating: License fees shall be paid in full, regardless of when
during the year the license is obtained. No license fee imposed by this title
shall be prorated to reflect a partial year or for any other reason. (Ord. 98-
24, 10-27-1998)
   D.   Refund: No license fee, or any part thereof, shall be refunded for any
reason whatsoever, once the license has been granted or issued by the city.
(Ord. 97-16, 12-9-1997)
   E.   Failure To Pay:
      1.   Penalty: All license fees for renewed business licenses shall be due
on January 1. A fifty percent (50%) penalty shall be assessed to the fees for
any business license fees which have not been paid by February 1. A one hundred
percent (100%) penalty shall be assessed to the fees for any business license
fees which have not been paid by March 1. Any business which has not renewed
its business license by paying the required fees by March 1 shall be deemed to
be operating without a license and a citation may be issued by the Davis County
sheriff's office. (Ord. 98-24, 10-27-1998)
      2.   Recovery; Civil Action: In all cases where the assessment required
by this title to be paid for the operation of a business for which a license is
required is not paid according to the requirements of this chapter, a civil
action may be brought in the name of the city against the person failing to pay
such license fee. The civil action may be brought in any court of this state
having jurisdiction of such action to recover the amount of the assessment and
any penalties which may attach, as well as court costs and reasonable attorney
fees. Where more than one such assessment shall be unpaid in violation of the
provisions of this title, such claims may be joined as separate causes of
action in a single action.
      3.   Prosecution: It shall be the duty of the city attorney to prepare,
bring and prosecute the civil actions contemplated by this title upon request
of the city council. (Ord. 97-16, 12-9-1997)
3-1-5: CERTIFICATE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Contents: Every certificate of license shall bear upon its face the
following:
      1.   The name of the person to whom such certificate has been issued.
      2.   The amount paid for such license.
      3.   The kind of license and the class of such license if such licenses
are divided into classes.
      4.   The term of such license, including the commencing date and the date
of expiration.
      5.   The place or places where such business is to be conducted. (Ord.
97-16, 12-9-1997)
      6.   The signature of the business license official or designee. (Ord.
09-12, 10-13-2009)
   B.   Posting: Every certificate of license issued shall be posted by the
licensee in a conspicuous place in which such licensed business is to be
carried on so that the same may easily be seen. No expired certificate shall be
displayed at any place or in any manner after the expiration thereof and any
wilful violation of this prohibition shall be grounds for refusing to issue a
new license for the same business.
   C.   Exhibit Upon Request: It shall be the duty of each and every person to
whom a certificate of license has been issued pursuant to this title to show
the same at all reasonable times to any person authorized by the City Council
or the provisions of this chapter to inspect such certificates.
   D.   Misuse Prohibited: It is unlawful to counterfeit a business license or
to deface or mutilate the same during the period in which the license
certificate is required by this section to be displayed. It is also unlawful to
remove or attempt to remove the certificate from a place of proper display,
except for purposes of destroying the same upon expiration thereof, or to use
or permit the same to be used at any place other than that designated therein,
or to use or permit the same to be used in conjunction with any business or
device prohibited or declared to be unlawful by the laws of the City, the
County or the State. (Ord. 97-16, 12-9-1997)
3-1-6: COMBINATION LICENSE:
   A.   Permitted: Where two (2) or more types of duly licensed businesses are
conducted within a single establishment by the same person, and in accordance
with section
10-11-11 of this Code, a combination license may be issued therefor. However,
such combination license shall not include licenses for beer, Christmas tree
lots or fireworks stands. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
   B.   Fee: The annual fee for such combination licenses shall be a total of
the full regular fee for each type of business. (Ord. 11-07, 4-26-2011)
3-1-7: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license granted or issued under any of the provisions of any ordinance of
the City shall be in any manner assignable or transferable, or authorize any
person other than the person therein mentioned or named to do business, or
authorize any other business than is therein mentioned or named to be done or
transacted; provided however, that any person to whom one or more licenses have
been issued to transact or carry on some business at a definite location in the
City may, except as hereinafter provided, make application for the transfer of
any or all of his said licenses for the sole purpose of transacting or carrying
on the same business as is therein mentioned at some other definite location in
the City by himself. Any person wishing to make such a transfer shall file an
application with the City business license official. No application shall be
approved unless the business as conducted in the new location shall be
conducted in the same manner and by the same persons as was the case when such
business was conducted in the original location. The business license official,
after examination of all appropriate reports, may in his discretion, deny or
grant the transfer of such licenses strictly within the above limitations.
(Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-1-8: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER AGENCY REGULATIONS:
In addition to complying with the provisions of this title, all businesses
operating within the City shall comply with all other local, State and Federal
regulations which affect the business, including, but not limited to, land use
regulations, State licensing requirements, State and Federal environmental laws
and any and all other laws and/or regulations which may govern the conduct of
the business. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006)
3-1-9: INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   A.   Inspections are required for all new businesses upon initial
application, except home occupations without patrons/employees, and are subject
to inspections at time of renewal as stated in subsection B of this section.
(Ord. 17-06, 5-9-2017)
   B.   Inspections for license renewals shall be scheduled as follows:
      1.   Home occupations with patrons/employees: Annually.
      2.   Commercial: Annually.
      3.   Construction: Annually.
      4.   Mining: Annually and throughout the year as needed.
      5.   Mobile food vendor: As determined necessary by the Fire Chief, and
which shall be conducted based on the criteria that the Utah Fire Prevention
Board establishes in accordance with Utah Code Annotated 53-7-204; however, the
City shall consider valid an approval from another political subdivision within
the State that shows the mobile food vendor passed a fire safety inspection
that the other political subdivision conducted. (Ord. 17-10, 10-10-2017)
   C.   Required inspections may be conducted throughout the year and held on
file by the business license official until time of renewal. (Ord. 17-06, 5-9-
2017)
3-1-10: RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION; DELIVERY OF GOODS:
   A.   Conditions: No license shall be required under this title of any person
whose only business in the City is the delivery of goods to a person in this
City where such goods have been sold by him at a regular place of business
maintained by him outside this City, where:
      1.   Such person's business is at the time of such delivery a business
licensed by the municipality or county in which the business is located; and
      2.   The licensing authority grants to the licensees of the City making
deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges and upon substantially
the same terms as are granted by this section; and
      3.   Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it
is manufactured, produced or processed are subject to inspection by the
authorities of this City for compliance for health or sanitary standards
prescribed by this City. (Ord. 97-16, 12-9-1997)
   B.   Certification Upon Request: The business license official shall certify
a copy of this section to any licensing authority in the State who shall
request the same. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-1-11: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Notice Requirements: A business license issued under this title may be
revoked for good cause, including if the business is found to constitute a
nuisance or for any other good cause as determined by the City Council. Before
any business license may be revoked, the holder of the license shall be
afforded written notice and a hearing before the City Council. (Ord. 98-24, 10-
27-1998)
   B.   Effect: If at any time a license under the provisions of this title is
denied or revoked, it is unlawful for any person to operate such business or to
permit or otherwise allow any other person to operate the business with respect
to which the license has been revoked or denied until the City Council shall
deem it proper to reissue such license. Each revocation shall work a forfeiture
of any license fees paid, and in the event the license is renewed, it shall be
renewed according to the provisions of this title dealing with the issuance of
licenses as though the same were a new license.
   C.   Waiting Period For New License: No person who has been denied a license
or whose license has been revoked under the provisions of this title, and no
person associated or connected with such person in the conduct of such
business, shall be granted a license for such business for a period of six (6)
months after such revocation or denial. The City Council may, in its sole
discretion, waive the prohibition against the associates or persons connected
with such business of its licensee, and may grant permission for the issuance
of a license to the associated persons. (Ord. 97-16, 12-9-1997)
3-1-12: PENALTY:
   A.   Conflicting Provisions: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prevent or in any manner interfere with the enforcement of any penalty
provisions contained in any other ordinance of the City.
   B.   Violation: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
title shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be
punished as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. Each day that person shall violate or continue to violate
this title after notice of such violation by the City or its officers or
agents, shall be considered to be a separate violation, and shall be punished
as such. (Ord. 97-16, 12-9-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
BUSINESSES REGULATED
SECTION:
3-2-1: Types Of Businesses
3-2-2: Occupations Not Specifically Provided For
3-2-1: TYPES OF BUSINESSES:
   A.   License Required: Except as otherwise provided in subsection C of this
section, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any of the following
types of businesses within the City without first making an application to the
City and obtaining a business license:
      1. Commercial: Any business conducted for profit that is not located
within a residence.
      2. Construction: A person or business that builds, excavates, or
completes any work, including electrical and mechanical, towards the completion
of a building or structure and whose business is located within the City.
      3. Group Home: A residential facility for elderly or handicapped persons
consistent with the zoning of the desired location, that is occupied on a 24-
hour basis by eight or fewer individuals in a family type arrangement and in
conformance with applicable standards of the Utah Department of Social
Services.
      4. Home Occupation with on-site patrons/employees: Any business conducted
from a residence that has patrons or employees frequenting the business.
      5. Mining: Those activities conducted on the surface of the land for the
exploration for development of or the extraction of mineral deposits from its
natural occurrences, including surface mining and surface effects of
underground mining, including on site transportation or other primary
processing.
      6. Mobile business: Any business conducted for profit that is operated
independently from or as an extension of a brick and mortar business location.
      7. Sort-Term or Vacation Rental: Any transient lodging facility in a
single-family dwelling unit, in public lodging facilities as part of a planned
unit development (PUD), or in an accessory dwelling unit (ADU), occupied by a
single group on a temporary basis for less than 30 consecutive days as an
alternative to a hotel or motel. This business requires a conditional use
permit for all zones. (See SWMC 10-18).
   B.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
mobile business or business on a mobile platform, such as a truck, trailer or
cart, within the City without first making an application to the City and
obtaining the required permit independent of or in conjunction with a business
license.
   C.   The City shall not:
      1. Require a license or permit for a business that is operated only
occasionally and by an individual who is under eighteen (18) years of age;
      2. Charge a license fee for a home occupation, unless the combined
offsite impact of the home occupation and the primary residential use
materially exceeds the offsite impact of the primary residential use alone as
deemed by the business license official. Appeals shall be determined by the
City Council; or
      3. Track home occupations that do not have patrons or employees, nor send
out renewal notices for such home occupations. (Ord. 19-10, 4-9-2019; amd. Ord.
19-14, 6-11-2019)
3-2-2: OCCUPATIONS NOT SPECIFICALLY PROVIDED FOR:
No person shall enter into or operate a business within the City without first
obtaining a license. The license for all businesses and occupations not
otherwise provided for in this title shall be determined according to the fee
resolution adopted by the City Council. The business owner must comply with any
applicable Federal, State and local regulations. (Ord. 97-16, 12-9-1997)
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Authority
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: General Restrictions
3-3-4: License To Sell Alcoholic Beverages At Retail
3-3-5: Retail Licenses - Classification
3-3-6: License Applications
3-3-7: Processing Of Applications; Local Consent
3-3-8: General Operational Restrictions
3-3-9: Off-Premises Licenses
3-3-10: Full-Service Restaurant And Limited-Service Restaurant Licenses
3-3-11: Club Licenses
3-3-12: Beer Only License
3-3-12-1: On-Premises Banquet License
3-3-13: Single-Event License
3-3-14: Renewal Of Existing Licenses
3-3-15: Renewal Information Required
3-3-16: Fees
3-3-17: Expiration And Renewal
3-3-18: Penalties For Violations By A Licensed Establishment
3-3-1: AUTHORITY:
South Weber City may prohibit, except as provided by law, any person from
knowingly possessing any intoxicating alcoholic beverages, and the manufacture,
sale, keeping or storing for sale, offering or exposing for sale, importing,
carrying, transporting, advertising, distributing, giving away, exchanging,
dispensing or serving of intoxicating alcoholic beverages. The authority for
this chapter is derived from section 10-8-42 of the Utah Code and the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Means beer, wine, and liquor as the terms are defined in
this section.
   BEER ONLY: Means an establishment that is issued a license which allows for
the storage, sale, service, and consumption of beer on the premises where the
business is engaged in primarily serving meals to the general public, where
patrons may only purchase beer in conjunction with an order of food that is
prepared, sold and served at the restaurant, and where the restaurant maintains
at least seventy percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from the sale
of food.
   BEER OR MALT LIQUOR: Means a product that contains at least 0.5 percent
alcohol by volume, but not more than four percent (4%) of alcohol by volume or
3.2 percent by weight, and is obtained by fermentation, infusion, or decoction
of any malted grain. Such products may or may not contain hops or other
vegetable products. "Beer" includes products referred to as light beer or malt
liquor.
   BREWER: Means any person or facility engaged in manufacturing beer, heavy
beer, or flavored malt beverage.
   CHURCH: Means a building set apart for the purpose of worship, in which
religious services are held with which clergy is associated and which is tax
exempt under the laws of this State.
   CITY: Means South Weber City.
   CLUB: Means a dining, equity, fraternal, or social club as defined in the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code.
   COMMISSION: Means the State of Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission.
   DINING CLUB LICENSE: Means a license which allows the sale, storage, service
and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises that: has a full menu
that offers full meals including appetizers, main courses, and desserts;
maintain at least sixty percent (60%) of their club business from the gross
sale of food; have a portion of the premises used for a dining area, and
adequate culinary facilities to serve full meals. Dining clubs are open to the
public but the club licensee may choose to restrict access to only those who
are on a list or pay a fee.
   EQUITY CLUB LICENSE: Means a license which allows the sale, storage, service
and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises that: only allows
members or guests of a member to be admitted to or use the premises; owns,
maintains, or operates a substantial recreational facility in conjunction with
a club house such as a golf course or a tennis facility; and have bylaws or
house rules as regarding membership as defined in the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act of the Utah Code.
   FLAVORED MALT BEVERAGE: Means a beverage that contains at least 0.5 percent
alcohol by volume, is treated by processing, filtration, or another method of
manufacture that is not generally recognized as a traditional process in the
production of a beer as described in 27 CFR section 25.55 and to which is added
a flavor or other ingredient containing alcohol, except for a hop extract; and
for which the producer is required to file a formula for approval with United
States Alcohol and Tobacco Trade and Tax Bureau pursuant to 27 CFR section
25.55.
   FRATERNAL CLUB LICENSE: Means a license which allows the sale, storage,
service and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises where only
members or guests of a member are allowed to be admitted to use the premises;
the club is organized and operated solely for a social, recreational,
patriotic, or fraternal purpose; the club has no capital stock; meets the
governing requirements outlined in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the
Utah Code; and the club exists solely for:
   A.   The benefit of its members and their beneficiaries; and
   B.   A lawful social, intellectual, educational, charitable, benevolent,
moral, fraternal, patriotic, or religious purpose for the benefit of its
members or the public, carried on through voluntary activity of its members in
their local lodges.
   FULL-SERVICE HOTEL: Means a hotel that offers full availability of requisite
standardized industry amenities which are not limited to, but including the
following: on-premises restaurant, room service, business center, concierge,
fitness center, banquet halls, various room type selection such as suites.
   FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT LICENSE: Means a license that allows for the
storage, sale, service, and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises
of a restaurant that is primarily engaged in serving meals to the general
public, where patrons may only purchase alcoholic beverages in conjunction with
an order of food that is prepared, sold and served at the restaurant, and where
the restaurant maintains at least seventy percent (70%) of its total restaurant
business from the gross sale of food.
   HEAVY BEER: Means a product that contains more than four percent (4%)
alcohol by volume and is obtained by fermentation, infusion, or decoction of
malted grain.
   LICENSED PREMISES: Means a room, house, building, structure or place
occupied by any person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on any premises
under this chapter; provided, that in any multi- roomed establishment, an
applicant for a full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, club,
manufacturer, or beer only license shall designate a room or portion of the
building of such business for the sale of alcoholic beverages, which portion so
specifically designated in the application and in the license issued pursuant
thereto shall be the licensed premises. Multiple dining facilities located in
one building and owned or leased by one licensed applicant shall be deemed to
be only one licensed premises.
   LICENSEE: Means a person granted an off-premises, on-premises banquet, beer
only, full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, manufacturer, club,
or single-event license in connection with the operation of a place of business
in the City. This term shall also include any employee of the licensee.
   LIMITED-SERVICE RESTAURANT: Means a restaurant that is issued a liquor
license which allows for the storage, sale, service, and consumption of wine,
beer and heavy beer on the premises where the business is engaged in primarily
serving meals to the general public, where patrons may only purchase wine,
beer, and heavy beer in conjunction with an order of food that is prepared,
sold and served at the restaurant, and where the restaurant maintains at least
seventy percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from the sale of food.
   LIQUOR: Means alcohol, or an alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt,
flavored malt beverage, or other liquid, or combination of liquids, a part of
which is spirituous, vinous, or fermented, and all other drinks, or drinkable
liquids that contains at least 0.5 percent alcohol by volume and is suitable to
use for beverage purposes. "Liquor" does not include any beverage defined as
beer.
   MANUFACTURE: Means to distill, brew, rectify, mix, compound, process,
ferment, or otherwise make an alcoholic product for personal use or for sale or
distribution to others.
   MANUFACTURER LICENSE: Means a license granted under the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act of the Utah Code which includes a brewer, winery or distillery.
ON-PREMISES BANQUET LICENSE: Means a license which allows the sale, storage,
service and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises in connection
with a banquet such as a hotel, resort facility, sports center or convention
center as defined in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code.
   PARK: Means a piece of public ground that is set apart for the use of the
public, whether developed or undeveloped, and that is usually, or may be,
planted with trees, lawns, or other shrubbery. The park may include facilities
for sport, entertainment, dancing, recreation, or swimming, or a park may be
planned for such future use of any and all other facilities. A park may consist
solely of a single purpose facility, either actual or proposed, such as an
equestrian park, open air theater, or playground. For purposes of this chapter,
a golf course is not a park.
   PERSON: Means an individual, partnership, firm, corporation, limited
liability company, association, business trust, or other form of business
enterprise, including a receiver or trustee, and the plural as well as the
singular number, unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed
by the context.
   PLAYGROUND: Means a public, private or neighborhood area which may or may
not include play equipment where children go for physical activity or to play.
   RESTAURANT: Means a business establishment where a variety of foods are
prepared and complete meals are served to the general public, located on
premises having adequate culinary fixtures for food preparation and dining
accommodations that is engaged primarily in serving meals to the general
public; where customers are seated at tables, servers take food orders and
serve food at tables without prepayment, and without service windows or
primarily providing takeout orders picked up at a counter.
   RETAILER: Means a person engaged in the sale or distribution of an alcoholic
beverage to a consumer.
   SCHOOL: Means a building used primarily for the general education of minors.
"School" does not include a nursery school, an infant day care center, or a
trade or a technical school.
   SELL, SALE, OR TO SELL: Means a transaction, exchange, or barter whereby,
for consideration, an alcoholic beverage is either directly or indirectly
transferred, solicited, ordered, delivered for value, or by means or under
pretext is promised or obtained, whether done by a person as a principal,
proprietor, or as an agent, servant, or employee, unless otherwise defined in
this chapter or the rules made by the commission.
   SINGLE-EVENT: Means a convention, civic, or community enterprise conducted
by a bona fide corporation, church, political organization, or association or a
recognized subordinate lodge, chapter, or other local unit thereof.
   SOCIAL CLUB LICENSE: Means a license which allows the sale, storage, service
and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises and includes any other
club that does not qualify as an equity, fraternal or dining club, such as a
social drinking club that does less than fifty percent (50%) of its business
from the sale of food.
   STATE STORE: Means a facility for the sale of package liquor located on
premises owned or leased by the State and operated by a State employee. "State
store" does not apply to a licensee, permittee, or package agencies.
   TAVERN: Means a business establishment that is engaged primarily in the
retail sale of beer to a public patron for consumption on the establishment's
premises. "Tavern" includes beer bar, parlor, lounge, cabaret, and night club
if the revenue from the sale of beer exceeds the revenue of the sale of food,
although food need not be sold in the establishment.
   TRAIL: Means a linear corridor of property which is planned as part of the
Parks and Trails Master Plan or recognized as a City facility by the Parks and
Trails Master Plan or an applicable Project Development Agreement or
Subdivision Approval, although not classified as a park, and maintained by the
City for the purpose of recreation and alternate transportation as a part of
the transportation system, thus not designed or intended for use by
unaccompanied small children. A trail is not a park for purposes of this
chapter.
   WINE: Means an alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the
natural sugar content of fruits, plants, honey, or milk, or other like
substance, whether or not another ingredient is added. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-3: GENERAL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Manufacturer/Brewer: A person may not manufacture any alcoholic
beverage unless an alcoholic beverage manufacturing license has been issued by
the commission. A separate license is required for each place of manufacture,
storage, and sale of alcoholic beverages. Whether independent or associated
with a restaurant, a brewer or other form of manufacturing requires local
consent from the City Council.
      1.   Before any manufacturer or brewer licensee may manufacture any
alcoholic beverage, it shall obtain:
         a.   Local consent for a manufacturer license from the City; and
         b.   A manufacturer license from the commission.
      2.   Applicants shall submit an application as per section
3-3-6 of this chapter.
      3.   Manufacturer licensee shall comply with all provisions and
operational regulations for a manufacturer as established by the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act.
      4.   Violation of this subsection is a Class B misdemeanor.
   B.   Single-Event: Before any sponsor of a single event may sell or allow
the consumption of alcohol on its premises, it shall first obtain a single-
event license from the commission and local consent from the City Council.
   C.   Advertising: It shall be unlawful to advertise the sale of alcoholic
beverages in violation of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. Permitted
signage shall comply with requirements contained in the land use ordinances of
this Code. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-4: LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AT RETAIL:
   A.   It shall be a Class B misdemeanor for any person to sell alcohol
without first having procured a license from the City and paid the license fee,
including all regulatory fees, as set forth in the City's consolidated fee
schedule.
   B.   It shall be a Class B misdemeanor for any person to sell alcohol after
the revocation of the license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   A separate license shall be required for each place of sale and the
license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in the place to which it
shall refer or for which it shall be issued. It shall be unlawful for any
licensee to violate any of the terms of the license.
   D.   All licensees shall comply with this chapter, the Utah Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act and the regulations of the commission. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-
2015)
3-3-5: RETAIL LICENSES - CLASSIFICATION:
   A.   Retail licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
classified under the following types which shall carry the privileges and
responsibilities set forth in this chapter: off-premises, full-service
restaurant, limited-service restaurant, on-premises banquet, beer only, and
single-event.
   B.   All licenses of each type shall be numbered numerically commencing with
the number one. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-6: LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
   A.   A person seeking an on-premises banquet, beer only, full- service
restaurant, limited-service restaurant, or single-event license to sell
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall provide a written
application on forms provided by the City. The application shall be accompanied
by:
      1.   The license fee as set forth in the City's consolidated fee
schedule;
      2.   An approved site plan or conditional use permit or a copy of the
applicant's business license. It shall be a prerequisite to issuance of an on-
premises banquet, beer only, full-service restaurant, limited-service
restaurant, or single-event license that the applicant has received either site
plan or conditional use approval or has been granted a business license;
      3.   Evidence of proximity to any school, church, public library, public
playground or public park. This requirement does not apply to off-premises
license applications;
      4.   A signed consent form stating that the premises will permit any
authorized representative of the commission, City, City Police Department or
County Health Department unrestricted right to enter the premises;
      5.   A copy of the dram shop insurance coverage established by the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code;
      6.   A copy of a cash, corporate or surety bond in the penal amount
established by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code payable to
the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; and
      7.   Any other information the City may require to accurately evaluate
the merits of the application. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-7: PROCESSING OF APPLICATIONS; LOCAL CONSENT:
   A.   Each application for an off-premises, on-premises banquet, beer only,
full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, manufacturer, or single-
event license shall be referred to the business license official. Upon
receiving the application and the accompanying information, the business
license official shall submit the request to appropriate City departments for
their review and comment. The request shall be reviewed by the City Council at
a regularly scheduled meeting not more than forty five (45) days after a
complete application is received. The Council shall take public comment on the
request. After review of the request and accompanying information, the Council
shall vote on whether to grant its consent for the issuance of the license.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an application for a single-event license in
conjunction with a regularly-conducted festival or event which, in previous
years, received single-event license approval from the City, may be approved by
the business license official upon a showing of past compliance with the
ordinances, rules and regulations of the City and that the application meets
current ordinances, rules and regulations.
   B.   An on-premises banquet, beer only, full-service restaurant, or limited-
service restaurant license shall not be granted to a business located within
six hundred feet (600') of any public or private school, church, public
library, public playground or public park as measured from the nearest entrance
of the outlet by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel to
the property boundary of the public or private school, church, public library,
public playground or public park.
   C.   An on-premises banquet, beer only, full-service restaurant, limited-
service restaurant, or club license shall not be granted to any applicant for
any location situated within two hundred feet (200') of any public or private
school, church, public library, public playground, or public park, measured in
a straight line from the nearest entrance of the proposed outlet to the nearest
property boundary of the public or private school, church, public library,
public playground, or public park.
   D.   The restrictions contained in subsection B of this section govern
unless the City Council determines that compliance with the distance
requirements would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or
exceptional and undue hardships in the granting of a license. In that event the
City Council, may, after giving full consideration of all attending
circumstances and after compliance with public notice and public hearing
requirements as specified in subsection E of this section authorize a variance
from the distance requirements to relieve the difficulties or hardships, if the
variance may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter.
   E.   On-premises banquet, beer only, full-service restaurant, limited-
service restaurant, or single-event license applicants wishing to request from
the City Council a variance from the proximity distance requirement in
subsection B of this section shall comply with the following:
      1.   Payment Of Fee: Any applicant desiring a variance for which a
special public hearing is required shall pay a fee set by resolution of the
City Council before the hearing shall be set or advertised.
      2.   Advertising: Notice of a public hearing shall be published once a
week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation. The
advertisement shall state the date, time, location and reason for the public
hearing.
      3.   Notice To Property Owners: Letters of notice of public hearing shall
be mailed at least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing to all
persons owning property within six hundred feet (600') of the applicant's
premises.
      4.   Petition: The applicant shall circulate a petition to each person
owning property within six hundred feet (600') of the applicant's business
premises. Such petition shall allow the affected property owners to indicate
opposition or lack of opposition to such a license being granted.
      5.   Public Hearing: After satisfying the fee and notice requirements,
the City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the granting of a
variance from the distance requirements.
   F.   Each person granted a license and the employees, management and
personnel of the licensee shall abide by the conditions and requirements
provided in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code.
   G.   In deciding whether to grant or deny a license, the City may also
consider the proximity of any educational, religious, and recreational
facility, or any other relevant factor in reaching a decision on a proposed
location.
   H.   There shall be a limitation on the number of local consents granted by
South Weber City, based on the following restrictions:
      1.   Off-Premises: No restrictions on the number of licenses;
      2.   On-Premises Banquet: No restrictions on the number of licenses;
      3.   Beer Only: No restrictions on the number of licenses;
      4.   Full-Service Restaurant: No restrictions on the number of licenses;
      5.   Limited-Service Restaurant: No restrictions on the number of
licenses;
      6.   Club: No club licenses of any type are allowed to be issued in the
City;
      7.   Manufacturer: No restrictions on the number of licenses;
      8.   Single-Event License: No restrictions on number of licenses;
      9.   Tavern License: No tavern licenses are allowed to be issued in the
City. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-8: GENERAL OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Each person granted an on-premises banquet, beer only, full- service
restaurant, limited-service restaurant, or single-event license and their
employees, management and personnel shall abide by the following conditions and
requirements. Failure to comply may result in suspension or revocation of the
license or other disciplinary action taken against individual employees or
management personnel.
      1.   Beer Only, Full-Service And Limited-Service Restaurant Licenses: A
beer only, full-service restaurant, and limited- service restaurant license
shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages only with the purchase
of food, on the premises described therein, in containers allowed under the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code. Only bona fide restaurants
shall be entitled to full-service, limited-service restaurant, beer only or
dining club licenses.
      2.   On-Premises Banquet And Single-Event Licenses: An on-premises
banquet or single-event license shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic
beverages on the premises described therein, for consumption on the licensed
premises.
      3.   Under Age Twenty One: No person under the age of twenty one (21)
years shall sell or serve alcoholic beverages under a full- service or limited-
service restaurant license.
      4.   Removal From Restaurant: Alcoholic beverages purchased from a
restaurant shall not be removed from the restaurant premises except as allowed
in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code.
      5.   On-Premises Consumption: A person shall not bring onto the premises
of an on-premises banquet, beer only, full-service restaurant, limited-service
restaurant, or special-event any liquor or beer, for on-premises consumption. A
person may bring bottled wine onto the premises of a full-service restaurant,
or limited-service restaurant provided the wine is delivered to a server upon
entering the premises. Officers, managers, employees or agents shall not allow
a person to bring onto the licensee's premises liquor or beer for on-premises
consumption or allow consumption of any such liquor or beverage on its
premises. If any licensee or any of its officers, managers, employees or agents
violates this subsection the City may immediately suspend or revoke the
license.
      6.   Employees: An employee of a licensee, while on duty, shall not
consume an alcoholic beverage or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages.
      7.   Posting License; Sign: Each licensee shall display in a prominent
place on the premises:
         a.   The license issued by the City and the license issued by the
commission; and
         b.   A sign in large letters stating: "WARNING, THE CONSUMPTION OF
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PURCHASED IN THIS ESTABLISHMENT MAY BE HAZARDOUS TO YOUR
HEALTH AND THE SAFETY OF OTHERS."
      8.   License Transfer; Location: There shall be no transfer of a license
from one location to another.
      9.   License Transfer; Entity: There shall be no transfer of a license
from one entity to another without approval by the City Council, except that
the business license official may grant a request to transfer an on-premises
banquet, beer only, full- service restaurant, or limited-service restaurant
license from a current licensee to a proposed licensee who will operate at the
same location, so long as the following conditions are met:
         a.   The type of alcoholic beverage to be sold is not changed;
         b.   The on-site management staff has not changed;
         c.   There have been no citations for alcohol related offenses issued
to either the current licensee or the proposed licensee within the last two (2)
years; and
         d.   The proposed licensee's application complies in all respects with
all other provisions of this chapter.
      10.   Monetary Value Of License:
         a.   A person having been granted an on-premises banquet, beer only,
full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, or special-event license
shall not sell, exchange, barter, give or attempt in any way to dispose of the
license whether for monetary gain or not.
         b.   An on-premises banquet, beer only, full-service restaurant,
limited-service restaurant, or special-event license has no monetary value for
the purpose of any type of disposition.
      11.   Condition Of Employment: A person's willingness to serve alcoholic
beverages or beer shall not be made a condition of employment as a server with
a restaurant that has a full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant,
on-premises banquet, beer only or dining club license. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-9: OFF-PREMISES LICENSES:
   A.   License: An off-premises retail license shall entitle the licensee to
sell beer on the premises described therein in original containers of a size
established in the Alcohol Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code.
   B.   Consumption On Premises Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for an off-
premises licensee to permit the consumption of beer on any off-premises
licensed premises.
   C.   License Application: A person seeking an off-premises license to sell
beer shall provide a written application on forms provided by the City. The
application shall be accompanied by:
      1.   The fee for an off-premises license as set forth in the City's
consolidated fee schedule;
      2.   An approved site plan or conditional use permit or a copy of the
applicant's business license, it being a prerequisite to issuance of an off-
premises license that the applicant has received either site plan or
conditional use approval or has been granted a business license; and
      3.   Any other information the City may require to accurately evaluate
the merits of the application.
   D.   No Distance Requirement: There is no distance requirement for the
location of an off-premises license where the premises would be located near or
adjacent to a school, church, public library, public playground or public park.
   E.   Hours Of Sale: An off-premises licensee may sell beer during all hours
allowed by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code.
   F.   Providing Beer To Certain Persons Prohibited: Beer may not be sold,
delivered, or furnished to any:
      1.   Minor;
      2.   Person actually, apparently, or obviously under the influence of any
intoxicating beverage or controlled substance;
      3.   Known habitual drunkard; or
      4.   Known interdicted person.
   G.   Possession By Minors: Provisions of this chapter prohibiting possession
of beer by minors shall not apply to persons under twenty one (21) years of age
who are bona fide employees in off- premises licensed premises while under the
supervision of a person twenty one (21) years of age or older who is on the
premises.
   H.   Intoxicated Persons: It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to
sell beer or for any of its agents or employees to allow intoxicated persons to
remain in or about any licensed premises.
   I.   Records: Off-premises licensees shall maintain records which shall
disclose the gross sale of beer during each and every year. Such records shall
be available for inspection and audit as established by the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act of the Utah Code. Failure of a licensee to properly maintain the
required records or failure to submit such records for inspection and audit
shall be cause for suspension or revocation of an off- premises license.
   J.   Theft: An off-premises licensee shall make every reasonable effort to
limit the potential for theft of beer from licensed premises. A clear,
unobstructed view of all portions of the interior shall be available at all
times from a point within the licensed premises at or near the main public
entrance. A beer inventory shrinkage record shall be kept by the licensee and
made available at any time upon request to the Chief of Police or business
license official for inspection or audit. Failure of a licensee to properly
maintain the alcoholic beverage inventory shrinkage or failure to submit such
records for inspection and audit shall be a Class B misdemeanor and shall be
cause for suspension or revocation of an off-premises license.
   K.   License Transfer; Location: There shall be no transfer of an off-
premises license from one location to another.
   L.   License Transfer; Entity: There shall be no transfer of an off-premises
license from one entity to another without approval by the City Council, except
that the business license official may grant a request to transfer an off-
premises license from a current licensee to a proposed licensee who will
operate at the same location provided:
      1.   The type of alcoholic beverage to be sold is not changed;
      2.   The on-site management staff has not changed;
      3.   There have been no citations for alcohol related offenses issued to
either the current licensee or the proposed licensee within the last two (2)
years; and
      4.   The proposed licensee's application complies in all respects with
all other provisions of this chapter.
   M.   Monetary Value Of License:
      1.   A person having been granted an off-premises license shall not sell,
exchange, barter, give or attempt in any way to dispose of the license whether
for monetary gain or not.
      2.   An off-premises beer license has no monetary value for the purpose
of any type of disposition.
   N.   EASY Law: Each off-premises beer licensee shall comply with the
provisions of the EASY Law and operational provisions established by the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-10: FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT AND LIMITED-SERVICE RESTAURANT LICENSES:
   A.   Before any full-service restaurant or limited-service restaurant may
sell alcoholic beverages at retail for on-premises consumption, it shall
obtain:
      1.   A full-service restaurant license from the City for the purpose of
selling alcoholic beverages as defined in this chapter; or
      2.   A limited-service restaurant license from the City for the purpose
of selling beer, heavy beer, and wine as defined in this chapter; and
      3.   A full-service restaurant or limited-service restaurant retailer
license from the commission.
   B.   A person seeking a full-service or limited-service restaurant license
to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall provide a
written application on forms provided by the City as outlined in section
3-3-6 of this chapter.
   C.   A full-service or limited-service restaurant licensee may sell
alcoholic beverages in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of
the Utah Code.
   D.   All full-service or limited-service restaurant licensees shall maintain
records which shall disclose the gross sales of alcoholic beverages and the
gross sales of food served and any other items sold for consumption on or off
the premises as defined in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code.
Alcoholic beverages sales shall not exceed more than thirty percent (30%) of
the gross dollar volume sales for any semi- annual period. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-
2015)
3-3-11: CLUB LICENSES:
   A.   Types: There are the following types of clubs defined by title 32A of
the Utah Code:
      1.   Dining clubs;
      2.   Social clubs;
      3.   Equity clubs; and
      4.   Fraternal clubs.
   B.   Restriction On Licenses: There shall be no club licenses of any type
allowed in South Weber City. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-12: BEER ONLY LICENSE:
   A.   Types: There are the following types of on-premises beer licenses
defined by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code:
      1.   Beer only which include restaurants, cafes, bowling center or golf
course food and beverage facilities; and
      2.   Taverns, which include beer bars, parlors, lounges, cabarets, or
nightclubs. No tavern licenses shall be issued within South Weber City.
   B.   Licenses Required: Before any establishment may sell beer at retail for
on-premises consumption, it shall obtain:
      1.   A beer only license from the City; and
      2.   A beer only retailer license from the commission.
   C.   License Application: A person seeking a beer only license to sell beer
for consumption on the premises shall provide a written application on forms
provided by the City as outlined in section
3-3-6 of this chapter.
   D.   Hours Of Sale: A beer only licensee may sell beer in accordance with
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code.
   E.   Records: All beer only licensees shall maintain records which shall
disclose the gross sales of alcoholic beverages and the gross sales of food
served and any other items sold for consumption on or off the premises as
defined in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code. Beer sales
shall not exceed more than thirty percent (30%) of the gross dollar volume
sales for any semi-annual period. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-12-1: ON-PREMISES BANQUET LICENSE:
   A.   Facilities: An on-premises banquet license may only be issued for a
hotel, resort facility, sports center or convention center.
   B.   Licenses Required: Before any on-premises banquet licensee may sell or
furnish an alcoholic product at retail for on-premises consumption, it shall
obtain:
      1.   An on-premises banquet license from the City; and
      2.   An on-premises banquet license from the commission.
   C.   License Application: A person seeking an on-premises banquet license to
provide alcohol for consumption on the premises shall provide a written
application on forms provided by the City as outlined in section
3-3-6 of this chapter.
   D.   Hours Of Sale: An on-premises banquet licensee may sell alcoholic
beverages in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah
Code.
   E.   Records: All on-premises banquet licensees shall maintain records which
shall disclose the gross sales of alcoholic beverages and the gross sales of
food served and any other items sold for consumption on the premises as defined
in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code. Alcohol sales shall not
exceed more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross dollar volume sales for any
semi-annual period. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-13: SINGLE-EVENT LICENSE:
   A.   Before any operator, participant or sponsor of a single event may sell
beer or alcohol at retail for on-premises consumption at the event, a single-
event license shall be obtained from the City. A single-event license may also
include a temporary special event beer license.
   B.   An applicant seeking a single-event license to sell beer or alcohol for
consumption on the premises of a single event shall provide a written
application on forms provided by the City. The application shall be accompanied
by:
      1.   The fee for a single-event license as set forth in the City's
consolidated fee schedule and evidence of necessary regulatory approvals to
conduct the single event;
      2.   Evidence of proximity to any school, church, public library, public
playground or public park, however, the proximity requirements of section
3-3-7 of this chapter do not apply to a single-event license as per the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code;
      3.   A site plan of the location of the single event, including clear
depiction of consumption areas and areas where the applicant proposes to keep,
store and sell alcoholic beverages;
      4.   A statement of the purpose of the association, corporation, church
or political organization or its local lodge, chapter, or other local unit;
      5.   A signed consent form stating that authorized representatives of the
City, including any City law enforcement agency, will have unrestricted right
to enter the premises during the event;
      6.   Proper verification evidencing that the person signing the
application is authorized to act on behalf of the association, corporation,
church or political organization conducting the single event; and
      7.   Any other information the City may require to accurately evaluate
the merits of the application.
   C.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall sell or serve
alcoholic beverages under a single-event license.
   D.   A single-event license shall not authorize the storage, sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages at an event for any period exceeding one
hundred twenty (120) hours.
   E.   Qualifying organizations may apply for up to four (4) licenses per
calendar year for a time period that does not exceed one hundred twenty (120)
consecutive hours for each license, or up to twelve (12) licenses per calendar
year for a time period that does not exceed seventy two (72) consecutive hours
for each license.
   F.   A special-event licensee may sell alcoholic beverages in accordance
with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah Code. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-
2015)
3-3-14: RENEWAL OF EXISTING LICENSES:
   A.   All applications for renewal of licenses shall be filed with the
license official at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the then
issued license. Any person who fails to file within the time limit set forth
herein shall, on the date of expiration of the license, forthwith cease all
sales of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises and shall make no sale of
alcoholic beverages until the date a new license is issued by order of the City
Council.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for renewal of an alcoholic beverage
license, the license official shall obtain a report from appropriate agencies
regarding the applicant's compliance with any applicable restrictions relating
to operation of the licensed premises and local or State laws relating to the
sale or supply of alcohol. In the event the report demonstrates there have been
any instances of non-compliance in the preceding year, the renewal application
shall be scheduled for a hearing before the City Council at its next regularly
scheduled business meeting. Within fourteen (14) days of the hearing, the City
Council shall render a decision regarding the license application. (Ord. 15-06,
8-25-2015)
3-3-15: RENEWAL INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Applications for renewal of licenses issued under this chapter shall be
accompanied by a statement setting forth the gross sales of beer by the
licensed establishment during the preceding year and the total gross revenues
from all sources of sales during the same year. Renewal applications which are
not accompanied by the required statement shall be deemed incomplete and shall
not be processed until the statement is supplied. The requirements of this
section shall be in addition to any requirements relating to the keeping of
records set forth within this chapter. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-16: FEES:
Renewal applications for licenses under this chapter shall be accompanied by
the City business license fee and the complete regulatory fees established by
the City's consolidated fee schedule as amended. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
3-3-17: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL:
   A.   Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire
one year from the date of issuance.
   B.   Licenses shall be issued for one year from the date of expiration shown
in subsection A of this section. In the event renewal fees are not received at
the office of the license official within forty five (45) days after the due
date each year, the licensee must reapply for the applicable retail license and
pay a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the regulatory fees due as part
of the re-issuance fee, in addition to the applicable regulatory license fees.
In the event the renewal fees are not received at the office of the license
official within seventy five (75) days of each year when due, the licensee must
reapply for the applicable retail license and pay a penalty of one hundred
percent (100%) of the fee due as part of the re- issuance fee, in addition to
the applicable regulatory license fees. Failure to meet the renewal
requirements shall result in an automatic forfeiture of the license effective
on the date the existing license expires.
   C.   If any licensee sells the place of business, the existing license shall
be canceled. The purchaser of the business may apply for a license to sell
alcoholic beverages in accordance with the procedures and requirements of this
chapter. If any licensee does not immediately notify the City of any change in
ownership of the business, the City shall revoke that license. (Ord. 15-06, 8-
25-2015)
3-3-18: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS BY A LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked
for the violation by the licensee or the licensee's agent or employee of any
provision of this chapter or any other applicable ordinance or law relating to
the possession, consumption, storage or sale of alcoholic beverages. If any
person to whom a license has been issued under this chapter no longer possesses
the qualifications required by this chapter for obtaining that license, the
City may revoke or suspend that license.
   B.   In addition to the suspension or revocation of licenses, the City may
bring criminal charges or seek any other civil remedy available to the City for
the violation of any provision of this chapter.
   C.   Violations of this chapter by a licensee or any employee or agent of a
licensee which occur within any 24-month period may be punished as follows:
      1.   Upon a first violation of this chapter the licensee shall be issued
a warning.
      2.   Upon any violation of this chapter which occurs within twenty four
(24) months of a prior violation, the licensee shall pay a civil fine of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      3.   Upon any violation of this chapter which occurs within twenty four
(24) months of two (2) prior violations, the licensee shall pay a civil fine of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the licensee shall have its license
suspended for a period of three (3) consecutive days concurrent with any
suspension imposed by the State.
      4.   Upon any violation of this chapter which occurs within twenty four
(24) months of three (3) prior violations, the licensee shall pay a civil fine
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the licensee shall have its license
suspended for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days concurrent with any
suspension imposed by the State. In addition, the licensee shall be placed on
probation for a period of one year. Any violation of this chapter by the
licensee or any employee of the licensee during the period of probation shall
result in the revocation of the licensee's license. The licensee shall not be
eligible to reapply for a new license for at least six (6) months from the date
of revocation.
   D.   Failure to pay any fine imposed for a violation of any provision of
this chapter within thirty (30) days of the imposition of such fine shall be
grounds for revocation of the license. (Ord. 15-06, 8-25-2015)
CHAPTER 4
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 1
SECTION:
3-4-1: Title
3-4-2: Purpose
3-4-3: Applicability
3-4-4: Definitions
3-4-5: Statutory Provisions
3-4-6: Location And Name Restrictions
3-4-7: Legitimate Artistic Modeling
3-4-8: Categories Of Licenses; Number Limited
3-4-9: Licenses Required
3-4-10: Application; Disclosures
3-4-11: Fees
3-4-12: Bond Required
3-4-13: Issuance Conditions
3-4-14: Term Of License
3-4-15: Notice Of Change Of Information
3-4-16: Transfer Limitations
3-4-17: Display Of License
3-4-18: Statement In Advertising
3-4-19: Regulations And Unlawful Activities
3-4-20: Outcall Services; Operation Requirements
3-4-21: Design Of Premises
3-4-22: Alcohol Prohibited
3-4-23: Prohibited Activities
3-4-24: Defenses To Prosecution
3-4-25: Existing Businesses; Compliance Time Limits
3-4-26: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-4-27: Violation; Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 76-10-1210.
3-4-1: TITLE:
The provisions codified in this Chapter shall be known and may be referred to
as the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 97-2,
3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose and object of this Chapter that the City establish reasonable
and uniform regulations governing the time, place and manner of operation of
sexually oriented businesses and employees of those businesses in the City.
This Chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental interests
recognized by this Chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional
protections provided by the United States and Utah Constitutions. (Ord. 97-2,
3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-3: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain
business activities which are characterized as sexually oriented businesses,
and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually oriented
business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions require,
this Chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances,
including, but not limited to, those codified in this Title. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-
1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words shall have the following
meaning:
   ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment which:
   A.   Excludes minors from more than fifteen percent (15%) of the retail
floor or shelf space of the premises; or
   B.   As one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any
form of consideration, any one or more of the following: books, magazines,
periodicals, printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, video reproductions, slides or other visual representations; the
central theme of which depicts or describes "specified sexual activities" or
"specified sexual anatomical areas" or instruments, devices or paraphernalia
which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities".
Legitimate medically recognized contraceptives are excepted.
   ADULT BUSINESS: An adult motion picture theater, adult book store or adult
video store.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment which:
   A.   Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions
(repeated showings of any single presentation shall not be considered a
consecutive exhibition); or
   B.   As its principal business, shows, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions
which are primarily characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which:
   A.   Holds itself out as such a business; or
   B.   Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions
(repeated performance of the same presentation shall not be considered a
consecutive exhibition); or
   C.   As its principal business, features persons who appear in live
performances in a state of semi-nudity or which are characterized by the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
   EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary or any other form of
compensation, whether such person is on the payroll of the employer, as an
independent contractor, as an agent or any form of employment relationship.
   ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes,
visits, consorts with or accompanies or offers to date, consort, socialize,
visit or accompany another or others to or about social affairs, entertainment
or places of amusement or within any place of public or private resort or any
business or commercial establishment or any private quarters. Escort shall not
be construed to include persons who provide business or personal services, such
as licensed private nurses, aides for the elderly or handicapped, social
secretaries or similar service personnel whose relationship with their patron
is characterized by a bona fide contractual relationship having a duration of
more than twelve (12) hours and who provide a service not principally
characterized as dating or socializing. Escort shall also not be construed to
include persons providing services such as singing telegrams, birthday
greetings or similar activities characterized by appearances in a public place,
contracted for by a party other than the person for whom the service is being
performed and of a duration not longer than one hour.
   ESCORT SERVICE: An individual or entity who for pecuniary compensation,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce
patrons to escorts.
   ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary
compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service,
escort or patron by contacting or meeting with escort services, escorts or
patrons at any location within the City, whether or not such third person is
employed by such escort service, escort, patron or by another business, or is
an independent contractor or self- employed.
   NUDITY: A state of dress in which the areola of the female breast, or male
or female genitals, pubic region or anus are covered by less than the covering
required in the definition of semi-nude.
   OPERATOR: The manager or other natural person principally in charge of a
sexually oriented business.
   OUTCALL SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually oriented
business employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually oriented
business, including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers and other
similar employees.
   PATRON: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or
escort, or the customer of any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter.
   PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire,
profit, reward or any other form of consideration.
   PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership or
other legal entity.
   SEMI-NUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the
areola of the female breast; and the male or female genitals, pubic region and
anus shall be fully covered by an opaque covering no narrower than four inches
(4") wide in the front and five inches (5") wide in the back.
   SEMI-NUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation, partnership
or any entity or individual which furnishes bookings, or otherwise engages or
offers to furnish bookings, or otherwise engage the service of a professional
dancer licensed pursuant to this Chapter for performance or appearance at a
business licensed for adult theaters.
   SEMI-NUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a
state of semi-nudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a semi-nude
entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: "Semi-nude entertainment businesses", sexually
oriented "outcall services", "adult businesses" and "semi-nude dancing
agencies", as defined by this Chapter.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the
premises of a sexually oriented business in activities related to the sexually
oriented portion of the business. This includes all managing employees,
dancers, escorts, models and other similar employees, whether or not hired as
employees, agents or as independent contractors. Employee shall not include
individuals whose work is unrelated to the sexually oriented portion of the
business, such as janitors, bookkeepers and similar employees. Sexually
oriented business employees shall not include cooks, serving persons and
similar employees, except where they may be managers or supervisors of the
business. All persons making outcall meetings under this Chapter, including
escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs and other similar
employees, shall be considered sexually oriented business employees.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human male or female pubic area or anus with
less than a full opaque covering, or the human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, with less than full opaque covering.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Acts of:
   A.   Masturbation.
   B.   Human sexual intercourse.
   C.   Sexual copulation between a person and a beast.
   D.   Fellatio.
   E.   Cunnilingus.
   F.   Bestiality.
   G.   Pederasty.
   H.   Buggery.
   I.   Any anal copulation between a human male and another male, human female
or beast.
   J.   Manipulating, caressing or fondling by any person of:
      1.   The genitals of a human.
      2.   The pubic area of a human.
      3.   The breast or breasts of a human female.
   K.   Flagellation, torture or sadomasochistic abuse by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so
clothed. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-5: STATUTORY PROVISIONS:
   A.   Obscenity: Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, nothing
in this Chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of
any matter which is contrary to applicable Federal or State statues prohibiting
obscenity.
   B.   Lewdness: Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, nothing
in this Chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow conduct or the showing or
display of any matter which is contrary to the provisions of Utah Code
Annotated section 76-5-401 et seq. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-6: LOCATION AND NAME RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Zoning: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do
business at any location within the City not zoned for such business. Sexually
oriented businesses licensed as adult businesses or semi-nude entertainment
businesses pursuant to this Chapter shall only be allowed in areas zoned for
their use pursuant to Title 10 of this Code.
   B.   Premises Licensed: It is unlawful to conduct business under a license
issued pursuant to this Chapter at any location other than the licensed
premises. Any location to which telephone calls are automatically forwarded by
such business shall require a separate license.
   C.   Name: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business
in the City under any name other than the business name specified in the
application.
   D.   Proximity To Specified Places: It is unlawful for any business licensed
for semi-nude entertainment to be located within three hundred thirty feet
(330') of a business licensed for the sale or consumption of alcohol. It is
also unlawful for any sexually oriented business to be located within one
thousand feet (1,000') of any church, school or public playground. (Ord. 97-2,
3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-7: LEGITIMATE AND ARTISTIC MODELING:
   A.   Intent: The City does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit
legitimate modeling which may occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected
by the First Amendment or similar State protections. The City intends to
prohibit prostitution and related offenses occurring under the guise of nude
modeling. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
3-4-19 of this Chapter, a licensed outcall employee may appear in a state of
nudity before a customer or patron, providing that a written contract for such
appearance was entered into between the customer or patron and the employee and
signed at least twenty four (24) hours before the nude appearance. All of the
other applicable provisions of this Chapter shall still apply to such nude
appearances.
   B.   Unlicensed Appearance; Unlawful Acts: In the event of a contract for
nude modeling or appearance signed more than forty eight (48) hours in advance
of the modeling or appearance, the individual to appear nude shall not be
required to obtain a license pursuant to this Chapter. During such unlicensed
nude appearance, it is unlawful to:
      1.   Appear nude or semi-nude in the presence of persons under the age of
eighteen (18);
      2.   Allow, offer or agree to any touching of the contracting party or
other person by the individual appearing nude;
      3.   Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor or committing activities harmful to a
minor;
      4.   Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sex act as validly defined by
City ordinances or State statute;
      5.   Allow, offer, agree or permit the contracting party or other person
to masturbate in the presence of the individual contracted to appear nude;
      6.   Allow, offer or agree for the individual appearing nude to be within
five feet (5') of any other person while performing or while nude or semi-nude.
(Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-8: CATEGORIES OF LICENSES; NUMBER LIMITED:
   A.   Number: It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be
licensed for more than one category of sexually oriented business, except that
a business may have a license for both outcall service and a semi-nude dancing
agency on the same premises.
   B.   Categories: The categories of sexually oriented businesses are:
      1.   Outcall services;
      2.   Adult businesses;
      3.   Semi-nude entertainment businesses;
      4.   Semi-nude dancing agency. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-9: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   Businesses; Exemptions:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented
business, as specified herein, without first obtaining a general business
license and a sexually oriented business license. The sexually oriented
business license shall specify the type of business for which it is obtained.
      2.   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any sex therapist
or similar individual licensed by the State to provide bona fide sexual therapy
or counseling, licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, psychiatrist,
psychologist, nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the State for
activities in the classroom.
   B.   Employees: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to employ
or for any individual to be employed by a sexually oriented business in the
capacity of a sexually oriented business employee, unless that employee first
obtains a sexually oriented business employee license. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997,
eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-10: APPLICATION; DISCLOSURES:
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually oriented business or
as a sexually oriented business employee pursuant to this Chapter, the
applicant shall submit on a form to be supplied by the City license authority,
the following:
   A.   Name: The correct legal name of each applicant, corporation,
partnership, limited partnership or entity doing business under an assumed
name.
   B.   Corporations, Partnerships, Assumed Names:
      1.   If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or limited
partnership, or individual or entity doing business under an assumed name, the
information required below for individual applicants shall be submitted for
each partner and each principal of an applicant, and for each officer, director
and any shareholder (corporate or personal) of more than ten percent (10%) of
the stock of any applicant. Any holding company or any entity holding more than
ten percent (10%) of the stock of any applicant, shall be considered an
applicant for purposes of disclosure under this Chapter.
      2.   The shareholder disclosure requirements above shall only be
applicable for outcall service licenses.
      3.   All corporations, partnerships or noncorporate entities included on
the application shall also identify each individual authorized by the
corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity to sign the checks for such
corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity.
   C.   Personal Information: For all applicants or individuals, the
application must also state:
      1.   Any other names or aliases used by the individual;
      2.   The age, date and place of birth;
      3.   Height;
      4.   Weight;
      5.   Color of hair;
      6.   Color of eyes;
      7.   Present business address and telephone number;
      8.   Present residence and telephone number; and
      9.   Social security number.
   D.   Proof Of Age: Acceptable written proof that any individual is at least
eighteen (18) years of age.
   E.   Photographs; Fingerprints: Attached to the form, as provided above, two
(2) color photographs of the applicant clearly showing the individual's face
and the individual's fingerprints on a form provided by the Sheriff's
Department. For persons not residing in the City, the photographs and
fingerprints may be on a form from the law enforcement jurisdiction where the
person resides. Fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the
applicant directly to the issuing agency.
   F.   Health Certificate: For any individual applicant required to obtain a
sexually oriented business employee license as an escort or a semi-nude
entertainer, a certificate from the Davis County Health Department, stating
that the individual has, within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date
of the original or renewal application, been examined and found to be free of
any contagious or communicable diseases.
   G.   Employment History: A statement of the business, occupation or
employment history of the applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding
the date of the filing of the application.
   H.   License Or Permit History: A statement detailing the license or permit
history of the applicant for the five (5) year period immediately preceding the
date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant
previously operated or sought to operate a sexually oriented business in this
or any other county, city, state or territory, has ever had a license, permit
or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or has ever had
any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended.
In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the
name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and state in full the reasons for
the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation
or suspension shall be attached to the application.
   I.   Criminal Convictions: All criminal convictions or pleas of nolo
contendere, except those which have been expunged, and the disposition of all
such arrests for the applicant, individual or other entity subject to
disclosure under this Chapter, for five (5) years prior to the date of the
application. This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance
violations, excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as
a felony shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date,
place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere, and sentence of
each conviction or other disposition, identifying the convicting jurisdiction
and sentencing court, and providing the court identifying case numbers or
docket numbers. Application for a sexually oriented business or employee
license shall constitute permission for disclosure of any criminal conviction
or plea of nolo contendere for the purposes of any proceeding involving the
business or employee license.
   J.   Lease Or Rental Of Property: In the event the applicant is not the
owner of record of the real property upon which the business or proposed
business is or is to be located, the application must be accompanied by a
notarized statement from the legal or equitable owner of the possessory
interest in the property specifically acknowledging the type of business for
which the applicant seeks a license for the property. In addition to furnishing
such notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name, address and
phone number of the owner of record of the property, as well as the copy of the
lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the service is or
will be located.
   K.   Description Of Services: A description of the services to be provided
by the business, with sufficient detail to allow reviewing authorities to
determine what business will be transacted on the premises, together with a
schedule of usual fees for services to be charged by the licensee and any
rules, regulations or employment guidelines under or by which the business
intends to operate. This description shall also include:
      1.   The hours that the business or service will be open to the public
and the methods of promoting the health and safety of the employees and patrons
and preventing them from engaging in illegal activity.
      2.   The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in
acts of prostitution or other related criminal activities.
      3.   The methods of supervising employees and patrons to prevent
employees and patrons from charging or receiving fees for services or acts
prohibited by this chapter or other statutes or ordinances.
      4.   The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote
the health and safety of employees and customers and prevent the transmission
of disease, and prevent the commission of acts or prostitution or other
criminal activity.
   L.   False Or Misleading Information: It is unlawful to knowingly submit
false or materially misleading information on or with a sexually oriented
business license application or to fail to disclose or omit information for the
purpose of obtaining a sexually oriented business or employee license. (Ord.
97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-11: FEES:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business or employee license shall be
required to pay regulatory license fees as set by resolution and added in the
consolidated fee schedule. The fees will be reviewed periodically. An
application is not complete until all appropriate fees have been paid. (Ord.
97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-12: BOND REQUIRED:
Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall post with the
city recorder, a cash or corporate surety bond payable to the city in the
amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Any fines assessed against the
business, officers or managers for violations of city ordinances shall be taken
from this bond if not paid in cash within ten (10) days after notice of fine,
unless an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter. In the event the funds
are drawn against the cash or surety bond to pay such fines, the bond shall be
replenished to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) within fifteen (15) days of the
date of notice of any draw against it. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997;
amd. 1998 Code)
3-4-13: ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Specified: The business license official shall approve the issuance of
a license to the applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed
application, unless the official finds one or more of the following: (Ord. 09-
12, 10-13-2009)
      1.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed on the applicant
in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      3.   The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request
for information as authorized by this chapter.
      4.   The applicant has violated a provision of this chapter or similar
provisions found in statutes or ordinances from any jurisdiction within two (2)
years immediately preceding the application; a criminal conviction for a
violation of a provision of this chapter or similar provisions from any
jurisdiction, whether or not it is being appealed, is conclusive evidence of a
violation, but a conviction is not necessary to prove a violation.
      5.   The premises to be used for the business has been disapproved by the
Davis County health department, the fire department, the sheriff's department,
the building officials or the zoning officials as not being in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances of the city. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-
1997)
If any of the foregoing reviewing agencies cannot complete their review within
the thirty (30) day approval or denial period, the agency or department may
obtain from the city recorder an extension of time of no more than thirty (30)
days for their review. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
      6.   The required license fees have not been paid.
      7.   All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid.
      8.   An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in
compliance with this chapter or similar provisions found in statutes or
ordinances from any jurisdiction.
      9.   An applicant has been convicted or pleaded or pled nolo contendere
to a crime involving: prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated
promotion of prostitution; aggravated exploitation of prostitution;
solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire; compelling prostitution; aiding
prostitution; sale, distribution or display of material harmful to minors;
sexual performance by minors, possession of child pornography, lewdness,
indecent exposure, any crime involving sexual abuse or exposure, any crime
involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a child, sexual assault or aggravated
sexual assault, rape, forcible sodomy, forcible sexual abuse, incest, harboring
a runaway child, criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of
the foregoing offenses, or offenses involving similar elements from any
jurisdiction, regardless of the exact title of the offense for which:
         a.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of conviction,
if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense or less than five (5) years if
the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors within the five (5) years;
or
         b.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the date of
conviction, if the offense is of a felony.
         c.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification pursuant to this subsection.
   B.   Approval Time; Review: The total time for the city to approve or deny a
license shall not exceed sixty (60) days from the receipt of a completed
application and payment of all fees. Businesses located outside of the
corporate boundaries of the city, but requiring a license under this chapter,
may be denied a license pursuant to this chapter if the business does not have
a valid business license to conduct business at the business location from the
appropriate jurisdiction for that location.
      1.   Upon receipt of an application, all departments required to review
the application shall determine within ten (10) working days whether or not the
application is incomplete in items needed for processing. Incomplete
applications shall immediately be returned to the applicant with a
specification of the items which are incomplete.
      2.   The time for processing applications specified in this section shall
begin to run from the receipt of a complete application.
      3.   In the event that a license for seminude entertainment, seminude
dancing agencies, adult businesses or seminude entertainment businesses has not
been disapproved within thirty (30) days or the sixty (60) days allowed after
an extension, the city shall issue the license pending completion of the city's
review.
      4.   Any license pursuant to subsection B3 of this section may be revoked
by the city pursuant to the revocation procedures provided for herein, if the
completed review determines that the license should have been denied. (Ord. 97-
2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-14: TERM OF LICENSE:
Sexually oriented business and employee licenses issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance through January 1 of each
succeeding year. The license fees required under the consolidated fee schedule
shall not be prorated for any portion of a year, but shall be paid in full for
whatever portion of the year the license is applied for. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997,
eff. 4-26-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
3-4-15: NOTICE OF CHANGE OF INFORMATION:
Any change in the information required to be submitted under this chapter for
either a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business
employee license shall be given, in writing, to the business license official
and the sheriff's department within fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord.
09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-4-16: TRANSFER LIMITATIONS:
Sexually oriented business licenses granted under this chapter shall not be
transferable. It is unlawful for a license held by an individual to be
transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a corporation, partnership or
other noncorporate entity to transfer any part in excess of ten percent (10%)
thereof, without filing a new application and obtaining prior city approval. If
any transfer of the controlling interest in a business licensee occurs, the
license is immediately null and void and the business shall not operate until a
separate new license has been properly issued by the city as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-17: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business location within the
boundaries of the city to fail to display the license granted pursuant to this
chapter in a prominent location within the business premises. It is unlawful
for any individual licensed pursuant to this chapter to fail to carry, at all
times while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate boundaries of
the city, their employee license on their person. If the individual is nude,
such license shall be visibly displayed within the same room the employee is
performing. When requested by the sheriff's department, city licensing or other
enforcement personnel or health official, it is unlawful to fail to show the
appropriate licenses while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate
boundaries of the city. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-18: STATEMENT IN ADVERTISING:
It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually oriented business or
employee to fail to state that the business or employee is licensed by the
city, and shall include the city license number. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-
26-1997)
3-4-19: REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business
employee to:
   A.   Persons Under Eighteen:
      1.   Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years on the licensed
premises, except that in adult businesses which exclude minors from less than
all of the business premises, minors shall not be permitted in excluded areas.
      2.   Allow, offer, or agree to conduct any outcall business with persons
under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   B.   Alcoholic Beverages: To allow, offer or agree to allow any alcohol to
be stored, used or consumed on or in the licensed premises.
   C.   Locking Outside Door: Allow the outside door to the premises to be
locked while any customer is in the premises.
   D.   Gambling: Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed premises.
   E.   Touching: Allow, offer or agree to any sexually oriented business
employee touching or being touched by any patron or customer; except that
outcall employees and customers may touch, except that any touching of
specified anatomical areas, whether clothed or unclothed, is prohibited.
   F.   Controlled Substances:
      1.   Allow, offer or agree to illegal possession, use, sale or
distribution of controlled substances on the licensed premises.
      2.   Allow sexually oriented business employees to possess, use, sell or
distribute controlled substances while engaged in the activities of the
business.
   G.   Prostitution: Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution,
solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor or permitting activities
harmful to a minor to occur on the licensed premises or, in the event of an
outcall employee or business, the outcall employee committing, offering or
agreeing to commit prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting
prostitution, soliciting a minor or committing activities harmful to a minor.
   H.   Specified Sexual Activities: Allow, offer, commit or agree to any
"specified sexual activity" as validly defined by city ordinances or state
statute in the presence of any customer or patron.
   I.   Nudity: Allow, offer or agree to any outcall employee appearing before
any customer or patron in a state of nudity.
   J.   Masturbation: Allow, offer or agree to allow a patron or customer to
masturbate in the presence of the sexually oriented business employee or on the
premises of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-
1997)
3-4-20: OUTCALL SERVICES; OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any business or employee providing outcall services
contracted for in the City to fail to comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Contract: All businesses licensed to provide outcall services pursuant
to this Chapter shall provide to each patron a written contract in receipt of
pecuniary compensation for services. The contract shall clearly state the type
of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall last, the
cost to the patron and any special terms or conditions relating to the services
performed. The contract need not include the name of the patron. The business
licensee shall keep and maintain a copy of each written contract pursuant to
this Section for a period not less than one year from the date of provision of
services thereunder. The contracts shall be numbered and entered into a
register listing the contract number, date, names of all employees involved in
the contract and pecuniary compensation paid.
   B.   Office; Phone: All outcall businesses licensed pursuant to this Chapter
shall maintain an open office or telephone at which the licensee or licensee's
designated agent may be personally contacted during all hours outcall employees
are working. The address and phone number of the license location shall appear
and be included in all patron contracts and published advertisements. For
outcall businesses which premises are licensed within the corporate limits of
the City, private rooms or booths where the patrons may meet with the outcall
employee shall not be provided at the open office or any other location by the
service, nor shall patrons meet outcall employees at the business premises.
   C.   Advertising: Outcall services shall not advertise in such manner that
would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that specified sexual
activities would be performed by the outcall employee.
   D.   Licensing Regardless Of Business Location: All employees of outcall
services who provide outcall services within the City shall be licensed in
accordance with this Chapter, regardless of the primary location of the
business. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-21: DESIGN OF PREMISES:
   A.   Adult Business:
      1.   In addition to the general requirements of disclosure for a sexually
oriented business, any applicant for a license as an adult business shall also
submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises of the license. The design
and construction, prior to granting a license or opening for business, shall
conform to the following:
         a.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms.
         b.   Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any
of the business merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one person be
allowed in the restroom and only one person in any stall at a time, and
requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to manager's station areas.
         c.   For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all
windows, doors and other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or
otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the
inside of the premises. Businesses which exclude minors from less than all of
the premises shall be designed and constructed so that minors may not see into
the area from which they are excluded.
         d.   The diagram required does not necessarily need to be a
professional engineer's or architect's blueprint; however, the diagram must
show marked internal dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures and ratings for
illumination capacity.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees to
ensure that the views from the manager's station in subsection A1 of this
Section remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
any other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and
to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which
has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
      3.   The premises shall at all times be equipped and operated with
overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to
which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one
foot-candle, measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee
and the licensee's employees present on the premises to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
   B.   Semi-Nude Entertainment Business:
      1.   It is unlawful for business premises licensed for semi-nude
entertainment to:
         a.   Permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item in any room on the
premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the
public or in any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in
an adult theater, such items may be on the stage as part of a performance.
         b.   Allow any door on any room used for business, except for the door
to an office to which patrons shall not be admitted, outside doors and restroom
doors to be lockable from the inside.
         c.   Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the
patron are alone together without a separation by a solid physical barrier at
least three feet high and six inches wide (3' x 6"). The patron or patrons
shall remain on one side of the barrier and the employee or employees shall
remain on the other side of the barrier.
      2.   Adult theaters shall also require that the performance area shall be
separated from the patrons by a minimum of three feet (3'), which separation
shall be delineated by a physical barrier at least three feet (3') high. (Ord.
97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-22: ALCOHOL PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter to
allow the sale, storage, supply or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the
premises.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage on the premises of any sexually oriented business. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-
1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-23: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Semi-Nude Agencies:
      1.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage the services of a professional dancer, model or performer to
appear in a state of semi-nudity for pecuniary compensation in or for any semi-
nude entertainment business or adult theater if licensed pursuant to this
Chapter, unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this Chapter.
      2.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage or permit any person to perform as a professional dancer,
model or performer in a state of semi- nudity or nudity, either gratuitously or
for compensation, in or for any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter
unless such person is licensed pursuant to this Chapter.
   B.   Performers: It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model or
performer, while performing in any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter,
to:
      1.   Touch in any manner any other person;
      2.   Throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
      3.   Accept any money, drink or any other object directly from any
person;
      4.   Allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money
or object on the performer or within the costume or person or the performer;
      5.   Place anything within the costume or adjust or move the costume
while performing so as to render the performer in a state of nudity.
   C.   Patrons: It is unlawful for any person or any patron of any business to
touch in any manner any performer; to place any money or object on or within
the costume or person of any performer; or to give or offer to give to any such
performer any drinks, money or object while such performer is performing;
except that money may be placed on the stage, which shall not be picked up by
the performer except by hand. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-24: DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION:
It is a defense to prosecution or violation under this Chapter that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   A.   By a proprietary school licensed by the State or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
   B.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. (Ord. 97-2, 3-
25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-25: EXISTING BUSINESSES; COMPLIANCE TIME LIMITS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date hereof and regardless of whether
such persons and businesses are currently licensed to do business in the City.
   A.   Outcall Services: All such persons and businesses requiring outcall
service licenses shall have forty five (45) days from the effective date hereof
or until their current license expires, whichever is first in time, to comply
with the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Semi-Nude Dancing Agencies: All semi-nude dancing agency licenses shall
have seventy five (75) days from the effective date hereof or until their
license must be renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the provisions of
this Chapter.
   C.   Adult Businesses; Semi-Nude Entertainment Businesses: All adult
businesses and semi-nude entertainment businesses shall have one hundred thirty
five (135) days from the effective date hereof or until their current license
must be renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
3-4-26: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Procedure: The denial, suspension or revocation of any license issued
pursuant to this Chapter shall be done in accordance with Section
3-1-11 of this Title, which sets forth the applicant's right to present
evidence why the license should not be denied, suspended or denied.
   B.   Conditions Specified: The City may issue a notice suspending or
revoking a sexually oriented business license or employee license granted under
this Chapter if a licensee or an employee of the licensee has:
      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter;
      2.   Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually
oriented business specifically authorized by this Chapter or by any other
statute or ordinance;
      3.   Failed to replenish the cost bond as provided in this Chapter (such
a suspension shall extend until the bond has been replenished);
      4.   Given materially false or misleading information in obtaining the
license;
      5.   Knowingly operated the sexually oriented business or worked under
the employee license during the period when the business license or employee
licensee's license was suspended;
      6.   Committed an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license
for which the time period required has not elapsed;
      7.   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a
person committed in or on, or solicited for on the licensed premises, or an
outcall employee solicited or committed on or off the premises, an offense
which would be grounds for denial of a license for which a conviction has been
obtained, and the person was an employee, whether or not licensed, of the
sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;
      8.   Delinquent in payment to the City for ad valorem taxes or sales
taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
   C.   Effective Date: Suspension or revocation shall take effect within
fifteen (15) days of the issuance of notice, unless an appeal is filed as
provided by this chapter.
   D.   Appeal No Effect On Revocation: The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. (Ord. 97-2, 3-
25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
   E.   Length Of Revocation: When a license issued pursuant to this chapter is
revoked, the revocation shall continue for one year from its effective date and
the license shall not be reissued to the sexually oriented business or employee
for one year from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-
26-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
3-4-27: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Suit For Injunction: An entity or individual who operated or causes a
sexually oriented business to be operated without a valid license, or who
employs or is employed as an employee of a sexually oriented business, or who
operates such a business or functions as such an employee in violation of the
provisions of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to
the civil and criminal violations provided herein and any other remedy
available at law or in equity. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
   B.   Civil Penalty: In addition to revocation or suspension of a license, as
provided in this chapter, each violation of this chapter shall, upon citation
by the business license official, require the licensee to pay a civil penalty.
Such fines shall be deducted from the cost bond posted pursuant to this
chapter, unless paid within ten (10) days of notice of the fine or the final
determination after any appeal. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
   C.   Misdemeanor Offense: In addition to civil fine provided in this
chapter, the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a Class B
misdemeanor, and subject the violator to the penalty provisions as provided in
section
1-9-1 of this Code. Each day of a violation shall be considered a separate
offense.
   D.   Employee Violations: Every act or omission by an employee constituting
a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or
omission of the sexually oriented business licensee and/or operator. If such
act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of
the licensee and/or operator, or as a result of the licensee's and/or
operator's negligent failure to supervise the conduct of the employee, the
sexually oriented business licensee shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the licensee committed the act or caused the
omission.
   E.   Responsibility For Conduct: A sexually oriented business licensee and/
or operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the
licensed premises and any act or omission of any employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission
of the licensee and/or operator for the purposes of determining whether the
licensee's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. (Ord. 97-2, 3-25-
1997, eff. 4-26-1997)
CHAPTER 5
   SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-5-1: Purpose
3-5-2: Contract With State Of Utah
3-5-3: Sales Tax Levied
3-5-4: Use Tax Levied
3-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to levy a one percent (1%) sales and use tax in
compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law, Utah
Code Annotated, as amended. (1989 Code § 6-101; amd. 1998 Code)
3-5-2: CONTRACT WITH STATE OF UTAH:
The existing contract between the City and the State Tax Commission, which
provides that the Commission will perform all functions incident to the
administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance of the City, is
hereby declared to be in full force and effect. (1989 Code § 6-102)
3-5-3: SALES TAX LEVIED:
   A.   Levy Of Tax: There is hereby levied a tax upon every retail sale of
tangible personal property, services and meals made within the City, subject to
the rate adopted by the State. (Ord. 96-6, 11-12-1996, eff. 11-30-1996)
   B.   Situs Of Levy: For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales shall
be presumed to have been consummated at the place of business of the retailer
unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his
agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an
out-of-state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business in the State, or has more than one place of business, the place or
places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under
the rules and regulations prescribed and adopted by the State Tax Commission.
Public utilities, as defined by Utah Code Annotated, shall not be obligated to
determine the place or places within any county or municipality where public
utilities services are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax
revenues arising from such service allocable to the municipality shall be as
determined by the State Tax Commission, pursuant to an appropriate formula and
other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   C.   Application Of State Sales Tax Provisions: Except as hereinafter
provided, and except insofar as otherwise inconsistent with the provisions of
the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of Utah, all of the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated, as amended and in force and effect on the effective date
hereof, insofar as related to sales taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part
of this Chapter.
   D.   Substitution Of Municipality For State: Whenever, and to the extent
that in Utah Code Annotated, the State of Utah is named or referred to as the
taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in
this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the City
for the word "State" when that word is used as part of the title of the State
Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the City
be substituted for that of the State in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in
performing the functions incidental to the administration or operation of this
Chapter.
   E.   Additional License Not Required: If an annual license has been issued
to a retailer under Utah Code Annotated, an additional license shall not be
required by reason of this Section. (1989 Code § 6-103; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Exemptions: There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or
charged by which the tax is measured:
      1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Utah upon
a retailer or consumer.
      2.   Receipts from the sale of tangible personal property upon which a
sales or use tax has become due by reason of the same transaction to any other
municipality and any county in the State of Utah, under a sales or use tax
ordinance enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the Uniform
Local Sales and Use Tax Law of Utah. (1989 Code § 6-103)
3-5-4: USE TAX LEVIED:
   A.   Levy Of Tax: An excise tax is hereby levied on the storage, use or
other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any
retailer on or after the operative date hereof for storage, use or other
consumption in the City, subject to the rate adopted by the State. (Ord. 96-6,
11-12-1996, eff. 11-30-1996; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Application Of State Use Tax Provisions: Except as hereinafter
provided, and except insofar as otherwise inconsistent with the provisions of
the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of Utah, Utah Code Annotated, as
amended and in force and effect on the effective date hereof, applicable to use
taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this Section.
   C.   Substitution Of Municipality For State: Whenever, and to the extent
that in Utah Code Annotated, the State of Utah is named or referred to as the
taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in
this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the City
for the word "State" when that word is used as part of the title of the State
Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the City
be substituted for that of the State in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in
performing the functions incidental to the administration or operation of this
Chapter. (1989 Code § 6-104; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Exemptions: There shall be exempt from the tax due under this Section:
      1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Utah upon
a retailer or consumer.
      2.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sales of or the cost of which has been subject to
sales or use tax under a sales or use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with
the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of Utah by any other municipality and
any county of the State of Utah. (1989 Code § 6-104)
CHAPTER 6
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose
3-6-2: Definitions
3-6-3: Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax
3-6-4: Exemptions From Tax
3-6-5: No Effect Upon Existing Franchises; Credit For Franchise Fees
3-6-6: Tax Collection Contract With State Tax Commission
3-6-7: Incorporation Of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code, Including
Amendments
3-6-8: No Additional License To Collect; No Additional License Or Reporting
Requirements
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of South Weber City to adopt the Municipal Energy Sales and
Use Tax, pursuant to, and in conformance with, Utah Code Annotated section 10-
1-301 et seq., "The Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act". (Ord. 98-023, 10-
13-1998, eff. 1-1-1999)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
   CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject
to the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
   CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE: A. A fee:
      1.   Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
      2.   That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
   B.   1. A fee similar to subsection A or B of this definition.
      2.   Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
   DELIVERED VALUE: A. The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered
for sale or use in the Municipality and includes:
      1.   The value of the energy itself; and
      2.   Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service
charges, or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in
usable form to each class of customer in the Municipality.
   B.   "Delivered value" does not include the amount of a tax paid under part
1 or part 2 of chapter 12, title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated.
   ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons
supplying a de minimus amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded
by rule promulgated by the State Tax Commission.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract, or agreement
granting a franchise.
   FRANCHISE TAX: A. A franchise tax;
   B.   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
   C.   Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
   PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate,
this State, any county, city, municipality, district, or other local
governmental entity of the State, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
   SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange, or barter, conditional or otherwise,
in any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
   A.   Installment and credit sales;
   B.   Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
   C.   Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable
energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable
if an outright sale were made.
   STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this City for any
purpose except sale in the regular course of business.
   TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity.
   USE: The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the
ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy. "Use" does not include the
sale, display, demonstration, or trial of the taxable energy in the regular
course of business and held for resale. (Ord. 98-023, 10-13-1998, eff. 1-1-
1999)
3-6-3: MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within the City equaling six percent
(6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This Tax
shall be known as the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
   A.   The Tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable
energy to the consumer.
   B.   The Tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy
imposed by the City authorized by title 59, chapter 12, part 2 of the Utah Code
Annotated, "The Local Sales and Use Tax Act". (Ord. 98-023, 10-13-1998, eff. 1-
1-1999)
3-6-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
   A.   No exemptions are granted from the Tax except as expressly provided in
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b); notwithstanding an exemption
granted by section 59-1-104 of the Utah Code.
   B.   The following are exempt from the Tax, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated
section 10-1-305(2)(b):
      1.   Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, and special fuels
subject to taxation under title 59, chapter 13 of the Utah Code Annotated;
      2.   Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under
Federal law, the United States Constitution, or the Utah constitution;
      3.   Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
      4.   Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of
the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a
fuel subject to taxation under title 59, chapter 13 of the Utah Code Annotated;
      5.   Taxable energy brought into the State by a nonresident from the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the State, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the State by a nonresident living or
working in the State at the time of purchase;
      6.   The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a
fuel or energy; and
      7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the
City.
   C.   The sale, storage, use, or other consumption of taxable energy is
exempt from the Tax levied by this Chapter, provided:
      1.   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a
municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the
State authorized by title 59, chapter 12, part 3 or the Utah Code Annotated;
and
      2.   South Weber City is paid the difference between the tax paid to the
other municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this Chapter,
if the tax due under this Chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other
municipality. (Ord. 98-023, 10-13-1998, eff. 1-1-1999)
3-6-5: NO EFFECT UPON EXISTING FRANCHISES; CREDIT FOR FRANCHISE FEES:
   A.   This Chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between
the City and energy suppliers.
   B.   There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount
of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
      1.   The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the City
pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
      2.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy
supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
      3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 98-023, 10-13-
1998, eff. 1-1-1999)
3-6-6: TAX COLLECTION CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
   A.   On or before the effective date of this Chapter, the City shall
contract with the State Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the
administration and collection of the Tax, in accordance with this Chapter. The
Mayor, is hereby authorized to enter agreements with the State Tax Commission
that may be necessary to the continued administration and operation of the Tax
enacted by this Chapter.
   B.   An energy supplier shall pay the Tax revenues collected from consumers
directly to the City monthly if:
      1.   The City is the energy supplier; or
      2.   a. The energy supplier estimates that the Municipal Energy Sales and
Use Tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more, and
         b.   The energy supplier collects the Tax.
   C.   An energy supplier paying the Tax directly to the City may deduct any
contractual franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a
credit and remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as
authorized by section 10-1-307(4), Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 98-023, 10-13-
1998, eff. 1-1-1999)
3-6-7: INCORPORATION OF PART 1, CHAPTER 12, TITLE 59, UTAH CODE, INCLUDING
AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of title 10, chapter 1, part 3, Municipal Energy Sales and
Use Tax Act, as well as this Chapter, all of the provisions of part 1, chapter
12, title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, and in force and
effect on the effective date of this Chapter, insofar as they relate to sales
and use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, and
excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes levied therein, are hereby
adopted and made a part of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein.
   B.   Wherever, and to the extent that in part 1, chapter 12, title 59, Utah
Code Annotated 1953, as amended, the State of Utah is named or referred to as
the "taxing agency", the name of South Weber City shall be substituted, insofar
as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as part 3, chapter 1,
title 10, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended. Nothing in this subsection B
shall be deemed to require substitution of the name South Weber City for the
word "State" when that word is used as part of the title of the State Tax
Commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of South Weber
City be substituted for that of the State in any section when the result of
such a substitution would require action to be taken by or against South Weber
City or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission
in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
Chapter.
   C.   Any amendments made to part 1, chapter 12, title 59, Utah Code
Annotated 1953, as amended, which would be applicable to the City for the
purposes of carrying out this Chapter are hereby incorporated herein by
reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a
Utah statute. (Ord. 98-023, 10-13-1998, eff. 1-1-1999)
3-6-8: NO ADDITIONAL LICENSE TO COLLECT; NO ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING
REQUIREMENTS:
No additional license to collect or report the Tax levied by this Chapter is
required, provided the energy supplier collecting the tax has a license issued
under section 59-12-106, Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 98-023, 10-13-1998, eff. 1-
1-1999)
CHAPTER 7
   TELECOMMUNICATION LICENSE TAX
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Levy Of Tax
3-7-3: Rate
3-7-4: Rate Limitation And Exemption Therefrom
3-7-5: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3-7-6: Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of The Tax
3-7-7: Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of The Tax
3-7-8: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
   CUSTOMER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, the person
who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for
telecommunications service received under the contract.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "customer" means:
      1.   The person who is obligated under a contract with a
telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received
under the contract; or
      2.   If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this
definition, the end user of telecommunications service.
   C.   "Customer" does not include a reseller:
      1.   Of telecommunications service; or
      2.   For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an
agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
   END USER: A. The person who uses a telecommunications service.
   B.   For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is
not an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the
telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the
telecommunications service.
   GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY: Those gross receipts from a
transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the
municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah code title 59,
chapter 12, sales and use tax act and determined in accordance with Utah code
section 59-12-207.
   GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered
except for amounts collected or paid as:
   A.   A tax, fee, or charge:
      1.   Imposed by a governmental entity;
      2.   Separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge in the transaction
with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
      3.   Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
   B.   Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a
customer under title 59, chapter 12, sales and use tax act; or
   C.   Interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications
provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when
payment is due.
   MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
   MUNICIPALITY: South Weber City.
   PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: A. For telecommunications service other than mobile
telecommunications service, means the street address representative of where
the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which
shall be:
      1.   The residential street address of the customer; or
      2.   The primary business street address of the customer; or
   B.   For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid:
   A.   If the location described in this subsection A is known, the location
of the telecommunications equipment:
      1.   To which a call is charged; and
      2.   From which the call originates or terminates;
   B.   If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not
known but the location described in this subsection B is known, the location of
the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first
identified by:
      1.   The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
      2.   If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications
provider from its service provider; or
   C.   If the locations described in subsection A or B of this definition are
not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this
definition, a person that:
      1.   Owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service;
or
      2.   Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition
for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications
service.
   B.   A person described in subsection A of this definition is a
telecommunications provider whether or not the public service commission of
Utah regulates:
      1.   That person; or
      2.   The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls,
operates, or manages.
   C.   "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined
in Utah code section 54-8b-2.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: A. Telephone service, as defined in Utah code
section 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that
originates and terminates within the boundaries of this state; and
   B.   Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah code section 59-
12-102:
      1.   That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state;
and
      2.   Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC section 116 et seq. (Ord. 04-7, 6-8-2004)
3-7-2: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to South Weber City. (Ord.
04-7, 6-8-2004)
3-7-3: RATE:
The rate of the tax levy shall be three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service
that are attributed to the municipality subject to the following:
If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than South Weber
City then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications
services shall be the lower of: a) the rate imposed by the taxing jurisdiction
in which the transaction is located or b) the rate for nonmobile
telecommunication services imposed by the municipality in which the customer's
service address is located; or for mobile telecommunications service, the rate
imposed by the municipality of the customer's primary place of use. (Ord. 07-
09, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-1-2007)
3-7-4: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION THEREFROM:
The rate of this levy shall not exceed three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunication service
attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority
vote of the voters in South Weber City that vote in:
   A.   A municipal general election;
   B.   A regular general election; or
   C.   A local special election. (Ord. 07-09, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-1-2007)
3-7-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2004, or the first
day of any calendar quarter after a seventy five (75) day period beginning on
the date the commission received notice pursuant to Utah code section 10-1-403
that South Weber City has enacted this chapter. (Ord. 04-7, 6-8-2004)
3-7-6: CHANGES IN RATE OR REPEAL OF THE TAX:
This chapter is subject to the requirements of Utah code section 10-1-403. If
the tax rate is changed or the tax is repealed, then the appropriate notice
shall be given as provided in Utah code section 10-1-403. (Ord. 04-7, 6-8-2004)
3-7-7: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF THE TAX:
On or before the effective date hereof, South Weber City shall enter into the
uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah code
section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement, and administration of this
municipal telecommunications license tax. (Ord. 04-7, 6-8-2004)
3-7-8: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
Any tax or fee previously enacted by South Weber City under authority of Utah
code section 10-1203 or Utah code title 11, chapter 26, local taxation of
utilities limitation is hereby repealed.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to repeal any South Weber City
ordinance or fee which provides that South Weber City may recover from a
telecommunications provider the management costs of South Weber City caused by
the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights of way of the
municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah code section 72-7-
102 and is not related to South Weber City's loss of use of a highway as a
result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way,
or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the activities of the
telecommunications provider in a right of way nor does this chapter limit South
Weber City's right to charge fees or taxes on persons that are not subject to
the municipal telecommunications license tax under this chapter and locate
telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah code section 72-7-108, in
South Weber City. (Ord. 04-7, 6-8-2004)
CHAPTER 8
RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-8-1: Purpose
3-8-2: No Other City Licenses Or Approval Required
3-8-3: Definitions
3-8-4: Exemptions From Chapter
3-8-5: Solicitation Prohibited
3-8-6: Registration Of Solicitors
3-8-7: Application Form
3-8-8: Written Disclosures
3-8-9: When Registration Begins
3-8-10: Issuance Of Certificates
3-8-11: Form Of Certificate And Identification Badge
3-8-12: Maintenance Of Registry
3-8-13: Nontransferability Of Certificates
3-8-14: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of A Certificate Of Registration
3-8-15: Appeal
3-8-16: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
3-8-17: No Solicitation Notice
3-8-18: Duties Of Solicitors
3-8-19: Time Of Day Restrictions
3-8-20: Buyer's Right To Cancel
3-8-21: Penalties
3-8-1: PURPOSE:
Residents of South Weber City have an inalienable interest in their personal
safety, well being, and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability
to provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief,
political or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in
commerce. The city has a substantial interest in protecting the well being,
tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the
ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property.
The city also has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or
otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.
There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the city and its
citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this chapter on the rights of
those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of city officials
derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and property from
criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens regarding door to
door solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement officers and those
affected by door to door canvassing and solicitation, as well as judicial
decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional protections afforded and
denied persons seeking to engage in door to door solicitation, the city adopts
this chapter to promote the city's substantial interests in:
   A.   Respecting citizens' decisions regarding privacy in their residences;
   B.   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
   C.   Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious
belief, political position, or charitable activities; and
   D.   Permitting truthful and nonmisleading door to door solicitation
regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
The city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in this
chapter are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the city interests
referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those
regulated. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-2: NO OTHER CITY LICENSES OR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration need not
apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the city
to engage in door to door solicitation.
   B.   Any business licensed by the city under another city ordinance that
uses employees, independent contractors, or agents for door to door
solicitation in an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the
business, shall be required to have such solicitors obtain a certificate,
unless otherwise exempt from registration.
   C.   Those responsible persons or entities associated with registered
solicitors need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or
registration from the city, provided they do not establish a temporary or fixed
place of business in the city.
   D.   Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other
requirement of federal, state, or other local government law regarding any
license, permit, or certificate that a registered solicitor is otherwise
required to have or maintain. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ADVOCATING: Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support
religious belief, political position, or charitable activities.
   APPEALS OFFICER: The city council or designee of the city responsible for
receiving the information from the city and appellant regarding the denial or
suspension of a certificate and issuing a decision as required by this chapter.
   APPELLANT: The person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a
certificate, either personally as an applicant or registered solicitor, or on
behalf of the applicant or registered solicitor.
   APPLICANT: An individual who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and not a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity who
applies for a certificate permitting door to door solicitation.
   APPLICATION FORM: A standardized form provided by the city to an applicant
to be completed and submitted as part of registration.
   BCI: An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to the date of the application, of either: a) a Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification verified criminal history report
personal to the applicant; or b) verification by the Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification that no criminal history rising to the
level of a disqualifying status exists for the applicant.
   BUSINESS: A commercial enterprise licensed by the city as a person or entity
under this title, having a fixed or temporary physical location within the
city.
   CERTIFICATE: A temporary, annual, or renewal certificate permitting door to
door solicitation in the city applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of
this chapter.
   CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES: Advocating by persons or entities that either are, or
support, a charitable organization.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Includes any person, joint venture, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, association, group, or other entity:
   A.   That is:
      1.   A benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane,
patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public
health, environmental or conservation, or civic organization;
      2.   For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter
fraternal association; or
      3.   Established for any charitable purpose; and
   B.   That is tax exempt under applicable provisions of the internal revenue
code of 1986, as amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible
contributions from the public for charitable purposes.
   C.   Charitable organization includes a chapter, branch, area, or office, or
similar affiliate or any person soliciting contributions within the state for a
charitable organization that has its principal place of business outside the
city or state of Utah 1 .
   COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL: A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen
(18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage
in rational thought, conversation, and conduct.
   COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application form, a BCI, two (2)
copies of the original identification relied on by the applicant to establish
proof of identity, and the tendering of fees.
   CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of
no contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not
been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal
conviction is that offense of which the applicant or registered solicitor was
convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the charge after completion
of conditions of probation or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in
abeyance or diversion agreement.
   DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this chapter as
requiring the denial or suspension of a certificate, and any of the following:
   A.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of:
1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a
minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual
assault of any kind;
   B.   Criminal charges currently pending against the applicant or registered
solicitor for: 1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or
exploiting a minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4)
sexual assault of any kind;
   C.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of
a felony within the last ten (10) years;
   D.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been incarcerated in a
federal or state prison within the past five (5) years;
   E.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of
a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: 1) moral
turpitude, or 2) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
   F.   A final civil judgment been entered against the applicant or registered
solicitor within the last five (5) years indicating that: 1) the applicant or
registered solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of the applicant or registered solicitor
was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)
(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
   G.   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently on parole or
probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including
being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
   H.   The applicant or registered solicitor has an outstanding arrest warrant
from any jurisdiction; or
   I.   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently subject to a
protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The practice of engaging in or attempting to
engage in conversation with any person at a residence, whether or not that
person is a competent individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate
a home solicitation sale, or attempting to further the sale of goods and/or
services.
   ENTITY: Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or
other lawful entity, organization, society or association.
   FEES: The cost charged to the applicant or registered solicitor for the
issuance of a certificate and/or identification badge, which shall not exceed
the reasonable costs of processing the application and issuing the certificate
and/or identification badge.
   FINAL CIVIL JUDGMENT: A civil judgment that would be recognized under state
law as a judgment to which collateral estoppel would apply.
   GOODS: One or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise,
perishables of any kind, subscriptions, or manufactured products offered,
provided, or sold.
   HOME SOLICITATION SALE: To make or attempt to make a sale of goods or
services by a solicitor at a residence by means of door to door solicitation,
regardless of:
   A.   The means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
   B.   The time of delivery of the goods or services; or
   C.   The previous or present classification of the solicitor as a solicitor,
peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or similar designation.
   LICENSING OFFICER: The city employee(s) or agent(s) responsible for
receiving from an applicant or registered solicitor the completed application
and either granting, suspending, or denying the applicant's certificate.
NO SOLICITATION SIGN: A reasonably visible and legible sign that states "No
Soliciting", "No Solicitors", "No Salespersons", "No Trespassing", or words of
similar import.
   POLITICAL POSITION: Any actually held belief, or information for, against,
or in conjunction with any political, social, environmental, or humanitarian
belief or practice.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has been issued a current certificate
by the city.
   REGISTRATION: The process used by the city licensing officer to accept a
completed application and determine whether or not a certificate will be
denied, granted, or suspended.
   RELIGIOUS BELIEF: Any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or
in conjunction with, any theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption,
presumption or position, or religious doctrine, dogma, or practice regardless
of whether or not the belief or information is endorsed by any other person or
public or private entity.
   RESIDENCE: Any living unit contained within any building or structure that
is occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the
city, together with the lot or other real property on which the living unit is
located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or public rights of
way.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY: That person or entity responsible to provide
the following to an applicant, registered solicitor, and the competent
individual in a residence to whom a sale of goods or services is made or
attempted to be made by means of a home solicitation sale:
   A.   Maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax
number, computing the sales taxes owing from any sale of goods or services,
paying the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or reports;
   B.   Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to
cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
   C.   Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those
persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights
or law.
   SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES: The conduct and agreement of a solicitor and the
competent individual in a residence regarding a particular goods or service(s)
that entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three (3) days under any
applicable federal, state, or local law.
   SERVICES: Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided, or
sold to a competent individual of a residence.
   SOLICITING OR SOLICIT: Any of the following activities:
   A.   Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or
consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase
insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications;
   C.   Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value
for the benefit of any person or entity;
   D.   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or
services;
   E.   Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence for the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding
religious belief, political position, charitable conduct, or a home
solicitation sale;
   F.   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of
soliciting, such as hawking or peddling.
   SOLICITOR OR SOLICITORS: A person(s) engaged in door to door solicitation.
   SUBMITTED IN WRITING: The information for an appeal of a denial or
suspension of a certificate, submitted in any type of written statement to the
city offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery
confirmation mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
   SUBSTANTIATED REPORT: An oral, written, or electronic report:
   A.   That is submitted to and documented by the city;
   B.   By any of the following:
      1.   A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or
other city employees with publicly available identification of their name,
address, and any other reliable means of contact;
      2.   City law enforcement or licensing officer; or
      3.   Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level
of government;
   C.   That provides any of the following information regarding a registered
solicitor:
      1.   Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying
status of a registered solicitor;
      2.   Probable cause that the registered solicitor has committed a
disqualifying status which has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying
status;
      3.   Documented, eye witness accounts that the registered solicitor has
engaged in repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrates failure by the
registered solicitor to adhere to the requirements of this chapter; or
      4.   Probable cause that continued licensing of the registered solicitor
creates exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety, or welfare of
any individuals or entities within the city.
   WAIVER: The written form provided to applicant by the city wherein applicant
agrees that the city may obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on
the applicant for licensing purposes under this chapter, and which contains
applicant's notarized signature. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 13-22-2(1)(a), (b).
3-8-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER:
The following are exempt from registration under this chapter:
   A.   Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent individual
prior to the time of the person's arrival at the residence;
   B.   Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the
state of Utah independently permits them to engage in door to door solicitation
to offer goods or services to an occupant of the residence;
   C.   Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously made
order, or persons providing services at a residence pursuant to a previously
made request by a competent individual;
   D.   Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any religious belief, or political position regardless of
whether goods, services, or any other consideration is offered or given, with
or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or purchase;
and
   E.   Persons representing a charitable organization. The charitable
exemption shall apply to students soliciting contributions to finance
extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs,
provided that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the school
administration, and that such student solicitors carry current picture student
identification from the educational institution for which they are soliciting.
   F.   Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties
and prohibitions outlined in sections
3-8-17,
3-8-18 and
3-8-19 of this chapter while advocating or soliciting. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-5: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this chapter, the practice of being in and/or upon a private
residence within the city by solicitors, for the purpose of home solicitation
sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-6: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS:
Unless otherwise exempt under this chapter, all persons desiring to engage in
door to door solicitation within the city, prior to doing so, shall submit a
completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a certificate. (Ord.
09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-7: APPLICATION FORM:
The licensing officer shall provide a standard application form for use for the
registration of solicitors. Upon request to the licensing officer, or as
otherwise provided, any person or entity may obtain in person, by mail, or
facsimile, a copy of the application form. Each application form shall require
disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following information,
documentation, and fee:
   A.   Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has
received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this chapter.
   B.   Contact Information:
      1.   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former names
or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
      2.   Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address, if
different;
      3.   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone
number of the responsible person or entity; and
      4.   The address by which all notices to the applicant required under
this chapter are to be sent.
   C.   Proof Of Identity: An in person verification by the licensing officer
of the applicant's true identity by use of any of the following which bear a
photograph of said applicant:
      1.   A valid driver's license issued by any state;
      2.   A valid passport issued by the United States;
      3.   A valid identification card issued by any state;
      4.   A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States
military.
Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to
establish proof of identity shall be returned to the applicant.
   D.   Proof Of Registration With Department Of Commerce: The applicant shall
provide proof that either the applicant, or the responsible person or entity,
has registered with the Utah State Department of Commerce.
   E.   Special Events Sales Tax Number: The applicant shall provide a Special
Events Sales Tax number for either the applicant, or for the responsible person
or entity for which the applicant will be soliciting.
   F.   Marketing Information:
      1.   The goods or services offered by the applicant, including any
commonly known, registered or trademarked names;
      2.   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits,
registrations, or other qualifications required by Federal or State law to
promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered goods or services.
(Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
   G.   BCI Background Check: The applicant shall provide an original or a copy
of a "BCI" background check as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 17-06, 5-9-2017)
   H.   Responses To Questions Regarding Disqualifying Status: The applicant
shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the
application form:
      1.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of: a) felony homicide,
b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, c) the sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual assault of any kind;
      2.   Are any criminal charges currently pending against the applicant
for: a) felony homicide, b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting
a minor, c) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual
assault of any kind;
      3.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a felony within the
last ten (10) years;
      4.   Has the applicant been incarcerated in a Federal or state prison
within the past five (5) years;
      5.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within
the past five (5) years involving a crime of: a) moral turpitude, or b) violent
or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
      6.   Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant within
the last five (5) years indicating that: a) the applicant had either engaged in
fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or b) that a debt of the applicant was
nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4),
(a)(6), or (a)(19);
      7.   Is the applicant currently on parole or probation to any court,
penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest
or subject to a tracking device;
      8.   Does the applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any
jurisdiction; or
      9.   Is the applicant currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   I.   Fee: The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the
city, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application
and issuing the certificate and/or identification badge.
   J.   Execution Of Application: The applicant shall execute the application
form, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on
the present knowledge and belief of the applicant, the information provided is
complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-8: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the
applicant of the following:
   A.   The applicant's submission of the application authorizes the city to
verify information submitted with the completed application including:
      1.   The applicant's address;
      2.   The applicant's and/or responsible person's or entity's state tax
identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
      3.   The validity of the applicant's proof of identity;
   B.   The city may consult any publicly available sources for information on
the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding
warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments;
   C.   Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is
allowed;
   D.   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant
with a completed application;
   E.   The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed
application;
   F.   To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, the applicant's
BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not
available for public inspection;
   G.   The city will maintain copies of the applicant's application form,
proof of identity, and identification badge. These copies will become public
records available for inspection on demand at the city offices whether or not a
certificate is denied, granted, or renewed;
   H.   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial, or suspension of a
certificate under the provisions of this chapter;
   I.   That a request for a temporary certificate will be granted or denied
the same business day that a completed application is submitted. (Ord. 09-12,
10-13-2009)
3-8-9: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS:
The licensing officer shall not begin the registration process unless the
applicant has submitted a completed application. The original identification
submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned after the licensing
officer verifies the applicant's identity. A copy of the identification may be
retained by the licensing officer. If an original BCI background check is
submitted by the applicant, the licensing officer shall make a copy of the BCI
and return the original to the applicant. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-10: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES:
The licensing officer shall review the completed application submitted by the
applicant and issue a certificate in accordance with the following:
   A.   Temporary Certificate: A temporary certificate shall issue allowing the
applicant to immediately begin door to door solicitation upon the following
conditions:
      1.   Applicant's submission of a completed application;
      2.   Applicant's submission of the required fee;
      3.   Applicant establishes proof of identity;
      4.   The applicant's representations on the application form do not
affirmatively show a disqualifying status;
      5.   The BCI does not affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
      6.   The applicant has not previously been denied a certificate by the
city, or had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
   B.   Expiration Of Temporary Certificate: A temporary certificate will
automatically expire after twenty five (25) calendar days from issuance, or
upon grant or denial of an annual certificate, whichever period is shorter.
   C.   Annual Certificate: Within twenty five (25) calendar days of the
issuance of a temporary certificate the city shall:
      1.   Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the
truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted by the applicant,
including, but not limited to, those disclosed with the application form.
      2.   Issue written notice to the applicant and the responsible person or
entity, if any, that the applicant either:
         a.   Will be issued an annual certificate, eligible for renewal one
year from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate; or
         b.   Will not be issued an annual certificate for reasons cited in
section
3-8-14 of this chapter.
   D.   Renewal Certificate: An annual certificate shall be valid for one year
from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate and shall expire at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the anniversary date of issuance. Any annual
certificate that is not suspended, revoked, or expired may be renewed upon the
request of the registered solicitor and the submission of a new completed
application and payment of the fee, unless any of the conditions for the
denial, suspension or revocation of a certificate are present as set forth in
section
3-8-14 of this chapter, or a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 09-12, 10-
13-2009)
3-8-11: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
   A.   Certificate Form: Should the licensing officer determine that the
applicant is entitled to a certificate, the licensing officer shall issue a
certificate to the applicant. The certificate shall list the name of the
registered solicitor and the responsible person or entity, if any, and the date
on which the certificate expires. The certificate shall be dated and signed by
the license officer. The certificate shall be carried by the registered
solicitor at all times while soliciting in the city.
   B.   Identification Badge: With both the temporary and annual certificates,
the city shall issue each registered solicitor an identification badge that
shall be worn prominently on his or her person while soliciting in the city.
The identification badge shall bear the name of the city and shall contain: 1)
the name of the registered solicitor; 2) address and phone number of the
registered solicitor, or the name, address, and phone number of the responsible
person or entity is provided; 3) a recent photograph of the registered
solicitor; and 4) the date on which the certificate expires. (Ord. 09-12, 10-
13-2009)
3-8-12: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The licensing officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a
copy or record of every completed application received and the certificate or
written denial issued by the city. The applicant's BCI background check shall
remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public
inspection. The licensing officer may furnish to the head of the city's law
enforcement agency a listing of all applicants, those denied, and those issued
a certificate. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-13: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATES:
Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and shall list
the responsible party or entity, if any. The certificate shall be
nontransferable. A registered solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to
facilitate home solicitation sales with different: a) goods or services; or b)
responsible person or entity, from those designated in the originally submitted
completed application, shall submit a written change request to the licensing
officer. A new certificate based on the amended information shall issue for the
balance of time remaining on the solicitor's previous certificate before the
amendment was filed. Before the new certificate is given to the registered
solicitor, the registered solicitor shall obtain a revised identification badge
from the city, after payment of the fee for the identification badge. (Ord. 09-
12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-14: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   Denial: Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a
certificate to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Denial Of Temporary Certificate:
         a.   The application form is not complete;
         b.   The applicant fails to: 1) establish proof of identity, 2)
provide a BCI or 3) pay the fees;
         c.   The completed application or BCI indicates that the applicant has
a disqualifying status; or
         d.   The applicant has previously been denied a certificate by the
city, or has had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
      2.   Denial Of Annual Certificate:
         a.   The information submitted by the applicant at the time of the
granting of the temporary certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         b.   Since the submission of the completed application, the applicant
is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
         c.   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         d.   Since the submission of the application, the city has received a
substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of the applicant;
         e.   Since the submission of the application, the city or other
governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a civil
injunction against the applicant for violating this chapter or similar federal,
state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying
status; or
         f.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of
the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523
(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
      3.   Denial Of Annual Certificate Renewal:
         a.   The information submitted by the applicant when seeking renewal
of a certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         b.   Since the submission of the renewal application, the applicant is
subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
         c.   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         d.   Since the submission of the application or granting of a
certificate, the city has received a substantiated report regarding the past or
present conduct of the solicitor;
         e.   The city or other governmental entity has either criminally
convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the applicant for violating
this chapter or similar federal, state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to
the level of a disqualifying status; or
         f.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of
the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523
(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a
certificate when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a certificate
occurs.
   C.   Notice Of Denial Or Suspension: Upon determination of the licensing
officer to deny an applicant's completed application or to suspend a registered
solicitor's certificate, the city shall cause written notice to be sent to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the method indicated in the completed
application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or suspension,
the documentation or information the city relied on to make the decision, the
availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon one business
day's notice to the city, and the date upon which the denial or suspension of
the certificate shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant or
registered solicitor shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the
notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or suspension of
the certificate shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from
the date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of exigent
circumstances outlined in section
3-8-3 of this chapter, in which case, the suspension is effective immediately.
The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and until the order is
rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be contrary to
equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a certificate automatically
results in its revocation. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-15: APPEAL:
An applicant or registered solicitor whose certificate has been denied or
suspended shall have the right to appeal to the city council or its designee.
Any appeal must be submitted by either the applicant, the responsible person or
entity, or legal counsel for either who: a) documents the relationship with the
applicant or responsible person or entity; or b) is licensed or authorized by
the state of Utah to do so, and makes the assertion of an agency relationship.
The following procedures and requirements shall apply:
   A.   Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the city recorder with a
copy to the license officer within ten (10) business days of the decision from
which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature of
the appeal, the action complained of and the grounds for appeal.
   B.   Upon request of the applicant or registered solicitor, within one
business day, the city will make available any information upon which it relied
in making the determination to either deny or suspend the certificate.
   C.   The appeals officer shall review, de novo, all written information
submitted by the applicant or registered solicitor to the licensing officer,
any additional information relied upon by the licensing officer as the basis
for denial, suspension or revocation, and any additional information supplied
by the city, applicant or registered solicitor. Any additional information
submitted by any party to the appeal to the appeals officer shall be
simultaneously submitted to the opposing party. If desired, any party shall
have three (3) business days to submit rebuttal documentation to the appeals
officer regarding the additional information submitted by the opposing party.
   D.   The appeals officer will render a decision no later than fifteen (15)
calendar days from the date the appeal was taken, unless an extension of time
is agreed upon by the parties. In the event that any party to the appeal
submits rebuttal information as allowed in subsection C of this section, the
fifteen (15) calendar days shall be extended to include the additional three
(3) days for rebuttal.
      1.   The denial or suspension of the certificate shall be reversed by the
appeals officer if upon review of the written appeal and information submitted,
the appeals officer finds that the licensing officer made a material mistake of
law or fact in denying or suspending the applicant's or registered solicitor's
certificate.
      2.   If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that the
licensing officer properly denied or suspended the certificate of the applicant
or registered solicitor, the denial or suspension of the certificate shall be
affirmed and constitute a determination that the suspended certificate is
revoked.
      3.   The decision of the appeals officer shall be delivered to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the means designated in the completed
application, or as otherwise agreed upon when the appeal was filed.
   E.   After the ruling of the appeals officer, the applicant or solicitor is
deemed to have exhausted all administrative remedies with the city.
   F.   Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the applicant's,
solicitor's, or city's right to seek relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-16: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   B.   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to
face solicitation: 1) the name of the solicitor; 2) the name and address of the
entity with whom the solicitor is associated; and 3) the purpose of the
solicitor's contact with the person and/or competent individual. This
requirement may be satisfied through the use of the badge and an informational
flyer.
   C.   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   D.   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the
granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement by the city
of the solicitor's goods or services or of the individual solicitor. (Ord. 09-
12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-17: NO SOLICITATION NOTICE:
   A.   Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a "No Solicitation" sign which shall be posted on or
near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the
sidewalk leading to the residence.
   B.   The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute
notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence
for the presence of any such notice.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors who are
exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-
12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-18: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for
any "No Soliciting" sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a
solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, "No
Solicitation" signs. If such sign or placard is posted such solicitor shall
desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall
immediately depart from such property. Possession of a certificate of
registration does not in any way relieve any solicitor of this duty.
   B.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person soliciting or
advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner
attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "No
Solicitation" sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or
attempting to engage in advocating a home solicitation sale, door to door
soliciting, or soliciting.
   C.   It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor through ruse,
deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take action
calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
   D.   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence or
dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.
   E.   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical
contact with, or touch another person without the person's consent.
   F.   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their
explicit consent.
   G.   The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person
and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their
lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
   H.   The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 09-12,
10-13-2009)
3-8-19: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a
residence before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the
resident to do so. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-20: BUYER'S RIGHT TO CANCEL:
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer's signature to a written
statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third
business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of "buyer's
right to cancel" shall be in the form required by section 70C-5-103, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, or a current version thereof or any state or federal law
modifying or amending such provision. (Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
3-8-21: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine and/or a jail sentence.
(Ord. 09-12, 10-13-2009)
CHAPTER 9
MOBILE BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-9-1: Purpose And Intent
3-9-2: Definitions
3-9-3: Location
3-9-4: Use Rules
3-9-5: Application Requirements
3-9-6: Business Licenses And Special Event Permit Requirements
3-9-7: License And Permit Exemptions
3-9-8: Penalty
3-9-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter to
provide responsible businesses and individuals who engage in the operation of
mobile businesses with clear and concise regulations to avoid traffic hazards,
promote public safety and health, and preserve the peace, safety and welfare of
the community. (Ord. 17-10, 10-10-2017)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
   FOOD TRUCK: Means a fully encased food service establishment:
   A.   On a motor vehicle or on a trailer that a motor vehicle pulls to
transport; and
   B.   From which a food truck vendor, standing within the frame of the
vehicle, prepares, cooks, sells, or serves food or beverages for immediate
human consumption.
"Food truck" does not include a food cart or an ice cream truck.
   FOOD TRUCK EVENT: Means an event where an individual has ordered or
commissioned the operation of a food truck at a private or public gathering.
   FOOD TRUCK OPERATOR: Means a person who owns, manages, or controls, or who
has the duty to manage or control, the operation of a food truck.
   MOBILE BUSINESS: A term used collectively to refer to mobile food vendors
and mobile vendors.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: A business that serves food or beverages from a self-
contained unit either in a motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, or a
cart on wheels, and which is readily movable.
   MOBILE VENDOR: A business that sets up temporary sales or services of non-
food related product from a tent, table or other portable structure; or from a
self-contained unit either in a motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer,
cart on wheels, and which is readily movable, that operates for more than
twenty four (24) hours in one week.
   VENDOR: A person eighteen (18) years of age or older who is the permittee
authorized to operate the business and holds the necessary credentials to
operate the business, such as a driver's license or food handlers permit. (Ord.
17-10, 10-10-2017)
3-9-3: LOCATION:
   A.   Mobile businesses may only set up business on property with the
permission of the property owner.
   B.   No mobile business or food truck shall conduct business in the public
road right-of-way unless approved by the Planning Commission.
   C.   Mobile businesses and food trucks shall be parked so neither the
vehicle nor the customers interfere with public access to adjacent driveways or
entrances to existing buildings or uses.
   D.   A mobile business shall not operate as a drive-thru.
   E.   All mobile businesses and food trucks utilizing City parks must reserve
the park space through the Family Activity Center. Reservations shall be made
on a first-come-first-served basis.
   F.   The storage of mobile businesses for any period of time on property in
residential or agricultural zones shall follow the home occupation guidelines
as set forth in section
10-11-11 of this Code. (Ord. 17-10, 10-10-2017)
3-9-4: USE RULES:
   A.   Business Activity: All business activity related to mobile businesses
shall be of a temporary nature, the duration of which shall not extend for more
than twelve (12) hours within a 24-hour period at any one location.
   B.   Hours And Location Of Operation: Permitted hours of operation shall be
between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. at approved
sites.
   C.   Canopy: Any canopy extensions shall be integrated into the design of
the mobile vendor and shall not project onto or over the public sidewalk or any
other part of the public right-of-way in a way that impedes pedestrian passage
or is lower than seven feet (7') measured from the lowest portion of the canopy
to the sidewalk or ground surface.
   D.   Signage: All signage shall be permanently attached to the mobile
vehicle, trailer, cart or moveable structure except each business may have one
additional sign that shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet and shall be
placed no more than ten feet (10') from the mobile business.
   E.   Trash Receptacles: Vendors shall provide trash receptacles which shall
be removed from the site and all trash, refuse and debris shall be removed from
the location each day. It is illegal to discharge or dispose of any substance,
material, food, grease, culinary oils used for food preparation, or waste onto
a public right-of-way or into the public storm drain system.
   F.   Utilities: Any auxiliary power or water required for the operation of
the mobile business shall be self-contained unless connection to the utility is
expressly permitted by the property owner or the owner's authorized designee.
   G.   Nuisance: There shall not be any amplified music or use of any
amplified sound system, or any moving or flashing lights. (Ord. 17-10, 10-10-
2017)
3-9-5: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Each mobile business vendor and food truck operator, excluding food
truck operators licensed in other jurisdictions, shall submit a completed
license application requesting to operate in the City to the business license
official. All requirements and attachments set forth on the application,
including fees according to the current fee schedule, shall be submitted with
the application before the application shall be deemed complete. No application
shall be considered by the business official until it is complete.
   B.   The following information shall be provided on each application:
      1.   Business and contact information;
      2.   Description of all products to be sold;
      3.   Site plan showing exact location of intended operations and letter
of approval from the private property owner if applicable;
      4.   Proof of all applicable health permits, business licenses, business
and tax registrations, and any other terms required by the City, County, or
State to operate the business;
      5.   A photograph of the vehicle, trailer, cart, or structure to be used;
      6.   The number of vehicles or trailers to be used, license plate
numbers, vehicle identification number (VIN), proof of vehicle insurance
coverage and registration;
      7.   The number of carts, stands, or structures to be used;
      8.   Proof of business insurance;
      9.   A signed statement that the licensee shall hold the City and its
officers and employees harmless from any and all liability and shall indemnify
the City and its officers and employees from any claims for damage to property
or injury to persons arising from any activity carried on under the terms of
the license; and
      10.   A fire inspection report as deemed applicable by the City Fire
Chief.
   C.   Food truck operators not based in South Weber City shall submit a
completed permit application requesting to operate a food truck business to the
business license official. All requirements and attachments set forth on the
application, including fees according to the current fee schedule, shall be
submitted with the application before the application shall be deemed complete.
No application shall be considered by the business license official or the
Planning Commission until it is complete. The following information shall be
provided with each application:
      1.   A current business license from another political subdivision within
the State;
      2.   A current Health Department food truck permit from a local Health
Department within the State; and
      3.   A current approval of a political subdivision within the State that
shows that the food truck passed a fire safety inspection that the other
political subdivision conducted in accordance with Utah Code Annotated 11-56-
104(4)(a).
   D.   If any of the application information changes, the applicant or
licensee, as the case may be, shall deliver current information to the business
license official within ten (10) business days following the change.
   E.   Separate applications shall be required for each mobile business or
food truck. Separate fees shall be required for each mobile business vehicle/
cart operating under one business license/permit.
   F.   All applications for operating a mobile business or food truck shall be
reviewed and approved by the business license official. Appeals shall be heard
and determined by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 17-10, 10-10-2017)
3-9-6: BUSINESS LICENSES AND SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Business License: Mobile businesses and food trucks based in South
Weber City shall require a City business license.
   B.   Special Event Permit: Mobile businesses or food trucks that come for a
special event on public property, such as Country Fair Days, carnivals,
festivals, fundraisers, or circuses shall first obtain a special event permit
if in operation for more than a 24-hour period.
   C.   Permit: Mobile businesses shall obtain a new permit with each new
location and food trucks shall obtain a new permit each year.
      1.   Use Permit: Mobile businesses that come to the City shall be limited
to a maximum operating period of six (6) months beginning on the day the permit
is approved.
      2.   Food Truck Permit:
         a.   No separate license or fee beyond the initial business license,
permit and fee is required for the operation of a food truck in more than one
location or on more than one day within the City in the same calendar year.
         b.   If a food truck operator presents the documents described in
subsection
3-9-5C of this chapter, the City shall not impose additional license or permit
qualification requirements on the food truck operator before issuing a permit
to operate within the City, except for charging a fee in accordance with the
consolidated fee schedule, or issue a permit that expires on a date earlier or
later than the day on which the permit described in subsection
3-9-5C of this chapter expires.
         c.   The City shall only charge a licensing fee to a food truck
operator in an amount that reimburses the City for the cost of regulating the
food truck.
         d.   Nothing in this section prevents the City from enforcing the
City's land use regulations, zoning, and other ordinances in relation to the
operation of a food truck. (Ord. 19-07, 3-12-2019)
3-9-7: LICENSE AND PERMIT EXEMPTIONS:
A mobile business license or permit shall not be required where:
   A.   The mobile food vendor or food truck vendor has a business license from
any political subdivision within the State and is catering an event on private
property and the event is not open to the public;
   B.   A food truck event is to be held on private property regardless of
whether the event is open or closed to the public; or
   C.   The mobile business is a 501(c)(3) organization, in which case proof of
the designation shall be provided to the City. (Ord. 19-07, 3-12-2019)
3-9-8: PENALTY:
   A.   Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be
grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of a business license or permit.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or in any manner
interfere with the enforcement of any penalty contained in any other chapter of
this Code.
   C.   A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 19-07, 3-12-2019)
CHAPTER 10
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definitions
3-10-2: Tax Imposed
3-10-3: Exclusions From Rent
3-10-4: Collection Of Tax
3-10-5: Penalties And Interest
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: Means any place providing temporary sleeping
accommodations to the public as specified in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-
103(1)(i), including tourist home, hotel, motel, or trailer court
accommodations.
   RENT: Includes all room charges paid or charged for transient accommodations
and services regularly rented for less than thirty (30) consecutive days, and
also includes timeshare fees or dues.
   TRANSIENT: Means a person who occupies a public accommodation for less than
thirty (30) consecutive days. (Ord. 19-01, 1-8-2019)
3-10-2: TAX IMPOSED:
There is levied and imposed a tax on the rent charged to transients occupying
public accommodations in an amount that is equal to one percent (1%) on charges
for the accommodations and services described in Utah Code Annotated subsection
59-12-103(1)(i). (Ord. 19-01, 1-8-2019)
3-10-3: EXCLUSIONS FROM RENT:
For purposes of this chapter, the following shall be excluded from the rent:
   A.   The amount of any Sales or Use Tax imposed by the State of Utah or by
any other government agency upon a retailer or consumer;
   B.   The amount of any Transient Room Tax levied under authority of Utah
Code Annotated title 17, chapter 31, as amended, or its successor;
   C.   Receipts from the sale of or service charge for any food, beverage or
room service charges in conjunction with the occupancy of the suite or room not
included in the base room rate; and
   D.   Charges made for supplying telephone service, gas or electrical energy
service not included in the base room rate. (Ord. 19-01, 1-8-2019)
3-10-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   The City shall contract with the Utah State Tax Commission for
assessment, administration, and enforcement services for all taxes assessed
under this chapter. Sums collected shall be remitted to the City in accordance
with that agreement.
   B.   All persons subject to this chapter shall make remittances in
accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the State Tax Commission
and as otherwise mandated by State law.
   C.   The tax enacted under this chapter shall be paid quarterly, on the
first day of January, April, July, and October of each calendar year, unless
the licensee is required to submit monthly remittances pursuant to State law or
regulations promulgated by the commission. Quarterly payments under this
chapter are timely, provided all sums owing are paid in full no later than
thirty (30) days from the quarterly payment date.
   D.   Licensees and all vendors or other persons subject to this chapter,
including persons acquiring a business or its assets, are liable for all
penalties, interest, costs of collection, statutory liens, and related remedies
available to the State Tax Commission for collection of unpaid taxes under the
Utah Sales and Use Tax Act, which remedies are incorporated by reference. (Ord.
19-01, 1-8-2019)
3-10-5: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
   A.   The penalty for failure to file a report within the time prescribed in
this chapter is the greater of twenty dollars ($20.00) or ten percent (10%) of
the unpaid tax due on the report.
   B.   Interest on any underpayment, deficiency or delinquency of any tax or
fee administered by the commission shall be computed from the time the original
return is due, to the date the payment received, at the rate of two (2)
percentage points above the Federal short-term rate. (Ord. 19-01, 1-8-2019)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Established
4-1-2: Fire Chief Position Created
4-1-3: Powers And Duties Of Fire Chief
4-1-4: Designation Of Emergency Vehicles
4-1-5: Responsibilities, Rights And Restrictions
4-1-6: Hazardous Material Cleanup
4-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created a Fire Department to be known as the South Weber Fire
Department. (Ord. 17-06, 5-9-2017)
4-1-2: FIRE CHIEF POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of Chief of the Fire Department. (1989
Code § 10-121)
4-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Supervision Of Department: The Fire Chief shall have responsibility for
the general supervision of the department.
   B.   Control And Extinguish Fire: During a fire, the Fire Chief shall have
full authority to take all measures as he shall deem necessary, subject to
State law, to control and extinguish the fire and for that purpose he is hereby
made a special peace officer.
   C.   Report Information To City Council: The Fire Chief shall, at least
quarterly, report to the City Council the condition of the fire equipment, the
number of fires and their causes and the estimated loss therefrom, together
with such other information as the City Council may request or as he shall deem
appropriate.
   D.   Enforce Fire Protection And Prevention: The Fire Chief shall strictly
enforce all of the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating to the
protection against and prevention of fire.
   E.   Maintain Equipment: The Fire Chief shall maintain the equipment of the
department in good repair and order and ready for use.
   F.   Establish Rules And Regulations: The Fire Chief, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and City Council, shall establish rules and regulations
for the operation of the department.
   G.   Delegate Duties: The Fire Chief may delegate his duties to any person
employed by the department, but such delegation shall not relieve the Fire
Chief of his responsibility for the performance thereof.
   H.   Investigation Of Fires: The Fire Chief shall cause all fires to be
promptly investigated to determine the cause of the fire and report the cause
of the fire, the time originated and such other information as may be relevant
to prevent other fires. (1989 Code § 10-122)
   I.   Employ Firefighters And Personnel: The Fire Chief may make
recommendations to the Mayor relating to the employment of firefighters and
such other personnel as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The Fire Chief may employ such additional personnel as the Mayor and
City Council may direct or authorize. (1989 Code § 10-123)
   J.   Inspections: The Fire Chief shall be responsible for fire inspections
of all businesses. (1998 Code)
4-1-4: DESIGNATION OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Fire trucks are hereby designated authorized emergency vehicles. (1989 Code §
10-131)
4-1-5: RESPONSIBILITIES, RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Removal Of Obstructions At Fire: The officer in charge at any fire may
order the removal or destruction of any fence, building or structure, or that
any utility be closed, cut or removed when deemed necessary to control,
extinguish or prevent the spread of fire. (1989 Code § 10-132)
   B.   Control Of Persons: All persons present at a fire shall obey the lawful
orders of any firefighters. (1989 Code § 10-133)
   C.   Interference With Firefighters In Discharge Of Duties: Every person at
the scene of any fire who wilfully disobeys the lawful orders of any public
officer or firefighter, or offers any resistance to or interference with the
efforts of any firefighter, or company of firefighters to extinguish the same,
or engages in any disorderly conduct calculated to prevent the same from being
extinguished, or who forbids, prevents or dissuades others from assisting to
extinguish the same, is guilty of an infraction and subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. (1989 Code § 10-134; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Unlawful Interference: Any person who shall wilfully hinder any officer
or firefighter in the discharge of his duty at a fire, or in any manner injure,
deface or destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the
City or who shall interfere with any fire company or person, or who shall
wilfully break or injure any water pipe or interfere with the water or its
source of supply, shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. (1989 Code § 10-135; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Investigation After Fire Report: The Fire Chief, or such other persons
as he shall designate, shall, after extinguishing a fire, make a prompt and
thorough investigation of the cause of the fire, the time the fire began, the
amount of loss and insurance, a description of the affected buildings and
premises, and shall secure all other useful information available, and record
the same in a record book kept for that purpose in the office of the department
and shall report the same to the City Council at such time as it may direct.
(1989 Code § 10-136)
   F.   Right To Enter And Inspect: The Fire Chief or his deputies, upon
presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter upon any
premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspections. (1989
Code § 10-137)
   G.   Persons Present Subject To Orders: Every capable person eighteen (18)
years or older present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer
in command and shall render assistance in the manner directed by the officer in
command. (1989 Code § 10-138; amd. 1998 Code)
   H.   False Alarm: It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in or report
to the Fire Department a false alarm or report of a fire or to tamper or remove
any part of the fire alarm system. (1989 Code § 10-139)
4-1-6: HAZARDOUS MATERIAL CLEANUP:
South Weber City shall be entitled to recover expenses it may incur in the
cleanup of any hazardous material emergency from any person, corporation,
partnership or other individual or entity who owned and/or had control over
and/or caused the release of the hazardous material involved in the hazardous
materials emergency pursuant to the following procedure:
   A.   The City shall determine responsibility for the emergency and notify
the responsible party by mail of the City's determination of responsibility and
the cost to be recovered.
   B.   The notice shall specify that the party determined responsible may
appeal the City's decision before a Hearing Officer designated by the Mayor and
establish a date by which the notice of appeal shall be filed. The appeal date
shall be no less than fifteen (15) days from the date of notice.
   C.   In the event the party determined responsible appeals the
determination, the Hearing Officer shall hold a public hearing to consider any
issues raised by the appeal, at which hearing the appealing party and the City
shall be entitled to present evidence in support of their respective position.
   D.   The Hearing Officer shall, after the hearing, make a recommendation to
the Mayor, who shall issue a decision assessing responsibility and costs.
In the event parties determined to be responsible for the repayment of
hazardous material emergency costs fail to make payment to the City within
thirty (30) days after a determination of any appeal by the Mayor or thirty
(30) days from the deadline for appeal in the event no appeal is filed, the
City may initiate legal action to recover from the parties determined
responsible the costs determined to be owing, including the City's reasonable
attorney fees. (Ord. 02-11, 8-13-2002)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Duty To Maintain Property
4-2-3: Declaration Of Public Nuisance
4-2-4: Restroom And Sewer Facilities
4-2-5: Blocking Water Courses
4-2-6: Junk
4-2-7: Weeds
4-2-8: Code Enforcement Officer - Examination Of Property - Notice
4-2-9: Abatement By City
4-2-10: Costs Of Removal To Be Included In Tax Notice
4-2-11: Alternate Citation Procedure - Criminal Prosecution
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED VEHICLES: Means any motor vehicle, trailer, or
semitrailer, not currently registered and licensed in this State or another
state, that cannot be operated in its existing condition because the parts
necessary for operation such as, but not limited to, tires, windshield, engine,
drive train, driver's seat, steering wheel or column, gas or brake pedals are
removed, destroyed, damaged, deteriorated, or nonconforming.
   JUNK: Means all discarded metals, scrap metals, iron, glass, paper, wood,
plastics, fiberglass, unused or discarded bicycles, tricycles or other
recreational vehicles or parts thereof, waste paper products, unused or
discarded building materials, machinery or machinery parts, lumber,
accumulations of dirt, gravel, ashes, concrete, or fire remains, or any
inoperable or abandoned vehicles, parts, or any other waste materials.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE: Means a crime against the order and economy of South Weber
City consisting in unlawfully doing any act or omitting to perform any duty,
which act or omission annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, or safety of three (3) or more persons; offends public decency;
unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders
dangerous for passage, any lake, stream, canal, or basin, or any public park,
square, street, or highway; is a nuisance as defined in Utah Code Annotated
section 78B-6-1107; or in any way renders three (3) or more persons insecure in
life or the use of property.
   A.   An act which affects three (3) or more persons in any of the ways
specified in this definition is still a nuisance regardless of the extent to
which the annoyance or damage inflicted on individuals is unequal.
   B.   Activities conducted in the normal and ordinary course of agricultural
operations, as defined in Utah Code Annotated subsection 78B-6-1101(7), and
conducted in accordance with sound agricultural practices are presumed to be
reasonable and not constitute a public nuisance. Agricultural operations
undertaken in conformity with Federal, State, and local laws and regulations,
including Zoning Ordinances, are presumed to be operating within sound
agricultural practices.
   WEEDS: Means any vegetation commonly referred to as weeds or which shall
have been designated noxious weeds by the Utah Commissioner of Agriculture.
(Ord. 16-06, 4-12-2016)
4-2-2: DUTY TO MAINTAIN PROPERTY:
   A.   There is hereby imposed upon every owner of real property, each
occupant who is not the property owner of record, and a person other than the
property owner of record who is responsible for the property, including a
manager or agent of the owner, the duty to maintain the property free from
injurious and noxious weeds, garbage and refuse, public nuisances, and illegal
objects or structures.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any property owner, manager, agent, or
occupant, to create or aid in creating or contributing to or maintaining a
public nuisance. (Ord. 16-06, 4-12-2016)
4-2-3: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   Every act or condition made, permitted, allowed or continued in
violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
abated and punished as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Public nuisances include:
      1.   Befouling Water: Befouling water in any spring, stream, well or
water source supplying water for culinary purposes.
      2.   Privies, Cesspools: Allowing any privy, vault or cesspool or other
individual wastewater disposal system to become a menace to health or a source
of odors or contamination to air or water.
      3.   Garbage Containers, Offensive: Permitting any garbage container to
remain on premises when it has become unclean and offensive.
      4.   Garbage Accumulation: Allowing vegetable waste, garbage, litter,
filth, or refuse of any nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley,
yard, or area, except when it is temporarily deposited for immediate removal.
      5.   Manure Accumulation: Permitting the accumulation of manure in any
stable, stall, corral, feed yard, yard or in any other building or area in
which any animals are kept.
      6.   Slaughterhouses, Feed Yards: Permitting any slaughterhouse, market,
meat shop, stable, feed yard or other place or building wherein any animals are
slaughtered, kept, fed or sold to remain unclean or in any state or condition
detrimental to health or creating a nuisance because of odors, or in which
flies or rodents breed.
      7.   Discharging Offensive Water Or Liquid Waste: Discharging or placing
any offensive water, chemical spray, liquid waste or refuse of any kind into
any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash, natural watercourse, ditch,
canal or any vacant lot or which, as the result of continued discharge, will
render the place of discharge offensive or likely to become so.
      8.   Collecting Grease, Offensive Matter: Keeping or collecting any stale
or putrid grease or other offensive matter.
      9.   Flies And Mosquitoes Breeding Grounds: Having or permitting upon any
premises any fly or mosquito producing condition.
      10.   Non-Decontaminated Public Drinking Vessels: Keeping any drinking
vessel for public use without providing a method of decontamination between
uses.
      11.   Ablutions Near Drinking Fountain: Permitting or performing any
ablutions in or near any public drinking fountain.
      12.   Boarding House Or Factory, Sanitary Condition: Failing to furnish
any dwelling house, boarding house or factory or other place of employment with
such privy vaults, water closets, sinks or other facilities as may be required
to maintain the same in sanitary condition.
      13.   Privy Vaults: Neglecting or refusing to discontinue use of, clean
out, disinfect and fill up all privy vaults and cesspools or other individual
wastewater disposal systems after notice from a Code Enforcement Officer.
      14.   Stagnant Water; Offensive Substances: Permitting any lot or
excavation to become the repository of stagnant water or any decaying or
offensive substances.
      15.   Obstructing Public Ways, Watercourses, Parks: Obstructing or
tending to obstruct or interfere with or render dangerous for passage any
street or sidewalks, lake, stream, drainage system, canal or basin, or any
public park without first obtaining the written permission of the City Council.
      16.   Blowing Dust And Soil: Airborne dust, sand and soil or the
continuance of conditions that create or allow such airborne particles that are
harmful to the health and well-being of the residents of the City or
destructive to property and natural resources.
   C.   The types of nuisances stated in this section shall be deemed in
addition to and in no way a limitation of the nuisances subject to this
chapter. (Ord. 16-06, 4-12-2016)
4-2-4: RESTROOM AND SEWER FACILITIES:
All restroom and sewer facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with Utah law and City ordinances. All restroom and sewer facilities
that do not comply with such provisions are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and are subject to abatement as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 16-
06, 4-12-2016)
4-2-5: BLOCKING WATER COURSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any drainage system, canal,
ditch, conduit, or other watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or
artificial, to become so obstructed as to cause the water to back up, overflow,
and cause damage, or to become unsanitary. Maintenance of any watercourse in
such condition shall constitute a public nuisance and the same shall be subject
to abatement as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 16-06, 4-12-2016)
4-2-6: JUNK:
   A.   Junk is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to
abatement or citation as prescribed in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for
any owner of property, a manager, an agent, or an occupant to permit junk to
accumulate or remain on or about the premises owned by or under the control of
such person whenever such items shall be unsightly and in public view, or
dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of the people of South Weber City.
Every owner of property, manager, agent, or occupant shall remove or provide
for the removal of junk before the same becomes objectionable, unsanitary, or
dangerous.
   B.   This section shall not apply to items which are clearly accessory and
incidental to any agricultural use permitted in the zone, or to items
completely and lawfully enclosed within a building or enclosure where it is not
visible from a public or private way or other public or private property and
which does not constitute a nuisance, endanger or adversely affect the health
or welfare of the community, or the keeping of which does not violate any other
law or ordinance. (Ord. 19-07, 3-12-2019)
4-2-7: WEEDS:
   A.   It is hereby declared that the growth and spread of injurious and
noxious weeds constitutes a public nuisance when they are over six inches (6")
in height, create a fire hazard; become a source of contamination or pollution
of water, air, or property; become a danger to health; become a breeding place
or habitation for insects or rodents or other forms of life deleterious to
humans; or are unsightly or deleterious to their surroundings.
   B.   Weeds shall be removed from real property within ten (10) days after
cutting. (Ord. 16-06, 4-12-2016)
4-2-8: CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - EXAMINATION OF PROPERTY - NOTICE:
   A.   Code Enforcement Officer Appointed: Pursuant to the authority granted
by Utah Code Annotated section
10-11-1, there is hereby established the position of Code Enforcement Officer.
Until another person is designated, the building inspector shall act as the
Code Enforcement Officer. More than one person may be appointed to act as Code
Enforcement Officer.
   B.   Duties: The Code Enforcement Officer shall perform all functions
necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter and examine and
investigate, as often as needed, real property for:
      1.   The growth and spread of injurious and noxious weeds;
      2.   Garbage and refuse;
      3.   A public nuisance; or
      4.   An illegal object or structure.
   C.   Written Notice Of Nuisance Or Objectionable Condition: If the Code
Enforcement Officer conducts an examination and investigation in accordance
with subsection B of this section and finds a violation of this chapter, the
officer shall deliver written notice of the examination and investigation by
serving written notice to a property owner of record according to the records
of the County Recorder in accordance with subsection D1 of this section, and by
serving written notice in accordance with subsection D2 of this section to a
non-owner occupant of the property or another person responsible for the
property who is not the owner of record, including a manager or agent of the
owners, if the property owner is not an occupant of the property.
   D.   Service Of Notice: The Code Enforcement Officer may serve the written
notice:
      1.   In person or by mail to the property owner of record, if mailed to
the last-known address of the owner according to the records of the County
Recorder; or
      2.   In person or by mail to a non-owner occupant or another person
responsible for the property who is not the owner of record, if mailed to the
property address.
   E.   Notice Requirements: In the written notice described in subsection C of
this section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall identify the property of
record according to the records of the County Recorder; describe the property
and the nature and results of the examination and investigation conducted in
accordance with this section; and require the property owner, occupant, or, if
applicable, another person responsible for the property to eradicate or destroy
and remove any identified item examined and investigated under subsection B of
this section, and comply with this requirement within the time period
designated by the Code Enforcement Officer but no less than ten (10) days after
the day on which notice is delivered in person or post-marked.
   F.   Injurious And Noxious Weeds Notice: For a notice described in
subsection C of this section of injurious and noxious weeds, the Code
Enforcement Officer is not required to make more than one notice for each
annual season of weed growth for weeds growing on a property.
   G.   Perjury: The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve the notice required
under subsection C of this section under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 16-06, 4-12-
2016)
4-2-9: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
   A.   If an owner of, occupant of, or other person responsible for real
property described in the notice delivered in accordance with section
4-2-8 of this chapter fails to comply with section
4-2-8 of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer may:
      1.   At the expense of the City, employ necessary assistance to enter the
property and destroy or remove an item identified in a written notice described
in section
4-2-8 of this chapter; and
      2.   a. Prepare an itemized statement in accordance with subsection B of
this section; and
         b.   Mail to the owner of record according to the records of the
County Recorder a copy of the statement demanding payment within thirty (30)
days after the day on which the statement is post- marked.
   B.   The statement described in subsection A2a of this section shall:
      1.   Include:
         a.   The address of the property described in subsection A of this
section;
         b.   An itemized list of and demand for payment for all expenses,
including administrative expenses, incurred by the City under subsection A1 of
this section; and
         c.   The address of the City Treasurer where payment may be made for
the expenses; and
      2.   Notify the property owner:
         a.   That failure to pay the expenses described in subsection A2a of
this section may result in a lien on the property in accordance with section
4-2-10 of this chapter;
         b.   That the owner may file a written objection to all or part of the
statement within twenty (20) days after the day of the statement post-mark; and
         c.   Where the owner may file the objection, including the City office
and address.
   C.   A statement mailed in accordance with subsection A of this section is
delivered when mailed by certified mail addressed to the property owner of
record's last-known address according to the records of the County Recorder.
   D.   1. The City may file a notice of lien, including a copy of the
statement described in subsection A2a of this section or a summary of the
statement, in the records of the County Recorder.
      2.   If the City files a notice of a lien indicating that the City
intends to certify the unpaid costs and expenses in accordance with subsection
B2 of this section and section
4-2-10 of this chapter, the City shall file for record in the County Recorder's
Office a release of the lien after all amounts owing are paid.
   E.   1. If an owner fails to file a timely written objection as described in
subsection B2b of this section or to pay the amount set forth in the statement
under subsection B1b of this section, the City may:
         a.   File an action in District Court; or
         b.   Certify the past due costs and expenses to the County Treasurer.
      2.   If the City pursues collection of the costs in accordance with
subsection E1a of this section, the City may:
         a.   Sue for and receive judgment for all removal and destruction
costs, including administrative costs, and reasonable attorney fees, interest,
and court costs; and
         b.   Execute on the judgment in the manner provided by law.
   F.   1. If a property owner files an objection in accordance with subsection
B2b of this section, the City Appeal Authority, as established in title 10,
chapter 4 of this Code, shall:
         a.   Hold a hearing in accordance with Utah Code Annotated title 52,
chapter 4, Open and Public Meetings Act; and
         b.   Mail or deliver notice of the hearing date and time to the
property owner.
      2.   At the hearing described in subsection F1a of this section, the
Appeal Authority shall review and determine the actual cost of abatement, if
any, incurred under subsection A1 of this section.
      3.   The property owner shall pay any actual cost due after a decision by
the Appeal Authority at the hearing described in subsection F1a of this section
to the City Treasurer within thirty (30) days after the day on which the
hearing is held.
   G.   If the property owner fails to pay in accordance with subsection F3 of
this section, the City may:
      1.   File an action in District Court for the actual cost determined
under subsection F3 of this section, or
      2.   Certify the past due costs and expenses to the County Treasurer.
(Ord. 16-06, 4-12-2016)
4-2-10: COSTS OF REMOVAL TO BE INCLUDED IN TAX NOTICE:
The City may certify to the County Treasurer the unpaid costs and expenses that
the City has incurred under section
4-2-9 of this chapter with regard to the property. If the City so certifies,
the County Treasurer shall follow the procedure of Utah Code Annotated section
10-11-4 and enter the amount of the costs and expenses on the assessment and
tax rolls of the County in the column prepared for that purpose. As required by
Utah Code Annotated section
10-11-4, the amount entered shall have the force and effect of a valid judgment
of the District Court, is a lien upon the property, and shall be collected by
the County Treasurer at the time of the payment of general taxes. (Ord. 16-06,
4-12-2016)
4-2-11: ALTERNATE CITATION PROCEDURE - CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
   A.   If the code enforcement officer determines that a nuisance exists in
violation of this chapter, the code enforcement officer may, as an alternate to
the notice, hearing, and abatement provisions of sections
4-2-8 and
4-2-9 of this chapter:
      1.   Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants of the premises
where such object and condition exist, together with a description of the
premises; and
      2.   Issue a Criminal Procedure Notice to the owner or occupant of the
property through either personal service to the owner or occupant, or through
certified mail addressed to the owner or occupant at their last known address
as disclosed by the records of the county recorder or as otherwise ascertained.
In the event the code enforcement officer elects to mail the notice, it shall
be deemed served when it is sent by certified mail.
   B.   The notice shall:
      1.   Require the person to whom it is sent to correct the violation
within such time as the code enforcement officer shall designate, which shall
not be less than ten (10) nor greater than twenty (20) days and shall be known
as the correction period, with the time given to remedy the violation beginning
the day following the day on which the notice is issued;
      2.   Contain a specific statement of the nature of the violation and
generally describe the premises on which the violation exists;
      3.   Inform the person to whom the notice is issued that after the
correction period, if the violation has not been fully remedied, the matter
will be referred for criminal prosecution;
      4.   Inform the person that in the event criminal prosecution is pursued,
the prosecution shall be for a misdemeanor except regarding an individual’s pet
or use of the individual’s residence which shall be an infraction unless:
         a.   A fine has been imposed for a violation involving the same
residence or pet on three previous occasions within the past 12- month period;
         b.   Violation is a nuisance as defined in state code 78B-6-1101(1);
         c.   Violation threatens the health, safety, or welfare of the
individual or an identifiable third party; or
         d.   Violation is of building or fire code.
   C.   In the event the person complies with the notice, the person shall
notify the code enforcement officer of their compliance. Within five (5) days
of receiving notice of compliance, the code enforcement officer shall again
inspect the property.
      1.   If the property complies with this chapter, the code enforcement
officer shall notify any other offices or persons who have received notice of
the violation of compliance and no criminal action shall be brought.
      2.   In the event the property still does not comply with the provisions
of this chapter, the code enforcement officer shall issue a Final Criminal
Procedure Notice, clearly stating the reasons the property is still considered
in violation of this chapter.
      3.   In the event a final notice is issued for the same violation and the
person again asks for inspection and the violation is still not corrected to
the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer, the matter shall be referred
to the city prosecutor for criminal prosecution. In no case shall the code
enforcement officer issue more than one criminal procedure notices for the same
violation within a 14-day period.
   D.   In the event the person to whom the notice was issued fails or neglects
to correct the violation, the code enforcement officer shall refer the matter
to the city prosecutor for prosecution.
   E.   The commencement of criminal proceedings for the purpose of imposing
penalties for violations of this chapter shall not be conditioned upon prior
issuance of any notification or the granting to the defendant an opportunity to
abate or remove the nuisance.
   F.   The provisions of this chapter relating to notice and abatement and
criminal procedure notice shall be deemed merely alternative and additional
methods of securing conformity to the provisions of this chapter.
   G.   Any owner, occupant, or person having an interest in property subject
to this chapter who shall fail to comply with the notice given pursuant to this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor except for violations pertaining to an
individual’s pet or use of residence which shall be infractions. (Ord. 19-07,
3-12-2019)
CHAPTER 3
ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Unlawful Acts
4-3-3: Impounding
4-3-4: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in interpretation and enforcement of this
chapter:
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY: Any real property within the City which is not a street or
highway.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the user of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and
transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
(1989 Code § 10-471)
4-3-2: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   A.   Abandonment: No person shall abandon any vehicle within the City and no
person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the City for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have
been abandoned.
   B.   Leaving Wrecked Or Non-Operating Vehicle On Street: No person shall
leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any
street or highway within the City.
   C.   Time Limit On Private Property: No person in charge or control of any
property within the City, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or
otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked
or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than thirty (30) days,
and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the City for
a longer time than thirty (30) days. This subsection shall not apply to a
vehicle in an enclosed building or in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in the lawful place and manner. (Ord. 19-07, 3-12-2019)
4-3-3: IMPOUNDING:
The County Sheriff or any member of the County Sheriff's Department designated
by the County Sheriff is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any
vehicle left at any place within the City which reasonably appears to be in
violation of this chapter or be lost, stolen or unclaimed or disposed of in
accordance with State law. (1989 Code § 10-475; amd. 1998 Code)
4-3-4: PENALTY:
   A.   Any persons violating any of the provision of this chapter, unless
involving an individual's pet or use of an individual's residence, shall be
deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-9-1 of this code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
   B.   Violations that involve an individual's pet or use of an individual's
residence shall be deemed infractions and ongoing violations may be cited every
14-days until compliant. Multiple violations for the same offense may be cited
as class C misdemeanors and result in increased fine amounts. (1989 Code § 10-
476; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2020-03, 7-21-2020)
CHAPTER 4
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Use Of Collection System Required
4-4-3: Collection Of Garbage
4-4-4: Service Charges; Payment
4-4-5: Containers
4-4-6: Closing Of Containers Required
4-4-7: Pick Up Of Garbage
4-4-8: Accumulation Prohibited
4-4-9: Open Burning
4-4-10: Delivery Of Waste To Facility
4-4-11: Spring Cleanup Policy
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
   AGRICULTURAL BURNING: Open burning in rural areas, essential to agricultural
operations, including the growing of crops, the raising of fowl, animals or
bees, when conducted on the premises where produced. There must be a minimum of
two and a half (2.5) acres of agriculturally zoned property and only fields,
ditches and trimmings from fruit and nut trees will be considered agricultural
burning.
   AIR CONTAMINANT: Any particulate matter or any gas, vapor, suspended or
solid or any combination thereof, excluding steam and water vapors.
   AIR CONTAMINANT SOURCE: Any and all sources of emission of air contaminants
whether privately or publicly owned or operated.
   AIR POLLUTION: The presence in the ambient air of one or more contaminants
in quantities or characteristics and under conditions and circumstances, and of
a duration sufficient to cause or contribute to injury to human, plant or
animal life or health or to property or which unreasonably interferes with the
enjoyment of life or use of property, as determined by the standards, rules and
regulations adopted by the State Air Conservation Committee.
   APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY: The Davis County Health Officer or his designee.
   ATMOSPHERE: The air that envelops or surrounds the earth and includes all
spaces outside of buildings, stacks or exterior ducts.
   AUTHORIZED LOCAL AUTHORITY: A City, County or combination Health Department;
a City, County or combination Fire Department; or other local agency duly
designated by appropriate authority, with approval of State Division of Health,
as the agency to issue permits for open burning under regulations of the State
Department of Health and other lawfully adopted ordinances, codes or
regulations not in conflict therewith.
   CLEARING INDEX: A number indicating the predicted rate of clearance of
ground level pollutants from a given area. This number is calculated by the
U.S. Weather Bureau, from daily measurements of temperature lapse rates and
wind speeds and directions from ground level to ten thousand feet (10,000').
   DEPARTMENT: The Davis County Department of Health.
   EMISSION: The act of discharging into the atmosphere an air contaminant or
an effluent which contains or may contain an air contaminant; or the effluent
so discharged into the atmosphere.
   GARBAGE: All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, including wastes
attendant thereto.
   HEAVY FUEL OIL: A petroleum product or similar material heavier than diesel
fuel.
   HOUSEHOLD WASTE: Any solid or liquid material normally generated by a family
in a residence in the course of ordinary day-to-day living; including but not
limited to garbage, paper products, rags, leaves and garden trash.
   OPEN BURNING: Any burning of combustible materials where the products of
combustion are emitted into open air without passing through a chimney or
stack.
   PERSON: Any individual; public or private corporation, partnership,
association, firm, trust or estate; the State or any department, institution,
bureau, or agency thereof, any municipal corporation, county, city and county
or other political subdivision of the State, or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by the law as being subject to rights and
duties.
   RECREATIONAL FIRES: Campfires or other fires solely for recreational
purposes which can be safely confined to a fire ring no larger than three feet
(3') in diameter and are continuously under the supervision of a responsible
person. Anyone planning a fire larger than this will be required to obtain a
special permit. Bonfires, fires built to burn Christmas trees, rally fires and
similar fires are prohibited.
   REFUSE: Any solid waste, including garbage and trash.
   SALVAGE OPERATION: Any business, trade or industry engaged in whole or part
in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including, but not limited
to, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
   TRASH: Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive, including,
but not limited to, clothing, rags, leather, plastic, rubber, floor coverings,
excelsior, tree leaves, yard trimmings or other similar materials.
   WASTE: All solid, liquid or gaseous material, including but not limited to,
garbage, trash, household waste, construction or demolition debris, or other
refuse including that resulting from the prosecution of any business, trade or
industry. (1989 Code § 10-411; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 17-06, 5-9-2017)
4-4-2: USE OF COLLECTION SYSTEM REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or lessee of any real property to allow
garbage, dead animals or other refuge to be accumulated on such premises. All
residents of the City are required to use the garbage collection system and to
remit such fees to the City. (1989 Code § 10-415)
4-4-3: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE:
   A.   Authority: The City or its agent shall collect, remove and dispose of
all residential and commercial garbage, the removal of which is not otherwise
provided for by the establishment or institution as herein provided. All
garbage and refuse shall be collected, removed and disposed of with such
frequency and in such manner as the City Council may from time to time
establish by regulation. (1989 Code § 10-412)
   B.   Moving, Hauling Or Transporting: Except as otherwise expressly
permitted by this chapter, no person may move, haul or transport garbage or
refuse on the streets or public ways of the City, unless that person is:
      1.   A City employee or agent;
      2.   A hauler or collector of commercial garbage and/or refuse, operating
in compliance with a permit or license issued by the City;
      3.   A hauler or collector of waste or garbage operating under a contract
with the City; or
      4.   A resident of the City hauling his or her own garbage, trash or
community waste.
   C.   Charges Not Eliminated: Nothing in this Section shall be construed as
eliminating the charge made for garbage service. (1989 Code § 10-412; amd. 1998
Code)
4-4-4: SERVICE CHARGES; PAYMENT:
   A.   Established: The City Council shall from time to time enact by
resolution the service charge for garbage pickup. (1989 Code § 10-413)
   B.   Method Of Payment:
      1.   The garbage service charges above imposed by this Section shall be
added to the charge made for water furnished through the water system of the
City and shall be billed and collected in the same manner as water service
charges are billed and collected.
      2.   In the event that the obligee for the water service charges and the
obligee for the garbage service charges do not coincide, or in the event that
practical economic and administrative reasons do not make combined billing and
collection feasible in the opinion of the City Council, the garbage service
charges may be collected with such frequency and in such manner as the City
Council shall by regulation provide. (1989 Code § 10-414)
4-4-5: CONTAINERS:
   A.   Required: All garbage and refuse to be collected by the City shall be
placed only in approved containers as provided by the City. All other solid
waste not collected by the City shall be placed in suitable and sufficient
garbage receptacles with tight fitting lids or in water resistant paper or
plastic bags manufactured specifically for use in solid waste collection.
   B.   Number Issued; Title: All residential users within the City shall be
issued one approved container by the City. Title to the containers shall be
retained by the City and payment made by the user thereof shall be rental for
the use of the receptacle.
   C.   Maintenance: Users renting containers furnished by the City, or having
custody thereof, shall maintain the container in its original color and keep it
free from destructive or decorative markings. Users shall also keep the inside
of the container clean and free from build up of fungus or other contaminants
that cause odors or facilitate deterioration of the container.
   D.   Damage; Reporting: Users of the containers shall report to the City,
any damage to or malfunctioning of containers that limit their usefulness for
solid waste handling.
   E.   Replacement: Containers which are lost, missing or destroyed through no
fault of the user shall be replaced by the City without charge. Containers
which are lost or rendered useless through negligence or abuse on the part of
the user shall be replaced at the expense of the user.
   F.   Nontransferable: Containers furnished by the City are issued to
specific users by number and are nontransferable. Upon discontinuance of use by
a resident, containers shall be returned to the City. (1989 Code § 10-416)
4-4-6: CLOSING OF CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
Containers provided by the City shall not be overfilled to the extent that the
contents may be spilled during the process of pickup and dumping into the
garbage collection vehicle. All solid waste not deposited for pickup by the
City shall be placed in rainproof and flyproof containers of the type herein
required and such receptacle shall be tightly closed in such a manner as to
prevent odors or flies. (1989 Code § 10-417)
4-4-7: PICK UP OF GARBAGE:
   A.   Day And Time: Until otherwise provided by regulation, garbage and
refuse must not be set out upon the street for collection prior to the evening
of the day before collection and must be set out on the day of collection
before the hour of collection designated by regulations of the City Council.
   B.   Placement: All garbage and refuse subject to collection by the City
shall be placed on the edge of the street or curb in such a manner that it is
not within ten feet (10') of a mailbox, tree or other object which might
prevent the garbage collection vehicle from reaching the container. The
container shall be placed with the wheels and hinge toward the residence or
business and the lid opening toward the street. Where curb exists, the
container's wheels shall be place as close as reasonably possible to the curb.
Where no curb exists, the container shall be placed at the edge of, but not on,
the traveled portion of the street. When snow or street construction prevent
the proper placement of the container, it shall be placed as close as possible
to the designated location and in such a manner as to not obstruct traffic.
   C.   Removal: All empty receptacles must be removed from the street as soon
as practicable after being emptied and in every case, must be removed from the
street the same day they are emptied. Receptacles shall not be permitted to
remain on the street longer than may be necessary for the removal of the
contents. (1989 Code § 10-418)
4-4-8: ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate garbage or refuse or cause
garbage or refuse to be deposited upon any street or alley or upon any premises
in the City without express permission from the City. The City may permit the
feeding or processing of garbage or refuse upon premises properly equipped and
maintained so as to prevent the creation of a nuisance or a hazard to health,
or permit the depositing of ashes and other dry material for filling purposes
at such places as the City may designate and under such restrictions as the
City Council may by regulation impose. Additionally, the Health Officer may
grant to any person permission for sorting, bailing and marketing trade waste
upon premises properly equipped and maintained. (1989 Code § 10-415; amd. 1998
Code)
4-4-9: OPEN BURNING:
   A.   Community Waste Site: No open burning shall be done at sites used for
disposal of community trash, garbage and other wastes except when authorized
for a specific period of time by the State Air Conservation Committee on the
basis of justifiable circumstances reviewed and weighed in terms of pollution
effects and other relevant considerations at appropriate hearing following
written application. (1989 Code § 10-420)
   B.   General Prohibition; Exceptions: No person shall burn any trash,
garbage or other wastes, nor shall conduct any salvage operation, in any open
fire except in conformity with the provisions of subsection C of this Section.
(1989 Code § 10-421)
   C.   Permissible Burning:
      1.   Without Permit: When not prohibited by other laws or by other
officials having jurisdiction and provided that a nuisance is not created, the
following types of open burning are permissible without the necessity of
securing a permit:
         a.   In devices for the primary purpose of preparing food such as
outdoor grills and fireplaces.
         b.   Recreational fires.
         c.   Indoor fireplaces and stoves.
         d.   Properly operated industrial flares for combustion of flammable
gases. (1989 Code § 10-422)
      2.   With Permit: When not prohibited by other laws or other officials
having jurisdiction and when a nuisance or threat to life or property is not
created, the types of burning listed in subsections C2a through C2d of this
Section are permissible: a) under the terms of individual permits issued by
authorized local authority under a clearing index system approved and
coordinated with the Utah State Department of Health; or b) when specifically
exempted by the State Air Conservation Committee and the Davis County Board of
Health, following written application and appropriate hearing. Application
under b) may be made by a political subdivision of the State as well as by any
individual citizen.
         a.   Agricultural burning, including on-premises orchard prunings,
field stubble and weeds, and open burning to clear irrigation ditches. Tires,
heavy fuel oil or other materials which can cause severe air pollution shall
not be used to start fires or keep fires burning.
         b.   Open burning of solid or liquid fuels or structures for removal
of hazards for firefighter training purposes when conducted under the direct
control and supervision of organized fire departments.
         c.   Open burning, in remote areas, of highly explosive or other
dangerous materials, for which there is no other known practical method of
disposal. (1989 Code § 10-423)
         d.   Open burning for special purposes or under unusual circumstances
when approved by the Davis County Health Department following formal request
therefor. (1989 Code § 10-423; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Permit Issuance: The Health Department shall establish a procedure for
issuance of burning permits under the terms of the Code of Open Burning
Regulation. Department, law enforcement and Fire Department personnel shall
devise a method of visual determination of any violation of the Code of Open
Burning Regulations and shall institute appropriate enforcement procedures as
necessary. (1989 Code § 10-424)
4-4-10: DELIVERY OF WASTE TO FACILITY:
   A.   Contract: The City has entered into a solid waste disposal services
contract with Davis County Solid Waste Management and Energy Recovery Special
Service District, pursuant to which contract the City has agreed to supervise
and regulate the collection, transportation and disposition of all processible
waste ("processible waste" constituting "solid waste", as defined in the Solid
Waste Management Act, which is processible by the facility) generated within
the jurisdiction (including any territory annexed thereto in the future) as
authorized by the Solid Waste Management Act.
   B.   Required: Beginning on the date when the owner of the solid waste
management facility gives the City notice to commence delivery of processible
waste to the facility or notice is given to commence delivery of processible
waste to the landfill, all persons (including private collectors of solid waste
operating with the jurisdiction of the City) shall deliver all "processible
waste", as defined in subsection A of this Section, generated within this City
and any territory annexed thereto in the future, to the facility or the
landfill in accordance with contract; provided however, that in the event the
facility is operating at capacity or is shutdown as provided in the solid waste
disposal contract referred to in subsection A of this Section, such persons,
including private collectors of solid waste operating within the jurisdiction
of the City, shall, upon the direction of owner of the facility, deliver all
processible waste to the landfill or landfills within Davis County. (1989 Code
§ 10-425)
4-4-11: SPRING CLEANUP POLICY:
   A.   Limbs And Burnable Items; Bundles:
      1.   Length: All tree limbs and burnable items will be cut into four foot
(4') lengths and bundled.
      2.   Placement: All bundles must be placed along side of the street and/
or curb; however, the items can only remain along side of the street for a
period of two (2) days. They must not obstruct the vision of drivers of
vehicles; nor can they be placed in such a fashion that would cause any bodily
harm to any car, bicyclist or pedestrian. (Res. 93-010, 4-13-1993; amd. 1998
Code)
      3.   Weight: All bundles need to weigh less than forty (40) pounds.
   B.   Special Needs: The City will take by individual case any special needs
as determined by the Public Works Director. However, no employee of the City
may enter into a resident's property to pick up any items, everything will need
to be brought out to the street.
   C.   Items Not Picked Up: The City will not pick up the following items:
appliances, batteries, furniture or anything that is not burnable and/or
considered garbage. (Res. 93-010, 4-13-1993)
CHAPTER 5
   GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Board Of Health Designated
4-5-2: Regulations Adopted
4-5-1: BOARD OF HEALTH DESIGNATED:
The Davis County Health Department is hereby designated as the Board of Health
of the City. (1989 Code § 10-211)
4-5-2: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The City hereby adopts the Davis County health regulations, as amended from
time to time. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 6
LITTER; HANDBILLS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Handbills And Posters; Restricted Activity
4-6-3: Litter Regulations
4-6-4: Handbill Regulations
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter:
   AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE: A public or private litter storage and collection
receptacle.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:
   A.   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
   B.   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest in sales thereof;
   C.   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. However, the terms of this
clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the
same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained
in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place
of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without
a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this State,
or under any ordinance of the City; or
   D.   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
   GARBAGE: Waste from the preparation, cooking or consumption of food,
condemned food products and all refuse and waste from the handling, storage,
preparation and sale of produce. Garbage originates primarily in kitchens,
stores, markets, restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled,
stored, sold, cooked and consumed.
   LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety, welfare or appearance of the City.
   NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general or local circulation or any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per
year and sold to the public.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a "commercial handbill"
or "newspaper".
   PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
public area in the City, owned or used by the City.
   REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals and solid
market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
   VEHICLE: Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks. (1989 Code § 10-431)
4-6-2: HANDBILLS AND POSTERS; RESTRICTED ACTIVITY:
No person or business shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise fix, or
cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card,
poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the
attention of the public, or upon any sidewalk, curb or any other portion or
part of any public way or public place or any lamp post, electric light,
telegraph, telephone or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or
upon the columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any
bridge or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture
of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be authorized
or required by the laws of the United States or the State and the ordinances of
the City. (1989 Code § 10-449A)
4-6-3: LITTER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Litter In Public Places: No person shall throw or deposit litter in or
on any street, sidewalk or other public place except:
      1.   In authorized receptacles for collection or in official City garbage
dumps; or
      2.   For collection as authorized by the City Council. (1989 Code § 10-
432)
   B.   Placement Of Litter In Receptacles: Persons placing litter in
authorized receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being
carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public
place or on private property. (1989 Code § 10-433)
   C.   Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited: No person shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter
from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway,
except as authorized by the City Council. Persons owning or occupying property
shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (1989 Code §
10-434)
   D.   Merchants' Duty To Keep Sidewalks Free Of Litter: No person owning or
occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street
or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
places of business shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises
free of litter. (1989 Code § 10-435)
   E.   Litter Thrown By Person In Vehicle: No person, while a driver or
passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter on any street or other
public place, or on private property. (1989 Code § 10-436)
   F.   Truck Loads Causing Litter: No person shall drive or move any truck or
other vehicle unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck,
the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or
other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of
any kind. (1989 Code § 10-437)
   G.   Litter In Parks: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park,
except in authorized receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the
park or on any street or other public place. Where authorized receptacles are
not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein. (1989 Code § 10-438)
   H.   Litter In Lakes And Fountains: No person shall throw or deposit litter
in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or
elsewhere within the City. (1989 Code § 10-439)
   I.   Litter On Occupied Private Property: No person shall throw or deposit
litter on any occupied private property, whether owned by such person or not,
except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will
be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on any private property. (1989 Code § 10-447)
   J.   Litter On Vacant Lots: No person shall throw or deposit litter on any
open or vacant private property, whether or not owned by such person. (1989
Code § 10-448)
4-6-4: HANDBILL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Throwing Or Distributing In Public Places; Penalty: No person shall
throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the City. Unless otherwise
authorized by the City Council, it is an infraction and subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code for any person to hand out, distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not
be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place for any person to
hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (1989 Code § 10-440;
amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Placing On Vehicles: Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council,
no person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
on any vehicle; provided however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public
place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver
thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to
accept it. (1989 Code § 10-441)
   C.   Depositing On Uninhabited Or Vacant Premises: No person shall throw or
deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any private premises
which is temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (1989 Code § 10-
442)
   D.   Prohibiting Distribution Where Properly Posted: No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill on any private
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on
said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign being
the words "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or Agents", "No Advertisements", or
any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises
do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed or to
have any such handbills left on such premises. (1989 Code § 10-443)
   E.   Distributing At Inhabited Private Premises: No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on private
premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or on
such private premises. However, in case of inhabited private premises which are
not posted, as provided in this section, such person, unless requested by
anyone on such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in
or on such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or
deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted
about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except
that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by Federal postal law or
regulations. (1989 Code § 10-444)
   F.   Exception For Mail And Newspapers: The provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers,
except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner so
as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on private property. (1989 Code § 10-445)
   G.   Posting Notice Prohibited: No person shall post or affix any notice,
poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the
public, to any lamp post, public utility pole or shade tree, or on any public
structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. (1989
Code § 10-446)
CHAPTER 7
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definition
4-7-2: Permit Required
4-7-3: Application For Permit
4-7-4: Issuance Of Permit
4-7-5: Control Of Animal And Fowl Facilities
4-7-6: Keeping Animals
4-7-7: Existing Businesses And Facilities
4-7-1: DEFINITION:
"Offensive businesses", within the meaning of this Chapter, shall include, but
not be limited to, packing houses, dairies, tanneries, canneries, renderies,
junk or salvage yards, bone factories, slaughterhouses, butcher shops, soap
factories, foundries, breweries, distilleries, livery stables, blacksmith shops
or any other enterprise or establishment which creates excessive odors, fumes,
smoke, gases, noises or dust. (1989 Code § 10-241B; amd. Ord. 98-13, 7-14-1998)
4-7-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall commence or change the location of an offensive business or
establishment in or within one mile of the limits of the City without first
filing an application for a permit to do so with the City Recorder. (1989 Code
§ 10-241A)
4-7-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application for a permit shall specify the location at which the business
or establishment is to be operated and maintained or the new location to which
it is to be moved. The application shall describe the type of activity which
will be conducted and describe the manner in which the business or
establishment shall eliminate, control or modify the emission by the business
of the undesirable odors, fumes, noises and other noisome features and the
manner in which it shall be screened from public view, if its appearance is
offensive. (1989 Code § 10-241C)
4-7-4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   Report And Recommendation: The City Recorder shall cause a study to be
made of the proposed business or relocation of any offensive business or
establishment by the County Board of Health and by personnel engaged in the
inspection of buildings and other facilities. A report and recommendation shall
be made to the City Council. The City Council, after review, may grant to the
applicant an opportunity to be heard and present additional facts. Thereafter
the City Council may:
      1.   Deny the application.
      2.   Recommend a modification thereof.
      3.   Grant a limited permit to enter into the business or make the change
of location subject to the requirement that the business or facility conform to
standards established by the City Council with reference to controlling the
offensive features of the business.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: In the event a permit is granted, it shall be
subject to revocation either upon failure of the operator or owner to conduct
his business in the manner specified by the City Council at the time of the
granting of the permit, or because a change of circumstances makes the
continued operation or maintenance of the business or facility a public
nuisance.
   C.   Modification Of Permit: The City Council shall have power to revoke or
modify the permission to operate and maintain the business in such a manner as
it deems necessary for the public good. (1989 Code § 10-242)
4-7-5: CONTROL OF ANIMAL AND FOWL FACILITIES:
   A.   Location And Management: The City Council shall have the power to
prohibit or control the location and management of any offensive, unwholesome
business or establishment in or within one mile of the City. The Council may
compel the owner of any pigsty, privy, barn corral, fur-bearing animal farm,
feed yard, poultry farm or other unwholesome or nauseous house or place, to
cleanse, abate or remove the same.
   B.   Examination Of Operation: The City Council may, on its own initiative
and shall, on complaint of a member of the public, examine the operation,
control or location of any business or facility for the purpose of determining
whether or not the operation of such business or facility should be improved so
as to minimize the offensive and unwholesome characteristics or whether the
business or activity should be moved or abated.
   C.   Notification Of Abatement: In the event that the city council decides
that the business or facility should be abated, removed or controlled, it shall
notify the owner or operator of the business or facility of such fact. (1989
Code § 10-244)
   D.   Hearing; Limited Permit: After a hearing, the city council may issue a
limited permit wherein it may prescribe the specifications and standards which
must be followed by the business or facility in order to be permitted to
continue in operation. (1989 Code § 10-244; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Abatement Or Removal: Upon a determination by the city council that the
business or facility is a nuisance, it shall have power to order the abatement
or removal of the facility or establishment. If the owner fails to conform to
such order, the city council shall have power to bring all necessary legal
proceedings to force removal, abatement or adherence to standards. (1989 Code §
10-244)
4-7-6: KEEPING ANIMALS:
The keeping of animals shall be in accordance with the city's land use title.
(Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006)
4-7-7: EXISTING BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Investigation By City Council: The city council may require an
investigation of any existing offensive business or facility to determine
whether or not it should be permitted to remain in existence in or within one
mile of the city limits. If the city council determines that the continuation
of the business or facility has become a nuisance to persons situated within
the city limits or that ample control is not being exercised to minimize the
creation of excessive odors, fumes, smoke, gases and noise, it shall notify the
owner or operator thereof that the city council is considering revoking or
modifying the operator's permit.
   B.   Conform To Standards And Specifications: If the city council decides to
require a modification of the manner in which the business or facility is to be
maintained, it shall specify the standards or specifications to which the
enterprise must conform or otherwise lose its permit to engage thereafter in
the business or activity. (1989 Code § 10-243; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 8
NOISE RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
4-8-1: Purpose
4-8-2: Applicability
4-8-3: Definitions
4-8-4: Standards For Measuring Sound Levels
4-8-5: Sound Level Limitations
4-8-6: Restricted Uses Or Activities
4-8-7: Exceptions To Noise Ordinance
4-8-8: Special Permit
4-8-9: Motor Vehicle Noise
4-8-10: Enforcement
4-8-11: Other Code Provisions
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety,
welfare, peace, quiet, and quality of life for the citizens of the city through
the reduction, control, and prevention of excessive noise. It is the intent of
this chapter to establish standards that will eliminate and reduce unnecessary
and excessive traffic and community noise, which are physically harmful or
detrimental to individuals and the community in the enjoyment of life, property
and conduct of business. (Ord. 2022-09, 7-12-2022)
4-8-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter apply to sound generated from real property
located within the city. It shall have no applicability to all aspects of the
employer-employee relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the
confines of a place of employment. (Ord. 2022-09, 7-12-2022)
4-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
"A"           The electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing
WEIGHTING:    frequency sensitivity.
AMBIENT SOUND The total sound pressure level in the area of interest including the
LEVEL:        noise source of interest.
BACKGROUND    The total sound pressure level in the area of interest excluding the
SOUND LEVEL:  noise source of interest.
              Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided
CLEARLY       hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under
AUDIBLE:      investigation is a sound amplification device, the detection of the
              rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to verify clearly
              audible sound.
COMMERCIAL    Any area of the city with a zoning designation of Commercial (C),
AREA,         Commercial Recreation (C-R), Highway Commercial (C-H), Business Commerce
COMMERCIAL    (B-C), Professional Office (P-O) under title 10 of this code, and the
ZONE:         abutting public streets and public premises.
COMMERCIAL    Any equipment or device rated at more than five (5) horsepower and used
POWER         for home or building repairs or grounds maintenance.
EQUIPMENT:
              Any premises involving traffic in goods or furnishing of services for
              sale or profit, including, but not limited to:
              A.   Banking and other financial institutions;
              B.   Dining establishments;
COMMERCIAL    C.   Establishments for providing retail services;
PREMISES:     D.   Establishments for recreation and entertainment;
              E.   Office buildings;
              F.   Transportation; or
              G.   Warehouses; and
              H.   Any other premises allowed in a commercial zone other than a use
              categorized as a residential premises or industrial premises.
              Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration, or similar
CONSTRUCTION  action, including demolition of buildings or structures, which produces
ACTIVITY:     sound clearly audible at the property line of the premises from which
              the sound originates.
              Any equipment or device, such as, but not limited to, pile drivers,
              power shovels, derricks, hoist tractors, loaders, rollers, concrete
              hauling motor vehicles, pavement breakers, bulldozers, crawler-tractors,
CONSTRUCTION  rotary drills and augers, cranes, ditchers, trenchers, scrapers, wagons,
EQUIPMENT:    pumps, compressors and pneumatic power equipment, or other mechanical
              apparatus operated by fuel or electric power in the construction, repair
              or demolition of any building, structure, land, street, alley, waterways
              or appurtenance thereto.
dBA:          The A-weighted unit of sound pressure level.
DECIBEL (dB): The unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified
              location. The symbol is "dB".
DEVICE:       Any equipment or mechanism which is intended to produce, or which
              actually produces sound when operated or handled.
              Any equipment or device rated at five (5) horsepower or less and used
DOMESTIC      for home or building repairs or grounds maintenance, including, but not
POWER         limited to, power saw, sander, vacuum, lawn mower, leaf blower, and
EQUIPMENT:    garden equipment. "Domestic Power Equipment" does not include snow
              blowers or other snow removal equipment.
              Any work or action necessary to deliver essential services including,
EMERGENCY     but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electric, telephone, sewer
WORK:         facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees
              on public streets, or abating life-threatening conditions.
ENFORCEMENT   A peace officer, or an officer or employee of the city authorized by
OFFICER:      administrative order of the mayor to enforce all or part of the
              provisions of this chapter.
IMPULSIVE     A sound having a duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset
SOUND:        and rapid decay.
INDUSTRIAL    Any manufacturing zone.
AREA:
INDUSTRIAL    Any premises where manufacturing, processing, fabrication, or production
PREMISES:     of goods or products takes place.
INDUSTRIAL    Any area of the city with a zoning designation of L-I, T-1, N-R under
ZONE:         the zoning ordinances under title 10 of this code, and the abutting
              public streets and public premises.
              Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is
              propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but
              not operated upon rails, except vehicles moved solely by human power and
MOTOR         motorized wheelchairs. "Motor vehicle" shall not include power
VEHICLE:      equipment, auxiliary equipment, and sound amplification devices on or
              within motor vehicles, that are not operated by or driven by the motor
              vehicle engine propelling system, or any "motor vehicle" operated on
              private property for recreational or amusement purposes.
              Any building, structure, land, utility, or portion thereof, including
PREMISES:     all appurtenances, and shall include yards, lots, courts, inner yards,
              common areas and real properties without buildings or improvements,
              owned or controlled by a person.
PROPERTY      The real or imaginary line and its vertical extension which separates
LINE:         one parcel of real property from another, or the vertical and horizontal
              boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a multiple dwelling unit.
              All real property owned, operated, or maintained by either the city or
PUBLIC PARK:  other public governmental entity, and used as a park, playground,
              swimming pool, golf course, waterway, nature center, or other
              recreational facility.
PUBLIC        Any premises, which is owned, leased, or controlled by any public
PREMISES:     governmental entity.
              All real property and improvements thereon used or dedicated as a public
PUBLIC        right of way for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, including any highway,
STREET:       boulevard, parkway, avenue, street, road, sidewalk, park strip, or
              alley.
PURE TONE:    Any sound that can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or set of
              single pitches.
RESIDENTIAL   Any area of the city with a zoning designation of Agricultural (A),
AREA,         Residential Low Density (R-L), Residential Low-Moderate Density (R-LM),
RESIDENTIAL   Residential Moderate Density (R-M), Residential Patio (R-P), Residential
ZONE:         Multifamily Five (R-5) under title 10 of this code and the abutting
              public streets and public premises.
              Any premises located within a residential zone or commercial zone where
RESIDENTIAL   single or multiple dwelling units exist, or where public parks, schools,
PREMISES:     churches, hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the aged, and similar
              institutional facilities are located.
SOUND:        An oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement and particle
              velocity which induces auditory sensation.
SOUND         Any device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other
AMPLIFICATION sound, including, but not limited to, radios, televisions, phonographs,
DEVICE:       stereos, record players, cassette players, compact disc players,
              loudspeakers, or sound amplifiers.
              The instantaneous sound pressure level measured in decibels with a sound
SOUND LEVEL:  level meter set for A-weighting on slow integration speed, unless
              otherwise noted.
              An instrument for the measurement of sound pressure levels of a design
SOUND LEVEL   and having the characteristics of a type 2 or better instrument as
METER (SLM):  established by the American national standards institute (ANSI),
              publication S1.4-1983 entitled "Specification for Sound Level Meters",
              or the latest version thereof.
SOUND         Twenty (20) multiplied by the logarithm, to the base 10, of the measured
PRESSURE      sound pressure divided by the sound pressure associated with the
LEVEL (SPL):  threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels. (Ord. 2022-09, 7-12-
              2022; amd. Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
 
4-8-4: STANDARDS FOR MEASURING SOUND LEVELS:
The following standards shall apply to the measurement of sound levels pursuant
to sections
   A.   Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under
investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at
other conditions, including, but not limited to, design, maximum, and
fluctuating rates.
   B.   When a noise source can be identified and measured in more than one
type of premises, the limits of the most restrictive use shall apply at the
property line between different premises types.
   C.   All tests shall be conducted in accordance with the following
procedures:
      1.   The enforcement officer shall, to the extent practicable, identify
all sources contributing sound to the point of measurement.
      2.   Measurements shall be taken at or within the property line of the
receiving property; provided that whenever it is impossible or impractical to
measure at the property line, a greater distance from the noise source shall be
used to determine compliance with this chapter.
      3.   The Sound Level Meter (SLM) must be calibrated in accordance with
manufacturer specifications.
      4.   No outdoor measurements shall be taken:
         a.   During periods when wind speeds (including gusts) exceed fifteen
miles per hour (15 mph);
         b.   Without a windscreen, recommended by the SLM manufacturer,
properly attached to the SLM;
         c.   Under any condition that allows the SLM to become wet (e.g.,
rain, snow, or condensation); or
         d.   When the ambient temperature is out of the range of the tolerance
of the SLM.
   D.   The report for each measurement shall include:
      1.   The date, day of the week, and times at which measurements are
taken;
      2.   The times of calibration;
      3.   The weather conditions;
      4.   The identification of all monitoring equipment by manufacturer,
model number, and serial number;
      5.   The normal operating cycle of the sources in question with a
description of the sources;
      6.   The ambient sound level, in dBA, with the sources in question
operating;
      7.   The background sound level, in dBA, without the sources in question
operating; and
      8.   A sketch of the measurement site, including measurement locations
and relevant distances, containing sufficient information for another
investigator to repeat the measurements under similar conditions.
   E.   Prior to taking measurements the enforcement officer shall explore the
vicinity of the source in question to identify any other sound sources that
could affect measurements, to establish the approximate location and character
of the principal sound source, and to select suitable locations from which to
measure the sound from the source in question.
   F.   When measuring continuous sound, or sound that is sustained for more
than one second at a time, the SLM shall be set for A-weighting, slow meter
response speed, and the range (if the SLM is designed to read levels over
different ranges of sound pressure levels (SPL) shall be set to that range in
which the meter reads closest to the maximum end of the scale. When the
measured sound level is variable or fluctuating over a range greater than +3
dBA, using the slow meter response speed, the fast meter response speed shall
be used. In either case, both the minimum and maximum readings shall be
recorded to indicate the range of monitored values.
   G.   The SLM shall be placed at a minimum height of three feet (3') above
the ground or from any reflective surface. When handheld, the microphone shall
be held at arm's length and pointed at the source at the angle recommended by
the SLM manufacturer.
   H.   If extraneous sound sources, such as aircraft flyovers or barking dogs,
that are unrelated to the measurements increase the monitored sound levels, the
measurements should be postponed until these extraneous sounds have become of
such a level as not to increase the monitored sound levels of interest.
   I.   The monitoring session should last for a period of time sufficient to
ensure that the sound levels measured are typical of the source in question.
   J.   The background sound levels shall be subtracted from the measured sound
levels of the source of interest by using table 1 of this section to determine
the sound levels from the source of interest alone. If the ambient sound level
is less than 3 dBA higher than the background sound level, the source level
cannot be derived, and a violation of this chapter cannot be substantiated.
 
TABLE 1 CORRECTION FOR BACKGROUND LEVELS (In dBA)
Difference Between Ambient And Correction Factor To Be Subtracted From
Background Sound Levels        Ambient Level For Source Level
3                              3
4, 5                           2
6 - 9                          1
10 or more                     0
 
(Ord. 2022-09, 7-12-2022)
4-8-5: SOUND LEVEL LIMITATIONS:
   A.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the
background sound level by at least ten (10) dBA during daytime hours (7:00 A.M.
to 10:00 P.M.) and by at least five (5) dBA during nighttime hours (10:00 P.M.
to 7:00 A.M.) when measured at or within the property line of the receiving
property, except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section.
   B.   If the background sound level cannot be determined, the absolute sound
level limits set forth in table 2 of this section shall be used.
   C.   If the sound source in question is a pure tone, the limits of table 2
of this section shall be reduced by five (5) dBA.
TABLE 2 MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SOUND LEVELS
Type Of Premises Where Noise Received Time Period Maximum Allowable Sound Level
TABLE 2 MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SOUND LEVELS
Type Of Premises Where Noise Time Period             Maximum Allowable Sound
Received                                             Level
Residential                  7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 55 dBA
                             10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 50 dBA
Commercial                   7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 65 dBA
                             10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 60 dBA
Industrial                   7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 80 dBA
                             10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 75 dBA
Public                       7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 75 dBA
                             10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 70 dBA
 
   D.   Nonrepetitive impulsive sound sources shall not exceed ninety (90) dBA
at or within the property line of a residential premises, using the fast meter
response speed.
   E.   In multiple dwelling units, if the background sound level cannot be
determined, the daytime limit is forty-five (45) dBA and the nighttime limit is
thirty-five (35) dBA for sound originating in another dwelling within the same
building. (Ord. 2022-09, 7-12-2022)
4-8-6: RESTRICTED USES OR ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Horns And Signaling Devices: No person shall, at any time, sound any
horn or audible signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar, or
other vehicle, except as a danger signal or traffic warning as provided under
the Utah motor vehicle act; create by means of any such signaling device any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; or sound any such device for an unnecessary
or unreasonable period of time.
   B.   Truck Idling: No person shall operate an engine of any standing motor
vehicle with a weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds' manufacturer's
gross vehicle general weighted average (GWA) for a period in excess of ten (10)
minutes when such vehicle is parked on a residential premises, on a premises
next to a residential premises, or on a public street next to a residential
premises; provided, however, that vehicles confined and operated within an
enclosed structure, or vehicles being used directly in construction activity or
the operation of construction equipment shall not be subject to the provisions
of this subsection.
   C.   Motor Vehicle Operation: No person shall operate or cause to be
operated any motor vehicle unless the exhaust system of the vehicle is:
      1.   Free from defects that affect sound reduction;
      2.   Equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device; or
      3.   Not equipped with any cutout, bypass, or similar device.
   D.   Sound Amplification Devices; Musical Instruments:
      1.   Affecting Residential Premises: No person shall operate a sound
amplification device or musical instrument:
         a.   Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. in a way that is clearly audible at the property line of a
residential premises; or
         b.   In a way that at any time is clearly audible inside of a
residential premises when all exterior doors and windows of such dwelling unit
are closed.
      2.   Operation In A Motor Vehicle: No person shall operate a sound
amplification device within a motor vehicle parked or operated on a public
street, which is clearly audible, or which causes a person to be aware of
vibration accompanying the sound either:
         a.   At a distance of thirty feet (30') from the motor vehicle; or
         b.   Within another motor vehicle on a public street, at any distance,
when all doors and windows of such other vehicle are closed.
      3.   Public Parks: No person shall operate a sound amplification device
within a public park, which is clearly audible at a distance of seventy-five
feet (75') from the device, unless operated pursuant to permit issued under
section
4-8-8 of this chapter.
   E.   Construction Equipment Or Activity: The operation of construction
equipment or the performance of construction activity, except as required for
emergency work, shall only be allowed between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on weekdays or between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on weekends (Saturday and
Sunday).
   F.   Commercial Power Equipment: The operation of any commercial power
equipment shall only be allowed between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., and only when in compliance with noise levels
established in section
4-8-5 of this chapter.
   G.   Domestic Power Equipment: The operation of any domestic power equipment
shall only be allowed between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   H.   Refuse Collection And Compacting: Garbage, refuse or other solid waste
collection and compacting, including recyclables collection, street sweeping,
and similar activities, shall only be allowed between the hours of six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., when such activity takes place on any
residential premises or on any premises next to, or across the street or alley
from, a residential premises.
   I.   Loading/Unloading Operations: Except as otherwise provided for solid
waste collection in subsection H of this section, loading, unloading, opening,
closing, or otherwise handling boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
liquids, garbage cans, refuse, or similar objects, or the pneumatic or pumped
loading or unloading of bulk materials in liquid, gaseous, powder, or pellet
form or the compacting of refuse by persons engaged in the business of
scavenging or garbage collection, whether private or public, shall not be
allowed between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M., when the sound therefrom is clearly audible across the property line of a
residential premises.
   J.   Mufflers Required For Engine Exhaust: No person shall discharge into
the open air the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine,
motorboat, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device, which
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
   K.   Fireworks: No person shall discharge fireworks at any time when the
sound therefrom is clearly audible across the property line of a residential
premises unless a permit is first obtained as provided in section
4-8-8 of this chapter. Fireworks include, but are not limited to, any rocket,
squib, firecracker, Roman candle, or other device containing pyrotechnic
composition that produces audible and/or visual effects through combustion.
   J.   Short-Term Rentals: Persons operating a short-term rental shall abide
by the provisions of title 10 chapter 18 of this code. (Ord. 2022-09, 7-12-
2022)
4-8-7: EXCEPTIONS TO NOISE ORDINANCE:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following uses and
activities:
   A.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure
relief valves.
   B.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding
to an emergency call or in time of emergency.
   C.   Noises resulting from emergency work.
   D.   Loudspeakers or other sound amplification device operated by a peace
officer or member of the fire department in the performance of official duties.
   E.   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by
the city in accordance with section
4-8-8 of this chapter.
   F.   Any aircraft or railroad equipment operated in conformity with, or
pursuant to, state statute, federal law or federal regulations, and traffic
control instruction used pursuant to and within the duly adopted state or
federal regulations. Any aircraft operating under technical difficulties, in
any kind of distress, under emergency orders of air traffic control or being
operated pursuant to and subsequent to the declaration of an emergency under
federal air regulations shall also be exempt.
   G.   Noise from an exterior alarm system of any building or vehicle provided
such alarm shall terminate its operation within five (5) minutes of its
activation.
   H.   Sound from any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church,
or sound from unamplified music or song emanating from any church or school.
   I.   Noise from construction equipment provided all motorized equipment used
in such activity is equipped with functioning mufflers, except as provided in
subsection
4-8-9 of this chapter.
   J.   Noise from domestic power tools, when operated between seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   K.   Noise from snowblowers, snow throwers, and snowplows when operated with
a muffler for the purpose of snow removal.
   L.   Lawful and properly permitted organized athletic activities on school
grounds, and officially designated playgrounds used for recreation by children
under supervision, and parks or places wherein athletic contests take place
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   M.   Noise resulting from lawful fireworks and noisemakers used for
celebration of an official holiday.
   N.   Noise generated from city sponsored celebrations or special events.
(Ord. 2022-09, 7-12-2022)
4-8-8: SPECIAL PERMIT:
   A.   Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in
this section may be made to the mayor or the mayor's designee.
   B.   Applications for a permit shall supply information including, but not
limited to:
      1.   The nature and location of the noise source for which such
application is made;
      2.   The reason for which the permit is requested, including the hardship
that will result to the applicant, his/her client, or the public if the permit
is not granted;
      3.   The level of noise that will occur during the period of the permit;
      4.   The ordinance provision for which the permit shall apply;
      5.   A description of interim noise control measures to be taken for the
applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring therefrom; and
      6.   A specific schedule of the noise control measures that shall be
taken to bring the source into compliance with this chapter within a reasonable
time.
   C.   Any permit granted under this section shall contain all conditions upon
which said permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the
permit shall be effective, which shall be no longer than one year.
   D.   No permit shall be approved unless the applicant presents adequate
proof that:
      1.   Compliance with this chapter would impose an undue hardship on the
applicant without equal or greater benefits to the public and additional time
is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to
comply with this chapter; or
      2.   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary
duration, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this section;
and
      3.   No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and
      4.   Noise levels occurring during the period of the permit will not
constitute a danger to public health.
   E.   In making the permit determination, the mayor, or the mayor's designee,
shall consider:
      1.   The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the
health and welfare or the reasonable use of property that is caused or
threatened to be caused;
      2.   The social and economic value of the activity for which the permit
is sought; and
      3.   The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise
control measures.
   F.   The mayor, or the mayor's designee, in granting such a special permit,
may prescribe any conditions or requirements he/she deems necessary to minimize
adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood.
   G.   The permit may be revoked by the mayor, or the mayor's designee, if
there is:
      1.   Violation of one or more conditions of the permit;
      2.   Material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application; or
      3.   Material change in any of the circumstances relied on by the mayor,
or the mayor's designee, in granting the permit. (Ord. 2022-09, 7-12-2022)
4-8-9: MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation
of any motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles at any time or place when
such operation exceeds the following noise sound pressure levels for the
category of motor vehicle and for the designated time period as specified in
table B of this section. The standards in table B of this section shall apply
to all noise emitted from motor vehicles including any and all equipment
thereon, under any condition of acceleration, deceleration, idle, grade or load
and whether or not in motion.
 
TABLE B Maximum Allowable Noise Sound Pressure Levels For Motor Vehicles
Type Of Vehicle    Time Period        Maximum Allowable    Measurement Distance
                                      Sound Pressure Level From Motor Vehicle
Motor vehicle
weighing less than
10,000 pounds,     At any time        80 dBA               25 feet
manufacturer's
gross vehicle
weight
Motor vehicle
weighing more than
10,000 pounds,     7:00 A.M. to 10:00 88 dBA               25 feet
manufacturer's     P.M.
gross vehicle
weight
Motor vehicle
weighing more than
10,000 pounds,     10:00 P.M. to 7:00 80 dBA               25 feet
manufacturer's     A.M.
gross vehicle
weight
 
   B.   Motor vehicles equipped with engine brakes shall not be permitted to
employ the use of said brakes.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not be construed as limiting or
precluding the enforcement of any other provisions of this code relating to
motor vehicle mufflers. (Ord. 2022-09, 7-12-2022)
4-8-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   A violation of this chapter is a class B misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
   B.   As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of
normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace
of residents in the area shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public
nuisance and may be subject to abatement as provided by law.
   C.   Any peace officer is authorized to enforce the provisions of this
section; provided that the mayor may by administrative order authorize other
officers or employees of the city to enforce all or part of the provisions of
this section.
   D.   The content of the sound will not be considered in determining a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2022-09, 7-12-2022)
4-8-11: OTHER CODE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Noise emitted by unamplified human voices shall be enforced pursuant to
the prohibitions against disorderly conduct, as provided in state law or other
provisions of this title.
   B.   No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other law.
(Ord. 2022- 09, 7-12-2022)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
   POLICE PROTECTION
SECTION:
5-1-1: Contract With County
5-1-1: CONTRACT WITH COUNTY:
Police protection for the City is provided by the Davis County Sheriff in
accordance with a contract between Davis County and the City. The Davis County
Sheriff is designated as the Chief of Police for the City. (1989 Code § 13-10-
1-01)
CHAPTER 2
   ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-2-1: Animal Control Officer
5-2-2: Animal Ownership And Control
5-2-1: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
The Davis County Animal Control Officer is hereby appointed as the City Animal
Control Officer. (1989 Code § 13-20-0-01)
5-2-2: ANIMAL OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL:
Animal ownership and control will be in accordance with the Davis County animal
control ordinance. (1989 Code § 13-20-0-02)
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Criminal Code Adopted
5-3-2: Discharging Firearms
5-3-1: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah Criminal Code (title 76), as amended, are hereby adopted
by the City. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of
this chapter, and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to
penalty provisions under this chapter if proceeded hereunder. (1998 Code)
5-3-2: DISCHARGING FIREARMS:
   A.   Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm as
defined by Utah State law within the limits of South Weber City, except:
      1.   In self-defense;
      2.   In the case of a peace officer performing his official duty;
      3.   In the case of the lawful slaughter of livestock in an area
designated for agricultural use, for personal consumption, where the shooting
is not in a direction and distance that would endanger persons, property, or
motorists;
      4.   In the case of the lawful slaughter of sick or injured livestock in
an area designated for agricultural use, where the shooting is not in a
direction and distance that would endanger persons, property, or motorists;
      5.   In the case of the lawful shooting of varmints in an area designated
for agricultural use, where the shooting is not in a direction and distance
that would endanger persons, property, or motorists.
   B.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a Class B
misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 9 of this
Code. (Ord. 08-14, 9-23-2008)
ARTICLE A. MINORS; CURFEW
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Established
5-3A-2: Responsibility Of Parents And Guardians
5-3A-1: ESTABLISHED:
No person age seventeen (17) years and under shall be or remain upon any of the
streets, alleys or public places or vacant lots at night between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. following, unless such
person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody of such minor person, unless the employment or lawful business such
minor makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places
between such specified hours, in which event such minor person shall obtain a
permit from the City office to be upon the streets, alleys or public places
during such hours. Where a permit is required from the City office under this
Section, such permit shall be kept upon the person and it shall be unlawful to
be upon the streets, alleys or public places within such curfew hours without
such permit. (1989 Code § 13-30-1-02; amd. Ord. 96-4, 10-8-1996)
5-3A-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS AND GUARDIANS:
No parent, guardian or other person having legal charge or custody of any
person seventeen (17) years of age and under shall allow or permit any such
person or child, ward or other person under such age, while in such legal
custody, to go or be in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places
when such going to, being in or upon such streets, alleys or public places
would be a violation by such minor person of any provision of Section
5-3A-1 of this Article. (1989 Code § 13-30-1-03; amd. 1998 Code)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Uniform Traffic Code Adopted
6-1-2: Definitions
6-1-3: Traffic Control
6-1-4: Parking Regulations
6-1-5: Motor Assisted Scooters And Personal Motorized Mobility Devices
6-1-1: UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
The Utah traffic rules and regulations, title 41, chapter 6 of Utah Code
Annotated, is hereby approved and adopted as the traffic code for the city,
except as such code may be altered or modified by the ordinances of the city.
   A.   Reasonable Care Required When Driving: It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle without the care and caution of a reasonable, prudent
person under the circumstances then and there existing, or in a manner so as to
endanger or likely to endanger any person or property.
   B.   Proper Lookout Required: No person shall drive a motor vehicle within
the corporate limits of the city in such a manner so as to endanger lives or
property by failing to keep a safe and proper lookout for other traffic,
objects or persons. (1989 Code § 11-321)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating, causing or permitting violation of any
provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 41-6-12. (1989 Code § 11-321; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in the traffic code to:
   A.   The "state road commission" or "state department of transportation"
shall mean the city and its officers, departments, agencies and agents.
   B.   "Local authorities" shall mean the city council. (1989 Code § 11-322)
   C.   The "department of public safety of the state of Utah" shall mean the
Davis County sheriff or his agent.
   D.   "Magistrate" shall mean the justice court judge or the city. (1989 Code
§ 11-322; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Prima Facie Speed; Designated Streets:
      1.   Streets With Signs: When appropriate street signs giving notice of
the maximum permitted speed thereon are erected, the prima facie speed limit
designated in the appropriate section of Utah Code Annotated shall apply to the
appropriate streets listed therein.
      2.   Streets Not Posted: Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or in
any other ordinance of the city, the prima facie speed limits on the streets of
the city shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. (1989 Code § 11-323; amd.
1998 Code)
   B.   Through Streets Designated: Those streets and parts of streets
described in the appropriate comprehensive general plan are hereby declared to
be through streets. (1989 Code § 11-325; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Erection Of Stop Or Yield Signs: Whenever any ordinance of the city
designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the Davis
County sheriff's department or the public works director to place and maintain
a stop sign or, where safety and efficiency require at any intersection, a
yield sign on each and every street intersecting such through street, unless
traffic at such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control
signals. However, at the intersection of two (2) through streets or at the
intersection of a through street and a heavily traveled street, stop signs
shall be erected at the approaches to either streets as determined by the Davis
County sheriff's department and on the basis of an engineering and traffic
study. (1989 Code § 11-326; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Angle Parking: The Public Works Department shall mark or sign the
streets or parts of streets where angle parking is permitted. (1989 Code § 11-
324; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Signs; Erection: The City Council may authorize or direct any person
employed by the City to erect or install any sign or traffic control device
required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Properly Posted Areas: It shall be an infraction to park or leave
standing at any time a motor vehicle, as defined in the Utah Traffic Code, as
adopted by the City, except when necessary to avoid interference with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic
control device.
   C.   Blocking Streets Or Highways: In addition to the parking provisions
contained in the Utah Traffic Code, as adopted by the City, it shall be an
infraction, for any person to:
      1.   Remain standing, lying or sitting on any street, public right-of-
way, or publicly owned or controlled property in such a manner as to obstruct
the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic thereon.
      2.   Willfully remain standing, lying or sitting on any street, public
right-of-way, or publicly owned or controlled property in such a manner for
more than one minute after being requested to move by any police officer.
      3.   Willfully remain on such street, public right-of-way, or publicly
owned or controlled property in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage
of any person or vehicle into or out of any property abutting upon the street,
public right-of-way, or publicly owned or controlled property, or any property
having access to such street or highway.
   D.   Unlawful Parking: It shall be unlawful to stop, stand, or park any
vehicle or trailer:
      1.   In such a manner so as to obstruct access upon, or use of, the
entire surface of any sidewalk;
      2.   Upon any street, public right-of-way, or publicly owned or
controlled property, for a period of more than twenty four (24) hours;
      3.   In any fire lane, or to otherwise block or obstruct any fire lane or
hydrant established by the City, except as necessitated by an emergency;
      4.   On any public property, other than in designated parking areas, or
as legally permitted on roadways;
      5.   In a manner that obstructs the delivery or retrieval of mail from a
mailbox, or which obstructs refuse collection. This subsection is only
applicable during times when those services are occurring or are likely to
occur, and does not apply if the driver is present and moves the vehicle or
trailer to avoid obstruction when such services are actually rendered; or
      6.   In a manner that obstructs all or part of a public or private
driveway, without permission from the driveway owner.
      7.   This section does not apply to any vehicle or trailer which is owned
by a governmental entity, and which is being used for official government
business, or to vehicles which have been authorized by the applicable highway
authority to stop, stand, or park in a manner otherwise contrary to this
section.
         a.   Such vehicles may not block access to private or public
driveways, except in cases of emergency repairs, when necessary, in order to
provide police or fire services, or pursuant to a road or lane closure
authorized by the applicable highway authority.
         b.   When it is anticipated that access to private or public driveways
will be blocked, the entity shall coordinate its plan with the City, and shall
communicate its plan to the affected property owner, at least twenty four (24)
hours prior to the time access is blocked.
   E.   Parking Of Trailers, Recreation Vehicles:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to park, place,
store, or otherwise leave standing on any street, public right-of-way, or
publicly owned or controlled property any unattached trailer of any type,
whether for the occupancy of people, storage of items or for towing purposes;
any boat, whether the same is loaded or not on an unattached trailer or
otherwise; any camper not mounted on a vehicle; any motor home or mini motor
home of any length; and any combination of a pulling or towing vehicle with an
attached trailer for a period longer than twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   Such vehicle shall be considered to be in violation of this section
if parked in any one location for longer than twenty four (24) hours, or if the
vehicle has been parked in public right-of-way or streets in one or more
locations within South Weber City for longer than twenty four (24) hours,
except that a permit may be obtained from the City for a period not to exceed
seven (7) days for out-of-town visitors.
      3.   Parking of any such trailer or recreational vehicle on private
property must not impede visibility of sidewalks and streets from adjacent
driveways, nor impede vision on a corner lot for a distance of forty feet (40')
from each of the intersecting streets.
      4.   No trailer or recreational vehicle may be used as a place of sleep
or habitation while it is parked on a public right-of-way. Recreational
vehicles or trailers with a "bump-out" feature, by which the sides of the
trailer expand to the left or right in order to increase the space within the
trailer, may not have that feature activated while parked on the public right-
of-way.
      5.   Trailers used in the course of business shall be stored off of the
public right-of-way and may not be parked overnight on any right-of-way.
      6.   This section does not prohibit the parking of construction trailers
on public right-of-way, so long as those trailers are associated with an active
building permit.
   F.   Evasion Of Parking Regulations:
      1.   The following constitute evasion of parking regulations, and shall
not avoid the regulations of this chapter or restart the calculation of time
for purposes of South Weber City Code:
         a.   Moving a parked vehicle, motor home, or trailer from its original
location on a public street, to any other location or locations on a public
street within one-half mile of the original location, if the cumulative time of
the vehicle at both or multiple locations would exceed the lawful amount of
time permitted at a single location; or
         b.   Removing an unlawfully parked vehicle, motor home, or trailer
from a public street for a period of time of less than eight hours, and then
returning the vehicle, motor home or trailer to a public street within one-half
mile of the original location.
      2.   Evasion of parking regulations shall constitute a separate offense,
punishable as an infraction, if done with intent to evade the provisions of
this chapter.
   G.   Specific Months Restricted: It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle or
recreational vehicle or farm equipment on any street in the City between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon from
November 1 to March 31, except as follows:
      1.   Physicians and other emergency vehicles during emergency calls.
      2.   Residents or persons visiting when required by emergency or other
unusual circumstances may apply to the City for a permit for all-night parking
on the street. The City, for good cause shown, may issue a permit and shall
issue an authorization that shall be displayed in the window and is visible to
law enforcement agencies.
   H.   Prohibition Of Unauthorized Parking Of Commercial Vehicles:
      1.   General Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to park or
leave standing or unattended any commercial vehicle or trailer on any street,
public right-of-way, or publicly owned or controlled property within the City,
except as expressly authorized by the City or as necessary for the immediate
loading or unloading of goods.
      2.   Definition Of Commercial Vehicle: For the purposes of this section,
a commercial vehicle is defined as any vehicle used or maintained for the
transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit, or designed, used,
or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
      3.   Exceptions:
         a.   This prohibition does not apply to commercial vehicles actively
engaged in the delivery or pickup of goods or services where no reasonable off-
street loading or unloading space is available.
         b.   Commercial vehicles may park temporarily on any street, public
right-of-way, or publicly owned or controlled property for a period not to
exceed two (2) hours for the purposes of loading or unloading, provided that
such parking does not obstruct traffic or create a safety hazard.
         c.   Emergency repair vehicles are exempt while engaged in the
performance of emergency services.
         d.   Permit For Extended Parking: A permit may be obtained from the
City for the parking of commercial vehicles on a street, public right-of-way,
or publicly owned or controlled property for a period longer than allowed under
this section, subject to the City's discretion and applicable regulations.
   I.   Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2023-04, 4-11-2023; amd. Ord. 23-19, 12-12-2023)
6-1-5: MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTERS AND PERSONAL MOTORIZED MOBILITY DEVICES:
   A.   Definitions:
   BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices.
   HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of
any nature when any part of it is open to the use of the public as a matter of
right for vehicular travel.
   MOPED: A motor driven cycle having both pedals to permit propulsion by human
power, and a motor which produces not more than two (2) brake horsepower and
which is not capable of propelling the cycle at a speed in excess of thirty
(30) miles per hour on level ground. If an internal combustion engine is used,
the displacement may not exceed sixty (60) cubic centimeters and the moped
shall have a power driven system that functions directly or automatically
without clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is
engaged. A moped includes an electric assisted bicycle and a motor assisted
scooter.
   MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTER: A self-propelled device with at least two (2) wheels
in contact with the ground, a braking system capable of stopping the unit under
typical conditions, a gas or electric motor not exceeding forty (40) cubic
centimeters, a seat or a deck designed for a person to sit, straddle, or stand
while operating the device, and the ability to be propelled by human power
alone.
   MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle and motor scooter, personal motorized
mobility device, moped, electric assisted bicycle, motor assisted scooter, and
every motorized bicycle having an engine with less than one hundred fifty (150)
cubic centimeters displacement or having a motor which produces not more than
five (5) horsepower.
   PERSONAL MOTORIZED MOBILITY DEVICE: A self-propelled device with two (2)
nontandem wheels in contact with the ground, a system capable of steering and
stopping the unit under typical operating conditions, a motor not exceeding one
horsepower or seven hundred fifty (750) watts, and a deck designed for a person
to stand while operating the device. A "personal motorized mobility device"
does not include a wheelchair.
All other definitions pertaining to this section shall be as defined in the
Utah Code Annotated 41-6-1.
   B.   Age Restrictions: Subject to the provisions of this section, a person
under sixteen (16) years of age may not operate a personal motorized mobility
device or a motor assisted scooter using the motor unless the person is under
the direct supervision of the person's parent or guardian.
   C.   Motor Assisted Scooter: A person may not operate a motor assisted
scooter:
      1.   In a public parking structure;
      2.   On public property posted as an area prohibiting skateboards;
      3.   On a highway consisting of a total of four (4) or more lanes
designated for regular vehicle traffic;
      4.   On a highway with a posted speed limit greater than twenty five (25)
miles per hour; or
      5.   That has been structurally altered from the original manufacturer's
design.
   D.   Personal Motorized Mobility Device: A person may not operate a personal
motorized mobility device:
      1.   On a highway consisting of a total of four (4) or more lanes
designated for regular vehicular traffic;
      2.   On a highway with a posted speed limit greater than thirty five (35)
miles per hour; or
      3.   That has been structurally altered from the original manufacturer's
design.
   E.   Nonmotorized Vehicle: Except where posted or prohibited by rule or
local ordinance, a motor assisted scooter is considered a nonmotorized vehicle
if it is being used with the motor turned off.
   F.   Exceptions: The city may authorize exceptions to this section for city
sponsored activities.
   G.   Violation: A person who violates this section is guilty of a class C
misdemeanor. (Ord. 04-9(A), 8-10-2004)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Public Works Department
7-1-2: Removal Of Snow
7-1-3: Obstructions In Streets
7-1-4: Openings In Streets; Doors Obstructing
7-1-5: Discharge Of Water
7-1-6: Sidewalk Regulations
7-1-7: Animals On Streets
7-1-1: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created a Public Works Department, which
shall have general supervision of streets, sidewalks, bridges and other public
ways.
   B.   Director: The Department shall be under the direction and control of
the Public Works Director. (1982 Code § 11-311; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Powers And Duties: The department shall:
      1.   Have charge of the construction, maintenance and repair of streets,
sidewalks, bridges, curbs, gutters, culverts, drains, waterways and other
public ways. It shall have control of all waters flowing on the streets,
sidewalks and public ways, whether originating from storm, flood, drainage or
irrigation waters.
      2.   Keep a record of and promptly investigate all complaints of
defective streets, culverts, drains, ditches, sidewalks and other public ways
and, when proper, repair, replace or take such action as deemed best, and shall
record the action taken on each complaint.
      3.   Enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances
relating to the maintenance and use of streets, culverts, drains, ditches,
waterways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other public ways.
      4.   Repair, or cause to be repaired, all defects coming to the
department's attention and take reasonable precautions to protect the public
from injuries due to such defects pending their repair. (1989 Code § 11-312)
7-1-2: REMOVAL OF SNOW:
   A.   Failure To Remove Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for the owner,
occupant, lessor or agent of any property, abutting on a paved sidewalk, to
fail to remove or have removed from such paved sidewalk, all hail, snow or
sleet thereon within a reasonable time after such snow, hail or sleet has
fallen but no longer than twenty four (24) hours. The Code Enforcement Officer
may grant a time extension if it is deemed necessary. The Code Enforcement
Officer may grant exception on a case by case basis if there are extenuating
circumstances. (Ord. 17-02, 2-28-2017)
   B.   Depositing In Gutter Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person
removing snow from the sidewalk or driveway or other areas, to deposit or blow
snow, dirt, leaves or any other material in the street, nor should any of these
materials be deposited in the gutter so as to clog or prevent the free flow of
water therein. (1989 Code § 11-361)
7-1-3: OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to place or permit to be placed upon or in the sidewalk, parking area,
gutter or on the half of the street next to such premises:
   A.   Refuse: Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, sweepings, refuse
matter, ice, snow, water, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances.
   B.   Building Materials: Any wagons, lumber, wood boxes, fencing, building
material, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other thing which shall
obstruct such public street, gutter, parking area or sidewalk, or any part
thereof, or the passage over and upon the same, or any part thereof, except as
expressly authorized by ordinance, without the permission of the City Council
first had and obtained.
   C.   Permanent Or Temporary Structures: Any permanent or temporary
structure, mechanism, device, vehicle or other thing of any kind or character,
except trees planted pursuant to the provisions of applicable ordinances.
   D.   Height Limitations: All sidewalks shall be kept clear and unobstructed
to a height of seven feet (7'). No vegetation shall be allowed to extend into
the street past the curb face or the edge of the pavement where there is no
curb to a height less than fourteen feet (14'). (1989 Code § 11-362)
7-1-4: OPENINGS IN STREETS; DOORS OBSTRUCTING:
   A.   Cellars: It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building
having a cellar which opens upon any street or sidewalk to fail to keep the
door or other covering in good repair and safe for the passage of the customary
traffic on the street or sidewalk. If the owner or occupant of any such
building shall neglect or refuse to repair properly any such door or covering
within twenty four (24) hours after notice from the Public Works Director to do
so, the Public Works Director shall forthwith cause such repairs to be made at
the expense of the owner or occupant.
   B.   Coal Holes: It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain coal holes or
other openings in streets or sidewalks, except with the special permission of
the City Council, and under the direction and supervision of the Public Works
Director. (1989 Code § 11-363; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Doors: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having the control
or management of any alley, road or passageway to construct or hang gates or
doors to such alley, road or passageway so that the gates or doors thereto,
when open, shall project outwardly more than two feet (2') over or upon the
sidewalk beyond the property line. (1989 Code § 11-364)
7-1-5: DISCHARGE OF WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to fail, refuse or neglect to prevent water from the roof or eaves of
any house, building or other structure, or from any other source under the
control of such person, to be discharged upon the surface of any sidewalk.
(1989 Code § 11-365)
7-1-6: SIDEWALK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Driving Or Parking: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
park a self-propelled vehicle or lead, drive or ride any animal upon any
sidewalk, except across a sidewalk at established crossings. (1989 Code § 11-
366)
   B.   Businesses To Keep Clean: It shall be unlawful for any owners or
occupants of any place of business to refuse, neglect or fail to cause the
sidewalk abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned each morning before the hour
of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (1989 Code § 11-367)
   C.   Placing Goods For Sale Or Show: No goods, wares or merchandise shall be
placed, maintained or permitted for sale or show in or on any parking area,
street or sidewalk beyond two feet (2') from the front line of the lot, without
first obtaining the written approval of the City. Such approval shall be
granted only when such sale or show shall be a promotional activity not
exceeding forty eight (48) hours and when participated in by a majority of
firms seeking approval in their business areas. The City's written approval
shall specifically provide that no goods, wares or merchandise shall be placed
in such a manner as to leave less than a four foot (4') passageway for
pedestrians. (1989 Code § 11-368; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Placing Goods For Receipt Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, or suffer to be placed or kept upon any sidewalk, any goods,
wares or merchandise which he may be receiving or delivering, without leaving a
four foot (4') passageway upon such sidewalk. It shall be unlawful for any
person receiving or delivering such goods, wares or merchandise to suffer the
same to be or remain on such sidewalk for a longer period than four (4) hours.
(1989 Code § 11-369; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Playing: Every person who obstructs the sidewalk or street by playing
any game or engaging in any activity which obstructs the free travel thereon is
guilty of an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. (1989 Code § 11-370; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Congregating: It is an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-9-1 of this Code for any person to congregate about or upon any sidewalks,
stairway, doorway, window or in front of any business or dwelling house,
theater, lecture room, church or elsewhere and by so doing to obstruct or
interfere with the free passage of persons entering, leaving or occupying such
building or premises. (1989 Code § 11-371; amd. 1998 Code)
7-1-7: ANIMALS ON STREETS:
   A.   Permit: Every person who drives any herd of sheep or band of horses,
cattle or other animals upon any public street or highway without first
obtaining a permit from the County Sheriff to do so is guilty of an infraction
and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code.
   B.   Permission: No person shall drive livestock through the City upon
streets not designated for that purpose, except upon permission and according
to the direction of the County Sheriff. (1989 Code § 11-331; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
   STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-2-1: Permit Required; Inspection
7-2-2: Conform To Established Specifications
7-2-3: Changing Existing Construction
7-2-4: Building Materials In Street; Permit
7-2-5: Mixing Concrete On Paved Streets Or Sidewalks; Permit
7-2-6: Overflowing Of Water
7-2-7: Irrigation Ditches
7-2-8: Improvements Required
7-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; INSPECTION:
   A.   Required: No person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or
employee, shall construct any permanent sidewalk for public use without first
obtaining from the Public Works Director a permit to do so. The permit shall
specify that the sidewalk be constructed of cement, the character and quality
of the cement, the consistent parts of the mixture and the thickness of the
walk.
   B.   Unlawful Violation Of Specifications: It shall be unlawful to construct
a sidewalk in violation of the specifications given by a proper City official.
   C.   Inspection: All sidewalks shall be inspected by the Public Works
Director or his duly authorized representative. (1989 Code § 11-352; amd. 1998
Code)
7-2-2: CONFORM TO ESTABLISHED SPECIFICATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, agent, servant, contractor
or employee to construct a street or sidewalk which does not conform to
specifications established by the City Engineer or other authorized
representative of the City unless special permission to deviate from such
specification is first obtained from the City Council. (1989 Code § 11-351)
7-2-3: CHANGING EXISTING CONSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway across a sidewalk
or cut or change the construction of sidewalk, curb or gutter without first
making written application and obtaining from the Public Works Director a
permit to do so. The acceptance of such permit shall be deemed an agreement on
the part of such person to construct said driveway in accordance with
specifications furnished by the City. (1989 Code § 11-353; amd. 1998 Code)
7-2-4: BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET; PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of the public
streets when erecting or repairing any building upon land abutting thereon,
without first making application to and receiving from the Public Works
Director a permit for the occupation or use of such portions of streets for
such periods of time and under such limitations and restrictions as may be
required by the City Council. Any such permit may be revoked by the City
Council at any time when the holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or
regulation under which it is granted, or when, in the opinion of the City
Council, the public interest requires such revocation. (1989 Code § 11-354;
amd. 1998 Code)
7-2-5: MIXING CONCRETE ON PAVED STREETS OR SIDEWALKS; PERMIT:
Unless a permit from the Public Works Director has been obtained, it shall be
unlawful to:
   A.   Place, Pile Or Permit: Place or pile or permit to be placed or piled,
any sand, gravel, lime, cement, mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance
or mixture, or allow the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or
sidewalk.
   B.   Make, Mix Or Permit: Make or mix or permit to be made or mixed any
mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture on any portion of
any paved street or sidewalk. (1989 Code § 11-355; amd. 1998 Code)
7-2-6: OVERFLOWING OF WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow water to overflow from any ditch,
canal, well or irrigation stream onto the streets, sidewalks or property of the
City. (1989 Code § 11-356)
7-2-7: IRRIGATION DITCHES:
All owners or occupants of lots in the City who require water from a ditch for
irrigation or other purposes shall dig ditches, erect flumes, lay pipes and
install culverts, as needed, and maintain the same to convey water under
sidewalks to or from their respective lots. All culverts, ditches, pipes and
flumes conveying water under sidewalks shall meet such reasonable standards and
specifications as may be established by the Public Works Director. (1989 Code §
11-357; amd. 1998 Code)
7-2-8: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
When application is made for a building permit for a residence or other main
building on a lot which has frontage on a public street and the street does not
have full improvements, as described in the standards and construction
specifications and drawings for the City, at the discretion of the City, the
applicant shall do either the following: a) install such improvements as may be
required for the street to be fully improved; or b) deposit the said amount of
funds in an escrow account with the City at the time the building permit is
taken out. The City will maintain a sixty foot (60') right-of-way on South
Weber Drive. (1989 Code § 11-358; amd. Res. 93-005, 2-23-1993; 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Permit Required; Basis For Issuance
7-3-3: State License Required
7-3-4: Application For Permit
7-3-5: Emergency Excavation
7-3-6: Fee For Permit
7-3-7: Permit; No Transfer Or Assignment
7-3-8: General Standards
7-3-9: Time Limit For Completion
7-3-10: One Year Guarantee
7-3-11: Relocation Of Structures In Public Ways
7-3-12: Failure To Comply; Default In Performance
7-3-13: Failure To Conform To Design Standards; Penalty
7-3-14: Appeal Of Suspension, Revocation, Or Stop Order
7-3-15: Tampering With Traffic Barricades
7-3-16: Conflict With Governing Provisions
7-3-17: Violation; Penalty
7-3-18: Excavations Fee Calculation
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter the following words shall have the following meanings:
   APPLICANT: Any person who makes application for a permit.
   APPURTENANCES: Miscellaneous concrete surfaces within the public way, such
as parking bays and carriage walks.
   BUSINESS: Any place in the city in which there is conducted or carried on
principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation for the purpose of gaining
a livelihood.
   CITY: South Weber City, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah.
   CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer, or his/her authorized representative.
   EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of
which constitutes an immediate danger to persons or property, or which causes
interruption of utility services.
   ENGINEERING REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS, AND DESIGN STANDARDS: The latest
version of the engineering regulations, or standard specifications and detail
for municipal construction maintained by the city engineer.
   EXCAVATION SITE RESTORATION: Means and includes the restoring of the
original ground or paved hard surface area to comply with engineering
regulations, and includes, but is not limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling,
compaction, and stabilization, paving and other excavation necessary to place
the site in acceptable condition following the conclusion of the excavation, or
the expiration or revocation of the permit.
   EXCAVATION(S) OR EXCAVATE: Digging in, cutting into the surface of, or
breaking the surface of a public way.
   FAILURE: An excavation site restoration which fails to meet public works
director specifications, or which results in a deteriorated or substandard
condition within the duration of the warranty period. Failure may be settlement
of surfaces, deterioration of materials, or other surface irregularities.
Measurement of failure shall be further defined in the engineering regulations.
   FEE, DIMINISHED ROAD INTEGRITY: A fee collected by the city to pay for the
accelerated need for pavement maintenance as a result of cutting the existing
pavement.
   FINANCIAL GUARANTEE: Cash escrow held to protect the city against failure of
the excavation site restoration, released one year following completion of
restoration.
   INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the right of way.
   MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES (MUTCD): The current standards for
signs, signals, and pavement markings.
   NEW PAVEMENT COST (NPC): The current cost for installation of new asphalt
pavement (3 inch asphalt, 8 inch road base). This cost shall be updated
annually by the city engineer.
   NEW SERVICE CONNECTION: The installation of a nonexisting connection.
   OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system
and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a controlling interest in
such system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of
such a system.
   PERMITTEE: Any person which has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed
to fulfill the requirements of this chapter.
   PERSON: Means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm,
association, provider, corporation, company, organization, or entity of any
kind.
   PIPE DRIVEWAY: A driveway approach which uses a pipe or other means to
bridge the gutter.
   PRIVATE DRAIN LINE: A pipe installed solely for the conveyance of water
collected or generated on private property such as drainage, spring, or storm
water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
   PROPERTY OWNER: A person or persons who have legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a
company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the
property.
   PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, system lessee, or
public utility company.
   PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah
state public service commission, or any mutual corporation providing gas,
electricity, water, telephone, or other utility product or services for use by
the general public.
   PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements,
public footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys, and public drainageways. It does not, however, include
utility easements not within public ways of the city.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: Director of South Weber City public works.
   REQUIRED MAINTENANCE: When service has been interrupted and requires repair.
Upgrades to existing infrastructure is not considered required maintenance.
   RESELLER: Any person that provides service over a system for which a
separate charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying
system used for the transmission and does not install any system in the rights
of way.
   RESIDENT: A person or persons currently making their home at a particular
dwelling within the city.
   STORM DRAIN: A dedicated pipe, conduit, waterway, or ditch installed in a
right of way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This
term does not include private drain lines.
   SYSTEM LESSEE: Any person that leases a system or a specific portion of a
system to provide services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles,
antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment,
wire and appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a provider located in the
construction, ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications
system.
   TRAFFIC BARRICADE MANUAL: The manual on proper barricading and traffic
control practices. (Ord. 98-22, 9-22-1998; amd. Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; BASIS FOR ISSUANCE:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation,
conservancy district, sewer district, water district, or any other entity: 1)
to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, bore, undermine or in any other manner
damage any part of the municipal right of way; or 2) to make or cause to be
made, excavations in or under the surface of any street right of way for any
purpose; 3) to deposit or leave upon the street right of way any earth or
material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street,
unless such person or entity shall have first obtained an excavation permit
from the city. Any person desiring to perform any kind of excavation in a
public way within the city shall make application for an excavation permit.
   B.   Basis For Issuance: When a road is cut, the design life of the road is
compromised. The decision by the city to issue a permit shall include, but not
be limited to, the following factors:
      1.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate the facilities or
structures proposed to be installed in the public way;
      2.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate multiple wire in
addition to cables, conduits, pipes or other facilities or structures of other
users of the public way, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, sewer and
water;
      3.   The damage or disruption, if any of public or private facilities,
improvements, or landscaping previously existing in the public way;
      4.   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction from numerous excavations of the public way;
      5.   The square footage of the excavation site restoration and the age of
the road being cut are considered when determining the impact on the road.
      6.   All permits shall be subject to revocation and the city may revoke
or refuse to issue a permit for failure of the applicant to abide by the terms
and conditions of this chapter.
   C.   Property Owner Exceptions: Property owners installing, replacing, or
maintaining less than five hundred (500) square feet or one hundred (100)
linear feet of sidewalk or driveway approach are not required to make
application for an excavation permit. (Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-3: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Contractors: All contractors desiring to perform work in the city's
right of way shall be properly licensed by the state department of business
regulation contractors division.
   B.   Exceptions: No license will be required by the city for employees of a
public utility company or the city, when doing work for these entities. (Ord.
09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Each application for a permit shall include the following:
   A.   Applicant Information: The name, address, and telephone number,
including a twenty four (24) hour emergency number, of the person, corporation,
utility, or district desiring the permit. If the applicant is a corporation or
utility or district, the name, address, and telephone number of the manager or
person authorized to act for and in behalf of the corporation and to obligate
it to the responsibilities set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Contractor Information: The name, address, telephone number, including
a twenty four (24) hour emergency number, state license number of the person
doing the actual digging, tunneling, trenching, and backfilling or construction
work.
   C.   Means Or Method Of Excavation: The mechanical means or method by which
the street, highway, or roadway will be excavated, trenched, backfilled, bored,
and/or compacted.
   D.   Location; Sketch: The location of the place where the cut or excavation
is to be made, in, or along, or across the road right of way as described,
utilizing distances from permanently recognized monuments, manholes, or
structures with a brief sketch of the trench or excavation and backfill
material, and compaction.
   E.   Agreement: A signed agreement whereby the applicant and applicant's
contractor agree to abide by the following requirements:
      1.   Notification For Inspection: The permittee shall notify the city
within two (2) business days for all inspections. Inspections shall be done as
often as deemed necessary by the city with a minimum being prior to and
following any work and one year from the date of completion. It is the
responsibility of the permittee to see that these inspections are requested.
      2.   Methods For Cutting, Excavating:
         a.   All excavations shall be preceded by sawcut or other approved
method of cutting pavement resulting in a neat straight, vertical line.
         b.   All excavated materials shall be placed so as to not
unnecessarily impair traffic or access to private property.
         c.   All excavation shall comply with all requirements of the state
industrial commission and the occupational safety and health administration
(OSHA).
         d.   All damage resulting from poor or substandard construction
practices, including, but not limited to, the failure to comply with the
requirements of this chapter and/or any required specifications, are solely the
responsibility of the contractor. The contractor shall make all necessary
repairs or reconstruction to remedy any such construction, including, but not
limited to, any resulting damage.
      3.   Backfill Materials: All backfill materials shall be thoroughly
compacted and installed per the city standard curb trench section. Backfill
material shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement in lifts consistent
with the type of soil involved and the method of consolidation being used.
Broken pavement, large stones, roots, and other debris shall not be used in the
backfill. No organic material shall be present in the backfill material. Each
lift shall be rolled or tamped, or a combination of these methods shall be
used, depending upon the type of soil involved, to compact the backfill
material. Such backfill shall be done in a manner that will permit the
restoration of the surface to a condition equivalent to that in which it was
prior to excavation or better. The city may require soil tests to be furnished
by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional engineer
specializing in soil mechanics, when, in its opinion, backfill for any reason
is not being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to be
permitted, such tests must show that the backfill material meets the minimum
compaction requirements of this subsection. All expenses of such tests shall be
borne by the permittee.
      4.   Pavement Resurfacing: Following compaction of backfill, the street
pavement shall be restored to match the existing pavement thickness and
consistent with the currently adopted city standards.
      5.   Patch Requirements: The patch required for all cuts is to extend one
foot (1') beyond the excavation on all sides. If the excavation limits are
located within five feet (5') of the edge of pavement or lip of curb and
gutter, the existing asphalt must be removed and the patch must extend to the
original edge of pavement or lip of curb and gutter.
      6.   Compliance With Specifications, Standards, Traffic Control
Regulations, Site Permittee Identification:
         a.   The excavation performed in the public way shall strictly conform
to the requirements of this chapter and the engineering regulations, design
standards, construction specifications and traffic control regulations of the
city, copies of which shall be available from the city, kept on file in the
office of the city recorder, and open to public inspection during office hours.
Any person desiring to perform any kind of excavation in a public way with the
city shall make application for an excavation permit.
         b.   Where a job site is left unattended, before completion of the
excavation, signage with minimum two inch (2") high letters shall be attached
to a barricade or otherwise posted at the site, indicating the permittee's
name, or company name, telephone number, and after hours telephone number.
         c.   All excavations shall be conducted in a manner resulting in a
minimum amount of interference or interruption of street or pedestrian traffic.
Inconvenience to residents and businesses fronting on the public way shall be
minimized as much as possible. Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades
and/or other structures will be available and used where necessary to prevent
accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must be in place until all
of the permittee's equipment is removed from the site and the excavation has
been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in place, except where
backfilling and resurfacing is to be done by the city; in which case the
barricades, together with any necessary lights, flares or torches, must remain
in place until the backfill excavation is actually commenced by the city. From
sunset to sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined by
adequate signal lights, torches, etc. The sheriff and fire department shall be
notified at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of any planned excavation
requiring street closure or traffic detour.
      7.   Hold City Harmless For Liabilities: The permittee shall indemnify
and hold the city harmless from and against any and all liability, damages,
claims, demands, costs and expenses of whatsoever nature, including court costs
and attorney fees arising from or growing out of any injury to or death of any
person or persons, whatsoever, or for loss of or damage to the tools, plant or
equipment of the permittee resulting directly or indirectly from carrying on
the work herein specified. To that end and prior to the issuance of a permit,
the applicant shall demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that the applicant
has insurance policies which will be in effect during the period of
construction given on the permit. These insurance policies must contain the
following minimum coverage:
 
Bodily injury or property damage liability per occurrence    $1,000,000.00
Bodily injury or property damage liability policy aggregate  $2,000,000.00
Workers' compensation                                        Statutory limits
Automobile liability                                         $500,000.00
 
      8.   Financial Guarantee:
         a.   Cash Escrow: The applicant shall file a fully executed escrow
agreement and post required cash escrow funds with the city for each and every
application based on an estimate by the city as stated in the current adopted
fee schedule on file with the city. The escrow will be deposited and retained
for one year following completion, as determined by the city, of the work to
guarantee proper backfilling and proper maintenance and/or reconstruction of
the work. Cash escrow will be refunded upon satisfactory completion,
inspections, and approval of the work performed under the permit and as
determined by the city.
         b.   Exception, Allowance For Bond: Public utility companies may, at
the city's discretion, deposit the financial guarantee amount with an escrow
agent or establish a performance bond. If the applicant is allowed to establish
a bond or use an escrow agent, a copy of the written escrow agreement or bond
must be attached to the agreement.
      9.   Damage To Public Facilities: Before commencing the work, the
permittee shall identify any damaged public facilities in the vicinity of his/
her work, and make written notification to the city within two (2) business
days of work commencing. While the work is in progress and after completion of
the permitted work, upon notice from the city, the permittee shall immediately
repair any damage to the public and private facilities as a result of the work
done under the permit. In the event such repairs are not made by the permittee
within forty eight (48) hours after notice, the city is hereby authorized to
make such repairs and charge all costs, including fifteen percent (15%)
overhead charge, to the permittee. By acceptance of the permit, the permittee
agrees to comply with the above.
      10.   City Right Of Way Access: The permittee agrees not to interfere
unreasonably with the access and use of the existing easements therein. (Ord.
09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-5: EMERGENCY EXCAVATION:
   A.   Any person maintaining pipes, lines, or facilities in the public way
may proceed with excavation upon existing facilities without a permit when
emergency circumstances demand that the excavation be done immediately;
provided a permit could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained
beforehand.
   B.   In the event that emergency excavation is commenced on or within any
public way of the city during regular business hours, the city shall be
notified within one-half (1/2) hour from the time the excavation is commenced.
The person commencing and conducting such excavation shall take all necessary
safety precautions for the protection of the public and the direction and
control of traffic; and shall ensure that excavation is accomplished according
to city engineering regulations, the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and other applicable laws, regulations, or generally recognized
practices in the industry.
   C.   Any person commencing emergency excavation in the public way during
other than business hours without a permit shall immediately thereafter apply
for a permit or give notice during the first hour of the first regular business
day on which city offices are open for business after such excavation is
commenced. A permit for such emergency excavation may be issued which shall be
retroactive to the date when the excavation was begun, at the discretion of the
public works director. (Ord. 98-22, 9-22-1998; amd. Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-6: FEE FOR PERMIT:
The city shall charge and the permittee shall pay upon issuance of the permit,
fees for costs associated with the excavation performed under the permit as
outlined in the currently adopted fee schedule on file with the city. For an
explanation of how fees are calculated, see section
7-3-18 of this chapter.
   A.   Inspection Fee: An inspection fee shall be paid upon application for a
permit. The inspection fee will cover two (2) inspections; one inspection
immediately following the work and one inspection one year from the date of
completion. Additional inspection fees will be assessed for additional
inspections deemed necessary by the city.
   B.   Diminished Road Integrity Fee: A fee shall be paid prior to
commencement of excavation work for the diminished life of the road. The square
footage of the excavation site restoration and the age of the road being cut
are considered when determining the diminished road integrity fee.
   C.   Financial Guarantee: A cash escrow, set up by the permittee and held by
the city, shall be established prior to commencement of excavation work as a
protection to the city against any failure in the repair work performed. This
may be used in the event the permittee refuses to or is unable to make the
required repairs as necessary to render the street in good working condition.
(Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-7: PERMIT; NO TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and excavation shall not be
performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the
excavation to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder
of the permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the
excavation under the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other
requirements of this chapter and under said permit. (Ord. 98-22, 9-22-1998)
7-3-8: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Environmental And Deposition Controls:
      1.   Dust And Debris: The permittee or contractor shall keep dust and
debris controlled at the work site at all times. If necessary, the work site
shall be wet down to control dust and containers shall be provided for all
debris. The city reserves the right to shut down the work or issue a citation
if dust is not controlled.
      2.   Noise: The permittee or contractor shall keep noise to a minimum as
determined by the public works director.
      3.   Cleanup: The permittee or contractor shall remove all equipment,
material, barricades, and similar items or other debris from the right of way
areas used.
      4.   Water Not To Be Discharged On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any
person or organization owning, occupying or having control of any premises
within the city to suffer or permit water to be discharged upon the surface of
any street right of way to the point where the public works director deems it a
hazard or a nuisance to the community.
      5.   Depositing Material On Streets Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person or organization intentionally or carelessly to throw, cast, deposit,
put into, or leave, or allow the same, in any street, gutter, public right of
way, or public place, any stones, gravel, sand, cement, coal, dirt, manure,
snow, garbage, leaves, lawn or hedge clippings, or rubbish of any kind, or any
other substance which in the opinion of the public works director shall render
any such street, gutter, public right of way, or public place unsafe, or
unsightly, or shall interfere with travel thereon.
   B.   Excavation Operations:
      1.   Blue Stakes: Before commencing excavation operations, the permittee
shall call "Blue Stakes" at 1-800-662-4111. The contractor shall use extreme
caution to avoid a conflict, contact or damage to existing utilities such as
power lines, sewer lines, storm drains, streetlights, telephone lines,
television cable lines, water lines, gas lines, poles, survey monuments or
other appurtenances during the course of construction. Any such conflict,
contact or damage shall be immediately communicated to the city.
      2.   Traffic Control Devices: Traffic control devices must be in place
before excavating begins and must be installed in accordance with the current
edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD).
      3.   Protection Of Paved Surfaces Outside Of Excavation Area: In order to
avoid unnecessary damage to paved surfaces, backhoes, outriggers, track
equipment or any other construction equipment that may prove damaging to
asphalt shall use rubber cleats or paving pads when operating on or crossing
said surfaces.
      4.   Open Trench Limits: Open trenches will be limited to one thousand
feet (1,000'). No excavation shall be allowed to continue until the one
thousand feet (1,000') of trench has been restored with proper asphalt surface.
   C.   Utility Drawing Requirements: Whenever the work involves the extension,
placement or the relocation of a utility easement, two (2) copies of the
drawings shall be provided for the city engineer for approval which detail the
location and type of the proposed facility. Work involving maintenance of
existing facilities or placement of laterals does not require a drawing.
   D.   Street Excavation In Winter: Excavation of city streets during the
winter months (herein defined as November 15 to April 1) will be allowed only
if the work is a new service connection, required maintenance or emergency, or
otherwise approved by the city. Permanent patching of a city street excavated
in winter may be delayed until April 1, provided the permittee maintains a
temporary untreated base course surface until such time as the permanent
surfacing is accomplished. This provision applies regardless of whether the
permittee or city crews are performing the permanent resurfacing. (Ord. 09-02,
3-10-2009)
7-3-9: TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLETION:
All work provided under this chapter must be completed within seven (7)
calendar days from the date of first excavation, unless otherwise requested and
authorized on the application. All roads are to be restored to a passable and
safe condition within twelve (12) hours of completion. If, within the standard
seven (7) days or other time limit authorized by the city, the road cut or
excavation has not been repaired as required, the city may revoke the
excavation bond and cause the repairs to be made. The costs of repairs shall
include administrative costs. (Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-10: ONE YEAR GUARANTEE:
The applicant, his/her contractor, and agent will maintain and be responsible
for the excavation performed under the permit for a period of one year from the
date of completion and will assume full responsibility for any injury or
settling in any portion of the public right of way in which they have worked.
Should the applicant within said year receive notice from the city that the
work they have performed under their permit has settled, raised, or
deteriorated, the applicant will immediately place barricades to protect the
traveling public, and will within seven (7) business days, unless otherwise
authorized by the city, repair the work at the point of construction placing it
back in a condition equal to its original condition. Should the applicant or
the contractor or agency fail to do this within seven (7) business days, the
city shall have the authority, without further notice, to employ a third party
contractor to repair the work. The city may also choose to perform the
necessary work with their own work crews. The city will first use funds held
within the escrow account to pay for the work performed. In the event that
escrow funds are insufficient to pay for the work performed, the applicant and
his contractor, upon notice from the city, will immediately pay the city the
remaining amount for the work performed. (Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-11: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   The city may direct any person owning or maintaining facilities or
structures in the public way to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or
structures as the city may require. Sewers, pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits,
pipe driveways, vaults, trash receptacles and overhead and underground gas,
electric, telephone, telecommunication and communication facilities shall
specifically be subject to such directives. The person owning or maintaining
the facilities or structures shall, at their own cost and expense and upon
reasonable written notice by the city, promptly protect, or promptly alter or
relocate such facilities or structures, or part thereof, as directed by the
city. In the event that such person refuses or neglects to conform to the
directive of the city, the city shall have the right to break through, remove,
alter or relocate such part of the facilities or structures without liability
to such person. Such person shall pay to the city all costs incurred by the
city in connection with such excavation performed by the city, including also
design, engineering, construction, materials, insurance, court costs and
attorney fees.
   B.   Any directive by the city shall be based upon one of the following:
      1.   The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being
maintained contrary to law, or is determined by the city to be structurally
unsound or defective;
      2.   The facility or structure constitutes a nuisance as defined under
state statute or city ordinance;
      3.   The permit under which the facility or structure was installed has
expired or has been revoked;
      4.   The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such
facilities or structures may pose a hindrance to construction; or
      5.   The grades or lines of the public way are to be altered or changed.
   C.   Any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the public
way who fails to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures upon
notice to do so by the city shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. All costs
of alteration, modification or relocation shall be borne by the person owning
or maintaining the facilities or structures involved.
   D.   Any directive of the city under this section shall be under and
consistent with the city's police power. Unless an emergency condition exists,
the city shall make a good faith effort to consult with the person regarding
any condition that may result in a removal or relocation of facilities in the
public way to consider possible avoidance or minimization of removal or
relocation requirements and provide the directive as far enough in advance of
the required removal or relocation to allow the person a reasonable opportunity
to plan and minimize cost associated with the required removal or relocation.
   E.   This obligation does not apply to facilities or structures originally
located on private property pursuant to a private easement, which property was
later incorporated into the public way, if that prior private easement grants a
superior vested right.
   F.   The city may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other
emergency, as determined by the city in its reasonable discretion, cut or move
any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or under the public way, in
which event the city shall not be liable therefor to a person. The city shall
notify a person in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon
as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any
action taken under this subsection. (Ord. 98-22, 9-22-1998; amd. Ord. 09-02, 3-
10-2009)
7-3-12: FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop order issued by the
city, after notice to the permittee for:
      1.   Violation of any condition of the permit, the bond, or of any
provision of this chapter;
      2.   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the city or law
relating to the excavation; or
      3.   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does
constitute, may constitute, or cause a condition endangering life or property.
   B.   A suspension or revocation by the city, and a stop order, shall take
effect immediately upon entry thereof by the public works director and notice
to the person performing the excavation in the public way. Notice to the person
performing the excavation shall be accomplished when the public works director
has posted a stop work order at the location of the excavation and written
notice has been mailed, return receipt requested, to the address indicated by
the permittee on the permit.
   C.   Whenever the city finds that a default has occurred in the performance
of any term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof may be given to
the principal and to the escrow agent if there is an escrow. Such notice shall
state the excavation to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of
time deemed by the city to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the
excavation.
   D.   In the event that the principal or escrow agent, within a reasonable
time following the giving of such notice (taking into consideration the
exigencies of the situation, the nature of the excavation, the requirements of
public safety and for the protection of persons and property), fails either to
commence and cause the required excavation to be performed with due diligence,
or to indemnify the city for the cost of doing the excavation, as set forth in
the notice, the city may perform the excavation, at the discretion of the
public works director, with city personnel or independent contractors or both,
and suit may be commenced by the city against the principal or escrow agent,
and such other persons as may be liable, to recover the entire amount due to
the city, including attorney fees, on account thereof. In the event that cash
has been deposited, the cost of performing the excavation may be charged
against the amount deposited, and suit brought for the balance due, if any.
(Ord. 98-22, 9-22-1998; amd. Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-13: FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS; PENALTY:
   A.   For failure to conform to the design standards and regulations, the
city may:
      1.   Suspend or revoke the permit;
      2.   Issue a stop order;
      3.   Order removal and replacement of faulty excavation;
      4.   Require an extended warranty period; and/or
      5.   Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance
costs. (Ord. 98-22, 9-22-1998; amd. Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-14: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR STOP ORDER:
Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the city may be appealed by the
permittee to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the
city recorder within ten (10) days of the action of the city. The city council
shall hear such appeal, if written request therefor be timely filed, as soon as
practicable, and render its decision within a reasonable time following filing
of notice of appeal. (Ord. 98-22, 9-22-1998; amd. Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-15: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without
authorization and legal cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light
illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any
manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other
construction site. (Ord. 98-22, 9-22-1998; amd. Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-16: CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING PROVISIONS:
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any other ordinance, agreement, franchise, or other document
governing the excavation of a public way, the more restrictive provisions of
the aforesaid documents shall apply. (Ord. 98-22, 9-22-1998; amd. Ord. 09-02,
3-10-2009)
7-3-17: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a violation of any provision of
this chapter, or failure to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or
stop work, shall be a class B misdemeanor. Each day the violation exists shall
be a separate offense. No criminal conviction shall excuse the person from
otherwise complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-22, 9-22-
1998; amd. Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
7-3-18: EXCAVATIONS FEE CALCULATION:
This section has been prepared in order to demonstrate the process by which the
following fees were calculated:
   A.   Explanation: It is assumed that a brand new road has a design life of
approximately fifteen (15) years. Meaning that if new pavement is installed,
receives the proper maintenance (crack seal, seal coats, etc.), and is not cut
or compromised in any way, it will last approximately fifteen (15) years before
another overlay is needed. If the road is cut, however, the design life of the
road is compromised. The road is now more susceptible to water getting
underneath the asphalt. This allows damage to the road due to freeze/thaw
situations as well as degradation of the base and possibly subbase material.
The square footage of the excavation site restoration is measured to be the
impact on the road. The age of the road being cut has also been considered. If
the road is less than two (2) years old, the design life is shortened more than
if the road is older than two (2) years old.
For the purpose of calculating the fee, the following assumptions have been
made: If a road that is less than two (2) years old is cut, the design life has
been shortened by approximately six (6) years (or 40 percent); if a road that
is older than two (2) years old is cut, the design life has been shortened by
approximately four (4) years (or 25 percent). Also, even though potholes have
minimal square footage, the impact on the road is still the same. Therefore, in
order to adequately compensate for the diminished road integrity of the road,
the fee is the same for all small excavations of one hundred (100) square feet
or less. The following equations represent how the fees are being calculated:
(The following variables and equations are for illustration purpose only. For
actual figures, see current consolidated fee schedule on file with the city.)
Variables:
 
NPC  = New pavement cost = $2.80/s.f.
SSFF = Small square footage compensation factor, less than 2' x 2' = 0.045
TSF  = Total square footage of excavation site restoration
L2F  = Roads less than 2 years old factor = 40% = 0.4
M2F  = Roads more than 2 years old factor = 25% = 0.25
 
   B.   Inspection Fee: This is the cost of the estimated time required for
city staff to inspect the work being performed and give additional direction if
the work being performed is inadequate.
   C.   Diminished Road Integrity Fee:
      Equations:
      Potholes (100 s.f. or less) on roads Less than 2 years old
      = (NPC * 100 s.f. * L2F) / SSFF = ($2.80 * 100 s.f. * 0.4) / 0.045 = $112
      Potholes (100 s.f. or less) on roads More than 2 years old
      = (NPC * 100 s.f. * M2F) / SSFF = ($2.80 * 100 s.f. * 0.25) / 0.045 = $70
      Diminished road integrity fee on roads Less than 2 years old
      = NPC * L2F * TSF = $2.80 * 0.4 * TSF = $1.12 * TSF
      Diminished road integrity fee on roads More than 2 years old
      = NPC * M2F * TSF = $2.80 * 0.25 * TSF = $0.70 * TSF
   D.   Financial Guarantee:
      Equation:
      Escrow amount = NPC * TSF = $2.80 * TSF
(Ord. 09-02, 3-10-2009)
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY, USE AND CONTROL
SECTION:
7-4-1: Unlawful Use
7-4-2: Repair After Unlawful Use
7-4-3: Park Regulations
7-4-4: Franchise; Easement
7-4-5: Acts Exempted
7-4-1: UNLAWFUL USE:
Unless authorized by permit or other written authorization issued by the City
or unless authority is granted by provisions of this Code or other ordinance of
the City now or hereafter enacted, it shall be a Class B misdemeanor and
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code for any person to: (1989 Code § 8-111; amd. 1998 Code)
   A.   Property Controlled By City: Construct, lay, excavate, erect, operate
or maintain over, under, across, in or through any property owned or controlled
by the City, any utility, canal, ditch, construction or building.
   B.   Restricted Areas: Enter upon any property of the City contrary to any
posting or marking restricting or prohibiting use of the area.
   C.   Damage To Property: Intentionally use or perform acts upon property of
the City which materially impairs, alters or damages the property. (1989 Code §
8-111)
7-4-2: REPAIR AFTER UNLAWFUL USE:
The City Council, in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, may
order any person who has damaged, altered or changed any property of the City
to repair or restore the property to its original condition prior to the
damage, alteration or change. (1989 Code § 8-112)
7-4-3: PARK REGULATIONS:
   A.   The city may purchase, lay out, establish, and maintain parks and
playgrounds for the benefit of the citizens of the city.
      1.   For purposes of this section, a "park" shall be defined as real
property owned, leased, or controlled by South Weber City and operated and
maintained by South Weber City and set apart for the use of the general public,
whether developed or undeveloped, and which is usually, or may be, planted with
trees, lawns, and other landscaping, and which may include within its
boundaries facilities for sport, pets, entertainment, dancing, recreation,
picnicking, or swimming, or is planned for such future use.
      2.   Other than those items listed below, the City Manager or designee
may promulgate rules and regulations relating to the city parks and may amend
such rules and regulations from time to time. Any park rules and regulations
adopted by resolution of the City Council shall be incorporated herein by this
reference and any violation of such park rules and regulations shall be deemed
a violation of this section, subject to citation, eviction, and/or repair as
provided elsewhere in this chapter.
   B.   Motor Vehicles:
      1.   Motor Vehicles Specified: For purposes of this section, motor
vehicles include but are not limited to, automobiles, trucks, off road
vehicles, motorcycles, motorbikes, snowmobiles, and any and all other self-
propelled mechanical vehicles, excepting vehicles moved solely by human power,
motorized wheelchairs, and electric bicycles and scooters operating at speeds
lower than ten (10) miles per hour.
      2.   Locations: No motor vehicles may be driven at any place within a
city park, other than in those areas specifically designated and posted as
allowing such vehicles. This shall not apply, however, to motorized or self-
propelled equipment or emergency vehicles used within the park by officers or
employees of the city in the performance of their official duties.
      3.   Snowmobiles and Off-Highway Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to
operate or drive any snowmobile or other off highway vehicle within any area of
any city park or recreation area at any time.
      4.   Speed: It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any motor vehicle
within any city park or recreation area at a speed in excess of that speed
posted on the particular road, trail or pathway within the park. In the absence
of a posted speed limit, no motor vehicle may be operated within any city park
at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour.
      5.   Manner of Operation: No motor vehicles, even though operated within
the speed permitted on the places provided for such vehicles, shall be operated
in a careless or reckless manner to such an extent that it will endanger the
peace, health, and safety of any other person within the city park area.
   C.   Bicycles And Skateboards: Except as otherwise posted, self-propelled
vehicles such as bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, scooters,
or motorized wheelchairs, and similar types of vehicles may be used within
public parks. No self-propelled vehicles or motorized wheelchairs shall be
operated in a careless or reckless manner to such an extent that it will
endanger the peace, health, and safety of any other person within the city park
area or in any way that will damage the facilities, plants, or property within
the park.
   D.   Golf: It shall be unlawful to play or practice golf within any city
park except as part of classes or programs approved by the city.
   E.   Skiing: It shall be unlawful to ice skate, snowboard, or ski within any
city park, except in specific areas as designated by the city.
   F.   Paths, Trails Or Roads: When a trail, path, or road is designated for
any specific purpose or purposes, such as an equestrian trail, bicycle path, or
other use, then such trail may, unless the city shall otherwise permit, only be
used for the specific purposes designated or for incidental uses in connection
therewith which are necessary to accomplish the use permitted.
   G.   Animals:
      1.   Certain Animals Prohibited: No pets are allowed in any city park
except as provided herein. Dogs may be allowed in city parks if leashed and
within a designated dog park unleashed. Dog owners shall clean up after their
pet. See separate dog park rules and regulations.
      2.   Animal Control: No person shall bring or drop off any animal in any
city park for the purpose of allowing such animal to urinate or defecate upon
the park property. If any animal deposits its feces on any park areas, the
owners of such animal shall immediately clean up and remove such feces from the
park premises. Unattended or unlicensed animals found within any city park are
subject to impound by the animal control officer.
      3.   Tethering Animals: No person shall hitch or fasten any animal to any
tree or any other place or structure on park property except within designated
areas.
   H.   Firearms And Explosives: No person shall carry or discharge any weapon,
firearms, firecrackers, rockets, or any other fireworks or explosives within a
city park, except persons who have obtained a special permit from the city to
put on a firework show or as otherwise may be allowed under state law.
   I.   Fire Making: No person shall make or kindle a fire within a city park
for any purpose, unless such person shall do the same in designated areas and
at designated times where a fireplace or other facility intended to contain a
fire is available. The City Council shall designate permitted hours and seasons
for permissible fireplace or fire facility use within city parks in the park
rules and regulations or other resolution of the City Council.
   J.   Camping: No person shall camp or lodge in any city park or playground.
This section shall not apply to authorized city personnel for official city
business or security purposes.
   K.   Defacing Or Destruction Of Property: Except as permitted by the city,
no person shall remove, injure, deface, destroy, or disturb any wood, turf,
grass, soil, sand, gravel, tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, sign, fence,
bench, or other structure, apparatus, or property within a city park; or cut,
take, or remove any plant, or mark or write upon any building, sign, fence,
bench, or other structure within a city park.
   L.   Littering: No dumping or littering shall be allowed on any city park
premises. No garbage generated outside of the park premises shall be
transported to or dumped within the park or within any garbage receptacles
belonging to the city and located within the park. Any garbage generated
through use of the park premises shall be deposited within designated garbage
receptacles.
   M.   Restroom Facilities: No person over six (6) years of age shall enter or
use any restroom designated and marked for use by members of the opposite sex
in a city park or playground, except that city personnel may for maintenance
purposes enter any restroom.
   N.   Prohibited Conduct: No person shall engage in fighting or indulge in
riotous, boisterous, intoxicated, threatening, promiscuous, or indecent conduct
or use any abusive, threatening, profane, or indecent language in a city park.
No person shall conduct any activity within a city park that poses a risk to
public health and safety or which endangers the peace, health, and safety of
any other person within the city park area.
   O.   Hunting And Fishing: No person shall hunt or fish in any city park.
   P.   Park Hours: Unless otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution of the
City Council, city parks may be used between the hours of six o’clock (6:00)
A.M. and ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. City parks shall not be used or occupied
between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.,
except by special permission of the city.
   Q.   Concessions: No person may sell food, drinks, or other items in city
parks, except as may be permitted by special permit approved by the City
Manager or designee.
   R.   Alcoholic Beverages: No person shall consume, sell, or have in their
possession any alcoholic beverage within a city park.
   S.   Violations: Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to fines, forfeitures,
penalties, and/or imprisonment as provided by law.
   T.   Eviction: In addition to other remedies provided by law, any person
violating any of the instructions, signs, or rules established by the city may
be forthwith evicted from the park by any police officer of the city.
   U.   Park Reservations: Certain facilities and areas within the city parks
as designated by the city may be reserved by any person upon payment of an
applicable park reservation fee established by the city. Park reservation
policies may be adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of the City
Council. The city may add conditions to the use of city parks by organized
groups, clubs, or teams including requirements for insurance, waivers, and/or
releases of liability as established in the reservation policies or rules and
regulations. No individual, group, or team may occupy more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the grass area in a city park without renting the space from
the city.
   V.   Smoking or Vaping: No person shall smoke or vape in any city park.
(Ord. 10-01, 1-26-2010; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 4-27-2021; Ord. 2024-05, 4-9-2024)
7-4-4: FRANCHISE; EASEMENT:
   A.   Provisions: The City Council may grant to any person a franchise or
easement on such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable, for the purpose
of entering upon, constructing, building, operating and maintaining any
business or for other use of the property of the City and the provisions of
sections
7-4-1 and
7-4-2 of this chapter shall not apply to the extent such provisions are waived,
qualified or made inapplicable to the rights or privileges granted in the
franchise ordinance or easement.
   B.   In Writing: Any franchise or easement granted by the City shall be in
writing and any franchise or easement not in writing shall be void. (1989 Code
§ 8-113)
7-4-5: ACTS EXEMPTED:
It shall not be a violation of this chapter where any person uses the public
property of the City in the manner or for the purpose for which such property
has been made available for public use. (1989 Code § 8-114)
CHAPTER 5
BRIDGE SAFETY
SECTION:
7-5-1: Title
7-5-2: Declaration Of Policy
7-5-3: Bridge Defined
7-5-4: Administration
7-5-5: Prohibited Activities
7-5-6: Penalty
7-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the BRIDGE SAFETY ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SOUTH
WEBER. (1989 Code § 13-76-10-1111)
7-5-2: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure safety of individuals both as
pedestrians and as the driver of automobiles, while on or using the bridges
within the City. (1989 Code § 13-76-10-1112)
7-5-3: BRIDGE DEFINED:
Bridge means a structure spanning and permitting passage over a waterway. (1989
Code § 13-76-10-1112; amd. 1998 Code)
7-5-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Responsible agency: City Council. (1989 Code § 13-76-10-1113)
   B.   Enforcement agency: The Davis County Sheriff's Office or any other
police officer, law enforcement official or other County officer in connection
with his duties imposed by law. (1989 Code § 13-76-10-1113; amd. 1998 Code)
7-5-5: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Diving And Jumping: It shall be unlawful for any person to dive, jump
or otherwise remove himself from the top or side of any bridge in the City.
   B.   Loiter Or Remain: It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, fish,
linger, loiter or remain on any bridge in the City, unless otherwise
designated. This shall not prohibit any individual from using the bridge to
walk from one side to the other. (1989 Code § 13-76-10-1114)
7-5-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. (1989 Code § 13-76-10-1115; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 6
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
7-6-1: Declaration Of Intent; Scope
7-6-2: Definitions
7-6-3: Franchise Required
7-6-4: Compensation And Other Payments
7-6-5: Franchise Applications
7-6-6: Construction And Technical Requirements
7-6-7: Franchise And License Nontransferable
7-6-8: Oversight And Regulation
7-6-9: Rights Of City
7-6-10: Obligation To Notify
7-6-11: General Provisions
7-6-12: Federal, State And City Jurisdiction
7-6-1: DECLARATION OF INTENT; SCOPE:
   A.   Power To Manage Rights-Of-Way: The City adopts this Chapter pursuant to
its power to manage the rights-of-way, pursuant to common law, the Utah
constitution and statutory authority, and receive fair and reasonable
compensation for the use of rights-of-way by providers as expressly set forth
by section 253 of the Act 1 .
   B.   Scope Of Ordinance: This Chapter shall provide the basic local scheme
for providers of telecommunications services and systems that require the use
of the rights-of-way, including providers of both the system and service, those
providers of the system only, and those providers who do not build the system
but who only provide services. This Chapter shall apply to all future providers
and to all providers in the City prior to the effective date of this Chapter,
whether operating with or without a franchise as set forth in subsection 7-6-
12B of this Chapter.
   C.   Excluded Activity:
      1.   Wireless Services: This Chapter shall not apply to personal wireless
service facilities.
      2.   Provisions Applicable To Excluded Providers: Providers excused by
other law that prohibits the City from requiring a franchise shall not be
required to obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this
Chapter through the exercise of the City's police power and not preempted by
other law shall be applicable. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. Telecommunications Act of 1996, P.L. No. 104-104.
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the
plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The word
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   APPLICATION: The process by which a provider submits a request and indicates
a desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights-of-way of all, or a
part, of the City. An application includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider
to the City concerning: the construction of a telecommunications system over,
under, on or through the rights-of-way; the telecommunications services
proposed to be provided in the City by a provider; and any other matter
pertaining to a proposed system or service.
   CITY: South Weber City, Utah.
   COMPLETION DATE: The date that a provider begins providing services to
customers in the City.
   CONSTRUCTION COSTS: All costs of constructing a system, including make ready
costs, other than engineering fees, attorney or accountant fees, or other
consulting fees.
   CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the
system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control
or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more
than twenty five percent (25%) of any provider (which person or group of
persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or
"controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than
one person or group of persons.
   FCC: The Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto.
   FRANCHISE: The rights and obligation extended by the City to a provider to
own, lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights-of-way
within the boundaries of the City. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include: a) any other permit or authorization
required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the
City required by the ordinances and laws of the City; b) any other permit,
agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on rights-of-
way or public property including, without limitation, permits and agreements
for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned
by the City or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in
or along the rights-of-way.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contract entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter between the City and a franchisee that sets forth,
subject to this Chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will
be exercised.
   GROSS REVENUE: Includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as
gross revenue within the meaning of title 11, chapter 26, Utah Code Annotated,
1953, as amended.
   INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the rights-of-way.
   OPEN VIDEO SERVICE: Any video programming services provided to any person
through the use of rights-of-way, by a provider that is certified by the FCC to
operate an open video system pursuant to sections 651 et seq., of the
Telecommunications Act (to be codified at 47 USC title VI, part V), regardless
of the system used.
   OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: The system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides,
optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment,
or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying or distributing open video services to or from subscribers or
locations within the City.
   OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system
and directly or through one or more persons owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
   ORDINANCE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE: This Telecommunications Chapter
concerning the granting of franchises in and by the City for the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
   PSC: The Public Service Commission, or any successor thereto.
   PERSON: Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the City.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Has the same meaning as provided in
section 704 of the Act (47 USC 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly
known as cellular and PCS services that do not install any system or portion of
a system in the rights-of-way.
   PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, resaler, or system lessee.
   RESALER: Refers to any person that provides local exchange service over a
system for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or
lease the underlying system used for the transmission.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY: The surface of and the space above and below any public
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or
hereafter existing as such within the City.
   SIGNAL: Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or
laser or radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or
digital format.
   SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific
portion of a system to provide services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by
the user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video, and voice),
without change in the form or content of the information sent and received.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE(S) OR SERVICES: Any telecommunications services
provided by a provider within the City that the provider is authorized to
provide under Federal, State and local law, and any equipment and/or facilities
required for and integrated with the services provided within the City, except
that these terms do not include cable service as defined in the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 USC section 521, et seq.), and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles,
antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment,
wire and appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a provider, located in the
rights-of-way and utilized in the provision of services, including fully
digital or analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced
telecommunications services. Telecommunications system or systems also includes
an open video system.
   WIRE: Fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
(Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
7-6-3: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
   A.   Nonexclusive Franchise: The City is empowered and authorized to issue
nonexclusive franchises governing the installation, construction, and
maintenance of systems in the City's rights-of-way, in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. The franchise is granted through a franchise
agreement entered into between the City and provider.
   B.   Every Provider Must Obtain: Except to the extent preempted by Federal
or State law, as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction,
including any appeals, every provider must obtain a franchise prior to
constructing a telecommunications system or providing telecommunications
services using the rights-of-way, and every provider must obtain a franchise
before constructing an open video system or providing open video services via
an open video system. Any open video system or service shall be subject to the
customer service and consumer protection provisions applicable to the cable TV
companies to the extent the City is not preempted or permitted as ultimately
interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals. The
fact that particular telecommunications systems may be used for multiple
purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By
way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must
obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to provide telecommunications
services over the same system, must also obtain a telecommunications franchise.
   C.   Nature Of Grant: A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or
legal, in the rights-of-way. A franchise is only the right to occupy rights-of-
way on a nonexclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period
stated in the franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned, or
subleased. A franchise does not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate
access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its system on the
property of others, including the City's property. This Section shall not be
construed to prohibit a provider from leasing conduit to another provider, so
long as the lessee has obtained a franchise.
   D.   Current Providers: Except to the extent exempted by Federal or State
law, any provider acting without a franchise on the effective date of this
Chapter shall request issuance of a franchise from the City within ninety (90)
days of the effective date of this Chapter. If such request is made, the
provider may continue providing service during the course of negotiations. If a
timely request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a franchise is not
granted, the provider shall comply with the provisions of subsection
7-6-9D of this Chapter.
   E.   Nature Of Franchise: The franchise granted by the City under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be a nonexclusive franchise providing the
right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its system
on, over and under the rights-of-way in order to provide services.
   F.   Regulatory Approval Needed: Before offering or providing any services
pursuant to the franchise, a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory
approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of
such services from the appropriate Federal, State and local authorities, if
required, and shall submit to the City upon the written request of the City
evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
   G.   Term: No franchise issued pursuant to this Chapter shall have a term of
less than five (5) years, or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each franchise
shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
7-6-4: COMPENSATION AND OTHER PAYMENTS:
   A.   Compensation: As fair and reasonable compensation for any franchise
granted pursuant to this Chapter, a provider shall have the following
obligations:
      1.   Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the City to review
an application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or
charges, a provider shall pay to the City, at the time of application, five
hundred dollars ($500.00) as a nonrefundable application fee.
      2.   Franchise Fees: The franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the
franchise agreement. The obligation to pay a franchise fee shall commence on
the completion date. The franchise fee is offset by any business license fee or
business license tax enacted by the City.
      3.   Excavation Permits: The provider shall also pay fees required for an
excavation permit as provided in Section
7-3-1 of this Title.
   B.   Timing: Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all
franchise fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within forty five (45) days of
the close of each calendar month.
   C.   Fee Statement And Certification: Unless a franchise agreement provides
otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the
manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to its
accuracy.
   D.   Future Costs: A provider shall pay to the City or to third parties, at
the direction of the City, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and
reasonable expenses that the City incurs for the services of third parties
(including, but not limited to, attorneys and other consultants) in connection
with any renewal or provider-initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this
Chapter or a franchise; provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a
reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. In the event the
parties are unable to agree, either party may submit the issue to binding
arbitration in accordance with the rules and procedures of the American
Arbitration Association.
   E.   Taxes And Assessments: To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities, other than the City on the use of the City
property as a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights-of-way,
the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such
taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
Chapter.
   F.   Interest On Late Payments: In the event that any payment is not
actually received by the City on or before the applicable date fixed in the
franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the
rate charged for delinquent State taxes.
   G.   No Accord And Satisfaction: No acceptance by the City of any fee shall
be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount,
nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any
claim the City may have for additional sums payable.
   H.   Not In Lieu Of Other Taxes Or Fees: The fee payment is not a payment in
lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in
this Chapter, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not
limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the City- owned
poles are not waived and remain applicable.
   I.   Continuing Obligation And Holdover: In the event a provider continues
to operate all or any part of the system after the term of the franchise, such
operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this
Chapter and the franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation and
other payment provisions throughout the period of such continued operation,
provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a
renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a limitation on the
remedies, if any, available to the City as a result of such continued operation
after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution.
   J.   Costs Of Publication: A provider shall assume any publication costs
associated with its franchise that may be required by law. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-
1998)
7-6-5: FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Franchise Application: To obtain a franchise to construct, own,
maintain or provide services through any system within the City, to obtain a
renewal of a franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter, or to obtain the City
approval of a transfer of a franchise, as provided in subsection
7-6-7A2 of this Chapter, granted pursuant to this Chapter, an application must
be filed with City on the form attached to Ordinance 98-3 as Exhibit A, which
is hereby incorporated by reference. The application form may be changed by the
Mayor, so long as such changes request information that is consistent with this
Chapter. Such application form, as amended, is incorporated by reference.
   B.   Application Criteria: In making a determination as to an application
filed pursuant to this Chapter, the City may, but shall not be limited to,
request the following from the provider:
      1.   A copy of the order from the PSC granting a certificate of
convenience and necessity;
      2.   Certification of the provider's financial ability to compensate the
City for provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights-of-way during
the franchise term proposed by the provider;
      3.   Provider's agreement to comply with the requirements of Section
7-6-6 of this Chapter.
   C.   Franchise Determination: The City, in its discretion, shall determine
the award of any franchise on the basis of these and other considerations
relevant to the use of the rights-of-way, without competitive bidding. (Ord.
98-3, 2-10-1998)
7-6-6: CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirement: No provider shall receive a franchise unless it
agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this Section governing
construction and technical requirements for its system, in addition to any
other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the City or the
franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in the cost of
locating portions of the system with other systems or with City utilities. A
provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the Excavation
Ordinance, before commencing any work in the rights-of-way.
   B.   Quality: All work involved in the construction, maintenance, repair,
upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and
reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time,
it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by Federal
law, or the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the system,
including, without limitation, any means used to distribute signals over or
within the system, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or
quality of service or reliability, then a provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
   C.   Licenses And Permits: A provider shall have the sole responsibility for
diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or
other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain,
upgrade or repair the system, including, but not limited to, any necessary
approvals from persons and/or the City to use private property, easements,
poles and conduits. A provider shall obtain any required permit, license,
approval or authorization, including, but not limited to, excavation permits,
pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for
which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
   D.   Relocation Of The System:
      1.   New Grades Or Lines: If the grades or lines of any rights- of-way
are changed at any time in a manner affecting the system, then a provider shall
comply with the requirements of the Excavation Ordinance.
      2.   The City Authority To Move System In Case Of An Emergency: The City
may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined
by the City in its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the system
and appurtenances on, over or under the rights-of-way of the City, in which
event the City shall not be liable therefor to a provider. The City shall
notify a provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon
as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any
action taken under this Section. Notice shall be given as provided in
subsection
7-6-11D of this Chapter.
      3.   A Provider Required To Temporarily Move System For Third Party: A
provider shall, upon prior reasonable written notice by the City or any person
holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable
under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its system to permit the
moving of said structure. A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any
person other than the City for any such movement of its systems.
      4.   Rights-Of-Way Change; Obligation To Move System: When the City is
changing a rights-of-way and makes a written request, a provider is required to
move or remove its system from the rights-of-way, without cost to the City, to
the extent provided in the Excavation Ordinance. This obligation does not apply
to systems originally located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated into the rights-of-way, if that
private easement grants a superior vested right. This obligation exists whether
or not the provider has obtained an excavation permit.
   E.   Protect Structures: In connection with the construction, maintenance,
repair, upgrade or removal of the system, a provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the City. A
provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the City to alter any water
main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or any other Municipal
structure on, over or under the rights- of-way of the City required because of
the presence of the system. Any such alteration shall be made by the City or
its designee on a reimbursable basis. A provider agrees that it shall be liable
for the costs incurred by the City to replace or repair and restore to its
prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified by the City, any
Municipal structure or any other rights-of-way of the City involved in the
construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system that may
become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of
a provider pursuant to the franchise.
   F.   No Obstruction: In connection with the construction, maintenance,
upgrade, repair or removal of the system, a provider shall not unreasonably
obstruct the rights-of-way of fixed guide way systems, railways, passenger
travel, or other traffic to, from or within the City without the prior consent
of the appropriate authorities.
   G.   Safety Precautions: A provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its
work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such
other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply
with all applicable Federal, State and local requirements including, but not
limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code.
   H.   Repair: After written reasonable notice to the provider, unless, in the
sole determination of the City, an imminent danger exists, any rights-of-way
within the City which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may be repaired by
the City at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing
before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the City shall submit to such a
provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and restoring the
rights-of-way intruded upon. The provider shall, within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof.
   I.   System Maintenance: A provider shall:
      1.   Install and maintain all parts of its system in a nondangerous
condition throughout the entire period of its franchise.
      2.   Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent
engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the National
Electrical Safety Code and all other applicable Federal, State and local laws
or regulations.
      3.   At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized
representative of the City of the system and its effect on the rights-of-way.
   J.   Trimming Of Trees: A provider shall have the authority to trim trees,
in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement
restrictions, upon and hanging over rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches
of such trees from coming in contact with its system. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
7-6-7: FRANCHISE AND LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
   A.   Notification Of Sale:
      1.   Notification And Election: When a provider is the subject of a sale,
transfer, lease, assignment, sublease or disposed of, in whole or in part,
either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or
otherwise, such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek
the approval of the PSC, the provider or its successor entity shall promptly
notify the City of the nature of the transaction. The notification shall
include either:
         a.   The successor entity's certification that the successor entity
unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of the original provider's franchise
agreement; or
         b.   The successor entity's application in compliance with Section
7-6-5 of this Chapter.
      2.   Transfer Of Franchise: Upon receipt of a notification and
certification in accordance with subsection A1a of this Section, the City
designee, as provided in subsection
7-6-9A1 of this Chapter, shall send notice affirming the transfer of the
franchise to the successor entity. If the City has good cause to believe that
the successor entity may not comply with this Chapter or the franchise
agreement, it may require an application for the transfer. The application
shall comply with Section
7-6-5 of this Chapter.
      3.   If PSC Approval No Longer Required: If the PSC no longer exists, or
if its regulations or State law no longer require approval of transactions
described in this subsection A, and the City has good cause to believe that the
successor entity may not comply with this Chapter or the franchise agreement,
it may require an application. The application shall comply with Section
7-6-5 of this Chapter.
   B.   Events Of Sale: The following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with
subsection A of this Section: 1) the sale, assignment or other transfer of all
or a majority of a provider's assets to another person; 2) the sale, assignment
or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity
interests in a provider by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners,
members or other equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest in a
provider; 3) the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership,
membership or other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new
controlling interest in such a provider; or 4) the entry by a provider into an
agreement with respect to the management or operation of such provider or its
system. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
7-6-8: OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION:
   A.   Insurance, Indemnity, And Security: Prior to the execution of a
franchise, a provider will deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional
letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise, and
shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the
franchise. A provider shall also indemnify the City as set forth in the
franchise.
   B.   Oversight: The City shall have the right to oversee, regulate and
inspect periodically the construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the system,
and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the franchise and
applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain managerial and
operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a provider to
prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the City at all times
throughout the term, that a provider is in compliance with the franchise. A
provider shall retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of
limitations.
   C.   Maintain Records: A provider shall at all times maintain:
      1.   On file with the City, a full and complete set of plans, records and
"as-built" hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an
electronic format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the
City's existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the
types of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights-of-way,
properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by
appropriate symbols and marks which shall include annotations of all rights-of-
way where work will be undertaken. As used herein, "as-built" maps includes
"file construction prints". Maps shall be drawn to scale. "As-built" maps,
including the compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be
submitted within thirty (30) days of completion of work or within thirty (30)
days after completion of modification and repairs. "As-built" maps are not
required of the provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the
existing system to the extent they do not exist.
      2.   Throughout the term of the franchise, a provider shall maintain
complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership,
and operations of a provider with respect to the system in a manner that allows
the City at all times to determine whether a provider is in compliance with the
franchise. Should the City reasonably determine that the records are not being
maintained in such a manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the
books and/or records are maintained so that a provider comes into compliance
with this Section. All financial books and records which are maintained in
accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that
regulates utilities in the State, and generally accepted accounting principles
shall be deemed to be acceptable under this Section.
   D.   Confidentiality: If the information required to be submitted is
proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by Federal, State or local
law, upon proper request by a provider, such information shall be classified as
a protected record within the meaning of the Utah Government Records Access and
Management Act ("GRAMA"), making it available only to those who must have
access to perform their duties on behalf of the City, provided that a provider
notifies the City of, and clearly labels the information which a provider deems
to be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling
shall be the sole responsibility of the provider.
   E.   Provider's Expense: All reports and records required under this Chapter
shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter or a franchise.
   F.   Right Of Inspection: For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of
the franchise fee, the books and records of the provider pertaining thereto
shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the
City at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to
inspect or audit the books and records, provided that the City shall not audit
the books and records of the provider more often than annually. The provider
agrees to reimburse the City the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit
discloses that the provider has paid ninety five percent (95%) or less of the
compensation due the City for the period of such audit. In the event the
accounting rendered to the City by the provider herein is found to be
incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty
(30) calendar days of written notice, it being agreed that the City may accept
any amount offered by the provider, but the acceptance thereof by the City
shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is
later found to be incorrect. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
7-6-9: RIGHTS OF CITY:
   A.   Enforcement And Remedies:
      1.   Enforcement; City Designee: The City is responsible for enforcing
and administering this Chapter, and the City or its designee, as appointed by
the Mayor, is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any
franchise agreement.
      2.   Enforcement Provision: Any franchise granted pursuant to this
Chapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and
protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this Chapter,
including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for
accessing the Bond/Security Fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
   B.   Force Majeure: In the event a provider's performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this Chapter or a franchise is
prevented by a cause or event not within a provider's control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this Section, causes or events
not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation: acts of
God; strikes; sabotage; riots or civil disturbances; failure or loss of
utilities; explosions; acts of public enemies; and natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires.
   C.   Extended Operation And Continuity Of Services:
      1.   Continuation After Expiration: Upon either expiration or revocation
of a franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter, the City shall have discretion
to permit a provider to continue to operate its system or provide services for
an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such
expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to operate its system under
the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise granted pursuant to
this Chapter.
      2.   Continuation By Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier: If the provider is
the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to
operate its system and provide services without regard to revocation or
expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith.
   D.   Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property:
      1.   Abandoned System: In the event that: a) the use of any portion of
the system is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, and
thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the City to the last
known address of provider; b) any system has been installed in the rights-of-
way without complying with the requirements of this Chapter or franchise; or c)
the provisions of subsection
7-6-3E of this Chapter are applicable and no franchise is granted, a provider,
except the provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed
to have abandoned such system.
      2.   Removal Of Abandoned System: The City, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a provider written permission to abandon, without removing,
any system, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained
under a franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this Chapter, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time the
abandoned system and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights-of-way to their former state at the time such system was
installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense, any
excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights-of-way in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires,
poles or attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of the rights-of- way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to
and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this
Chapter and any security fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a
provider with the terms and conditions of this Section.
      3.   Transfer Of Abandoned System To City: Upon abandonment of any system
in place, a provider, if required by the City, shall submit to the City a
written instrument, satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City
the ownership of the abandoned system.
      4.   Removal Of Aboveground System: At the expiration of the term for
which a franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as
provided for by this Chapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or
transfer, the City shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its
expense, all aboveground portions of a system from the rights- of-way within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty
(180) days. If the provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall
not be required to remove its system, but shall negotiate a renewal in good
faith.
      5.   Leaving Underground System: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
set forth in this Chapter, a provider may abandon any underground system in
place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights-
of-way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other
person. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
7-6-10: OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY:
   A.   Publicizing Work: Before entering onto any private property, a provider
shall make a good faith attempt to contact the property owners in advance, and
describe the work to be performed. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
7-6-11: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conflicts: In the event of a conflict between any provision of this
chapter and a franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter
in effect at the time the franchise is entered into shall control.
   B.   Severability: If any provision of this chapter is held by any federal,
state or local court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting
with any federal or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in
any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and all
appellate remedies with regard to the validity of the chapter provisions in
question are exhausted, such provision shall be considered a separate,
distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not
affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the
event that such law is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise
changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no
longer in conflict with such law the provision in question shall return to full
force and effect and shall again be binding on the city and the provider,
provided that the city shall give the provider thirty (30) days, or a longer
period of time as may be reasonably required for a provider to comply with such
a rejuvenated provision, written notice of the change before requiring
compliance with such provision.
   C.   New Developments: It shall be the policy of the city to liberally amend
this chapter, upon application of a provider, when necessary to enable the
provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of
telecommunications which will afford the provider an opportunity to more
effectively, efficiently, or economically serve itself or the public.
   D.   Notices: All notices from a provider to the city required under this
chapter or pursuant to a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
directed to the officer as designated by the mayor. A provider shall provide in
any application for a franchise the identity, address and phone number to
receive notices from the city. A provider shall immediately notify the city of
any change in its name, address, or telephone number.
   E.   Exercise Of Police Power: To the full extent permitted by applicable
law either now or in the future, the city reserves the right to adopt or issue
such rules, regulations, orders, or other directives that it finds necessary or
appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
7-6-12: FEDERAL, STATE AND CITY JURISDICTION:
   A.   Construction: This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent
with all applicable federal and state statutes.
   B.   Ordinance Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all franchises
granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter. This chapter shall
further apply, to the extent permitted by applicable federal or state law to
all existing franchises granted prior to the effective date of this chapter and
to a provider providing services, without a franchise, prior to the effective
date of this chapter. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
   C.   Other Applicable Ordinances: A provider's rights are subject to the
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the
health, safety and welfare of the public. A provider shall comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to its
police powers. In particular, all providers shall comply with the city land use
requirements. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006)
   D.   City Failure To Enforce: A provider shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any
franchise granted pursuant to this chapter by reason of any failure of the city
to enforce prompt compliance.
   E.   Construed According To Utah Law: This chapter and any franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the
substantive laws of the state. (Ord. 98-3, 2-10-1998)
CHAPTER 7
   DISPOSAL OR LEASE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-7-1: Purpose
7-7-2: Definitions
7-7-3: Disposal Of Public Property
7-7-1: PURPOSE:
The city council of South Weber, Utah, deems that in order to ensure an
equitable, competitive process in the disposition or lease of public property
this "disposal or lease of public property" regulation be established. (Ord.
07-05, 3-27-2007)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   REASONABLE NOTICE: Publishing a notice of the proposed disposition and of a
public hearing before the city council to consider such disposition once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city.
   SIGNIFICANT PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY: All real property. (Ord. 07-05, 3-27-
2007)
7-7-3: DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   The city shall have the authority to sell, lease, convey and dispose of
real and personal property for the benefit of the city as provided by Utah Code
Annotated section
10-8-2, as amended.
   B.   Before the city may dispose of a significant parcel of real property,
the city shall:
      1.   Provide reasonable notice of the proposed disposition at least
fourteen (14) days before a scheduled meeting at which the city will hear
public comment; and
      2.   Hold a meeting at which the city council accepts public comment on
the proposed disposition.
   C.   All disposal, leases, or subleases of such property of the city other
than a significant parcel of real property, shall be made, as nearly as
possible, under the same conditions and limitations as required by city
ordinances and state law for the purchase or sale of property.
   D.   The city council may also authorize at its discretion and under such
terms and conditions as it may deem desirable, fair and appropriate,
considering intended use, property tax value, and the interests of the city,
the sale of any public property, through public auction or other method
designed to best serve the interests of city residents and produce a fair
return; the trade or exchange of any public property; and the lease or sublease
of any public property. Methods for the sale of public property may include,
but are not limited to, listing with a broker, auction, or private
negotiations. (Ord. 07-05, 3-27-2007)
TITLE 8
WATER, SEWER, STORM WATER AND DRAINAGE
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE 1
SECTION:
8-1-1: Water Department
8-1-2: Applications For Connection, Service
8-1-3: Fees
8-1-4: Statement Of Charges; Delinquency
8-1-5: Discontinuance Of Service
8-1-6: Use Without Payment Prohibited
8-1-7: Use Without Authority; Restrictions
8-1-8: Installation Of Water Lines
8-1-9: Pipe Requirements
8-1-10: Water Mains Extended
8-1-11: Water Vehicles
8-1-12: Access By Department
8-1-13: Water Use For Motors And Certain Machinery Restricted
8-1-14: Fire Hydrants
8-1-15: Scarcity Of Water
8-1-16: Excessive Use Of Sprinklers
8-1-17: Waste Of Water
8-1-18: Leaks On Property Owner's Side
8-1-19: Water Meters
8-1-20: Service Outside City
8-1-21: Nonliability For Damages
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4 of this title for secondary water connection requirements.
8-1-1: WATER DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Creation: The Water Department of the City is hereby created. It shall
administer the operation and maintenance of the water system of the City. (1989
Code § 14-110)
   B.   Director: There is hereby created the position of Public Works
Director. (1989 Code § 14-111; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Duties: The Public Works Director shall manage and supervise the City
water system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to
resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the City Council from time to
time prescribing his powers and duties and directing the manner and frequency
with which he shall make reports to the Mayor relating to the water system. All
of the functions and activities of the Public Works Director shall be carried
on under the direction of the Mayor. (1989 Code § 14-112; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-2: APPLICATIONS FOR CONNECTION, SERVICE:
   A.   Connection: Any person, other than a subdivider or developer seeking
multiple connections, who desires or is required to secure a new connection to
the City water system, shall file with the Water Department for each connection
a written and signed connection application which is on file in the City
office. (1989 Code § 14-113; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Connection By Subdividers: Whenever a subdivider or developer desires
or is required to install water connections and extensions for a subdivision or
development, the subdivider or developer shall enter into a written extension
agreement which shall constitute an application for permission to make the
extensions and connections and an agreement specifying the terms and conditions
under which the water extensions and connections shall be made and the payments
that shall be required. (1989 Code § 14-114)
   C.   Service: The current property owner is required to secure water service
when such service is available from the City water system by completing the
required application/agreement, presenting a legal form of identification
(driver's license, passport, tax ID, green card) to the City offices, and
paying the associated sign-up or connection fee.
   D.   Invoicing Regulations: The property owner shall be on record as the
responsible party. Invoicing for services shall only be issued to the property
owner. In the case of a rental, shutoff notices shall only be mailed to the
property owner. The property owner may add an additional name, such as the name
of the renter, to the invoice; however, the invoice will reflect the property
owner's name. (Ord. 16-09, 7-26-2016)
8-1-3: FEES:
   A.   Service Rates And Connection Fees: The rates, penalty fee for
delinquency in payment, sign-up fee, after hours service fee, connection fee,
shut-off fee for non-payment, tampering fee, reservoir fee, inspection fee and
other charges incidental to connection and services from the City water system
shall be fixed from time to time by resolution enacted by the City Council. The
City Council may from time to time promulgate rules for levying, billing,
guaranteeing and collecting charges for water services and all other rules
necessary for the management and control of the water system. Rates for
services furnished shall be uniform with respect to each class or classes of
service established or that may hereafter be established. (Ord. 16-09, 7-26-
2016)
   B.   Special Rates: The City Council may from time to time fix by agreement
or resolution special rates and conditions for users using exceptionally large
amounts of water service or making use of the water system under exceptional
circumstances, upon such terms and conditions as they may deem proper. (1989
Code § 14-118)
   C.   Complaints; Corrections: The City Council is hereby constituted as a
Board of Equalization of water rates to hear complaints and make corrections of
any assessments deemed to be illegal, unequal or unjust. They may, if they see
fit, rebate all or any part of the water bill of any indigent person. (1989
Code § 14-119; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-4: STATEMENT OF CHARGES; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Statement: Each month the City shall mail to each user a printed
statement, stating thereon the amount of utility charges assessed for the
month, including any past due amounts. (1989 Code § 14-121)
   B.   Delinquency: The utility statement shall specify the amount of the
bill, the place of payment and date due. If any customer fails to pay the
utility charges on or before close of business on the eighteenth day of the
month (or next business day if the eighteenth falls on Saturday, Sunday or
holiday), a late fee, as reflected on the currently adopted fee schedule, will
be assessed the following business day and shall be reflected on the next
utility statement. If the utility bill is not paid on or before the eighteenth
day of the following month, a courtesy notice will be mailed to the customer
stating all charges/fees must be paid in full on or before the shut-off day in
order to avoid shutoff. If the full balance of the utility bill is not paid on
or before the day of shut-off, a shut-off fee will be assessed in accordance
with the currently adopted fee schedule. Once a shutoff fee has been assessed,
the fee shall be due and payable even if the water is not actually turned off.
Water will be turned on no sooner than three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the day it
is turned off and only after all charges/late fees have been paid in full. No
extensions of payment will be afforded once the water service has been shut-off
for non-payment. If payment has not been made to the City office by five
o'clock (5:00) P.M., the water will remain turned off until the next day of
business.
All delinquent payments shall be made at the City office in the form of cash or
credit card. Once penalty fees have been assessed to a customer's account for
nonpayment, such fees shall only be removed upon authorization of the City
Manager, or designee. If a due date falls on a holiday or a weekend, payment
will be due on the next business day.
   C.   Extensions: No extensions of payment will be afforded once the water
service has been shut-off for non-payment. Extension of payment and avoidance
of late and services fees may be granted by the City Manager or designee.
However, no extension of payment will be granted longer than the following
month's scheduled shutoff date. If more time is needed, the customer must
contact the City Manager or designee for an additional extension. At this time,
a payment schedule will be established and signed by the customer. (Ord. 16-09,
7-26-2016)
   D.   Enforcement Of Delinquent Charges: The City Manager or designee is
hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the payment of all delinquent
utility charges by an action of law in the name of the City. (1989 Code § 14-
121; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 08-11, 8-26-2008, eff. 10-1-2008)
   E.   Legal Proceedings: If any person fails to pay his utility charges
within the designated time frame, the City is hereby authorized to take all
action necessary to enforce collection. Such action may include, but not be
limited to, the commencement of legal proceedings in a court of proper
jurisdiction seeking judgment for all the amount of the delinquent fees, late
fees and service fee charges and all costs of collection, including a
collection fee based on a percentage in accordance with the City's adopted fee
schedule and Utah Code Annotated 12-1-11, and including court costs and
reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 13-14, 7-16-2013)
   F.   Option To Terminate Not Waived: Nothing herein shall be construed as a
waiver by the City of its option to terminate water service if payment is not
made as required herein. (1989 Code § 14-121)
8-1-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Any customer desiring to discontinue service shall notify the City of such fact
at least ten (10) days before the date when such service shall be discontinued.
On giving such notice, the customer shall not be responsible for water bills
incurred after the date specified in the notice. Any credit balance in favor of
the customer as a result of an advance payment of bills will be refunded upon
discontinuation of service. (Ord. 11-01, 4-26-2011)
8-1-6: USE WITHOUT PAYMENT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family, servants, or agents to
utilize the City water or sewage system without paying therefor, as herein
provided or, without authority, to open any fire hydrant, stopcock, valve, or
other fixtures attached to the system of water supply unless it is done
pursuant to proper application, agreement or resolution. It shall be unlawful
to injure, deface, or impair any part or appurtenance of the water or sewer
system, or to cast anything into any reservoir or tank which is part of the
water system. (1989 Code § 14-120; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-7: USE WITHOUT AUTHORITY; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Turning On Water After Being Turned Off Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful for any person, after the water has been turned off from the premises
for nonpayment of water charges or other violation of the ordinances, rules,
regulations, or resolutions pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or allow
the water to be turned on or used without authority from the City. If water is
turned on or used without authority from the City, a tampering fee shall be
assessed against the property owner. (Ord. 16-09, 7-26-2016)
   B.   Separate Connections:
      1.   As used herein, "separate water user" shall mean each individual,
family, tenant, landlord or resident who occupies a home, basement apartment,
separate dwelling, twin house, apartment unit or any structure wherein the
living quarters' bathing facilities, washing facilities or cooking facilities
are separate and distinct from the other living quarters' bathing facilities,
washing facilities or cooking facilities in the structure.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more water users to be supplied
from the same service pipe, connection or water meter unless special permission
for such combination usage has been granted by the City Council and the
premises served are owned by the same owner. In all such cases, a failure on
the part of any one of the users to comply with this subsection shall warrant a
withholding of a supply of water through the service connections until
compliance or payment has been made, and in any event, the property owner shall
be primarily liable to the City for all water services utilized on all such
premises. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the power of the City to
require separate pipes, connections or meters at a subsequent time.
      3.   An exception to subsection B2 of this section is granted to where
two (2) or more separate water users are receiving water from and through the
same meter on the effective date hereof, subject to the following:
         a.   Each separate water user herein shall be charged the standard
monthly rate for water service as determined by resolution of the City Council.
The individual or entity that applied for or received the water connection
shall be responsible for the payment of each and every water bill incurred as a
result of that water connection.
         b.   If two (2) or more separate water users are receiving water from
and through the same meter, the individual or entity that applied for or
received the water connection shall be responsible for the payment of each and
every water bill incurred as a result of that water connection. If two (2) or
more separate water users occupy the apartment unit, basement apartment, home
or separate dwelling during any month, the individual or entity that applied
for or received the water connection shall pay a fee for the water service as
if the separate water user had occupied the apartment unit, basement apartment,
home or separate dwelling for the entire month, unless the individual or entity
that applied for or received the water connection notifies the City that the
tenant or other occupant living in the apartment unit, basement apartment, home
or separate dwelling has ceased to occupy the premises, in which case the water
bill shall be prorated for that month from the date the City is so notified.
(1989 Code § 14-123)
   C.   Unauthorized Users: It shall be unlawful for any water service user to
permit any person from other premises or any unauthorized person to use or
obtain water services regularly from his premises or water facilities, either
outside or inside his premises. (1989 Code § 14-124)
   D.   Adjoining Premises: No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water
pipes across lots or buildings to adjoining premises without permission from
the Public Works Director and subject to such requirements relating to controls
as may be imposed by him. (1989 Code § 14-127B; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Visitors: Individuals in a recreational vehicle, not including a
manufactured home, visiting the premises of an authorized user and continuing
to live therein during the period of visitation may receive water service from
the service pipes or facilities of the host during the visitation period which
shall not exceed two (2) weeks. Continued use thereafter shall be deemed
unauthorized and violative of the provisions of this chapter relating to
separate connections and unauthorized use. (1989 Code § 14-125; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-8: INSTALLATION OF WATER LINES:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, repair,
alter or connect any water line to the City culinary water system without first
having received a construction permit from the office of the City Recorder.
(1989 Code § 14-137; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Application: Applications for permits to make water connections or
other alteration or for laying or repairing lines connected directly or
indirectly to the City water system must be made in writing by a licensed
plumber, his authorized agent, or by the owner of the premises, who shall
describe the nature of the work to be done for which the application is made.
(1989 Code § 14-138)
   C.   Determination Of Approval: The application shall be granted if the
Public Works Director determines that: (1989 Code § 14-138; amd. 1998 Code)
      1.   The connection, repair, alteration or installation will cause no
damage to the street in which the water main is laid, or that it will not be
prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or may
thereafter be connected to the water main.
      2.   The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations,
specifications and standards of materials required by the City. (1989 Code §
14-138)
   D.   Line And Grade Designation: All connections, alterations or
installations shall be to the line and grade designated by the Public Works
Director. (1989 Code § 14-138; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Fees: Fees for permits or for inspection services shall be of such
amounts as the city council shall from time to time determine by resolution.
(1989 Code § 14-138)
   F.   Moving Or Replacement Of Water Lines: In the event that the City in its
sole discretion determines that any water line of the City must be moved or
replaced, the City shall bear that portion of the cost of such move or
replacement which applies to main lines up to the property line of the
customer. The cost of reconnecting such new line or lines from the house of the
customer to the point of connection shall be borne by the customer. (1989 Code
§ 14-139; amd. 1998 Code)
   G.   When Permits Shall Not Be Issued: Permission to connect with the City
water system shall not be given unless the plumbing in the house or building to
be connected meets the provisions of the Building and Plumbing Codes 1  of the
City. (1989 Code § 14-140)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9 of this Code.
8-1-9: PIPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Good Repair: All users of water services shall keep their service pipes
and connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at
their own expense. No person except under the direction of the Public Works
Director shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of laying,
removing or repairing any service pipe. (1989 Code § 14-126; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Quality Of Service Pipe: All service and other pipe used in conjunction
with the water services of the City shall be of such material, quality, and
specifications as the city council may from time to time by resolution provide,
and shall be installed at such distances below ground as may be specified by
regulations. All work, alterations or extensions affecting water pipes shall be
subject to the acceptance of the Public Works Director, and no connections with
any water mains shall be made without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the City. (1989 Code § 14-127A; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-10: WATER MAINS EXTENDED:
   A.   Petition To City Council: Any person or persons, including any
subdivider, who desires to have the water mains extended within the City, and
is willing to advance the whole expense of such extension and receive the
return of an agreed portion thereof, as hereinafter provided, may make
application to the city council by petition. The petition shall contain a
description of such proposed extension accompanied by a map showing the
location of the proposed extension together with an offer to advance the whole
expense thereof, which cost shall be verified by the Public Works Director. The
city council may grant or deny the petition as in its discretion seems best for
the welfare of existing water users in the City. (1989 Code § 14-143; amd. 1998
Code)
   B.   Cost Determined: Upon the receipt of such petition and map and before
the petition is granted, the city council shall obtain from the Public Works
Director a statement showing the whole cost or expense of making such
extension. (1989 Code § 14-144; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Amount Deposited: If the city council grants the petition, the amount
of the cost of making the extension, as certified by the Public Works Director
shall be deposited with the City Recorder before any work shall be done on such
extension. The deposit shall be made within thirty (30) days, or such other
time as the city council shall indicate, after the granting thereof. (1989 Code
§ 14-145; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Return Of Deposit: At the time the city council decides whether or not
to grant petition for an extension, it shall also decide whether or not any
portion of the costs is to be refunded and the manner and circumstances under
which such refund shall be made or credited to the applicant, his successors or
representatives. Such determination shall be duly recorded in writing and a
copy thereof furnished to the applicant. (1989 Code § 14-146; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Ownership Of Extension: Any such extension shall be deemed the property
of the City. (1989 Code § 14-147)
8-1-11: WATER VEHICLES:
Any vehicles taking or using water from a City hydrant shall be regulated and
controlled by the Water Department through the Public Works Director. (1989
Code § 14-129; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-12: ACCESS BY DEPARTMENT:
The Public Works Director and his agents shall at all ordinary hours have free
access to any place supplied with water services from the City system for the
purpose of examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of water service
being used and the manner of its use. (1989 Code § 14-130; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-13: WATER USE FOR MOTORS AND CERTAIN MACHINERY RESTRICTED:
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the City water system for the
purpose of driving motor, syphon, turbine, or other wheels, or any hydraulic
engines, or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind
whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose
except by special permission of the city council. (1989 Code § 14-132)
8-1-14: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Water for the purpose of fighting fires will be furnished free of charge by the
City. Installation and repairs on such hydrants shall be at the expense of the
City and shall be made under the direction of the City. (1989 Code § 14-142;
amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-15: SCARCITY OF WATER:
In time of scarcity of culinary water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the
Mayor and the city council be necessary, the Mayor shall by proclamation limit
the use of water to such extent as may be necessary. It shall be unlawful for
any person, his family, servants, or agents, to violate any proclamation made
by the Mayor in pursuance of this Section. (1989 Code § 14-134; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-16: EXCESSIVE USE OF SPRINKLERS:
   A.   Effect On City Water System: It shall be unlawful for any person to use
such number of outlets simultaneously or to use such sprinkler or combinations
of sprinkler or outlets as will in the opinion of the Public Works Director
materially affect the pressure or supply of water in the City water system or
any part thereof. The city council may from time to time, by resolution,
specify combinations or numbers of outlets which may have such effect. (1989
Code § 14-133; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Order To Discontinue: The city council shall, after determining that
such improper use exists, notify the affected water user or the owner of the
premises whereon such use occurs of such determination in writing, order such
use discontinued and advise that such continued usage constitutes a violation
of this Chapter. (1989 Code § 14-133)
8-1-17: WASTE OF WATER:
   A.   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any water user to:
      1.   Waste water.
      2.   Allow it to be wasted by stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes,
or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow.
      3.   Wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets, or stops or through
basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus.
      4.   Use the water for purposes other than for those which he has
applied, or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for
controlling the water supply. (1989 Code § 14-128)
   B.   Refer To city council: Users of water from the City water system shall
not permit water to continue to run wastefully and without due efforts to
conserve water. If, in the judgment of the Public Works Director or of any of
the officers of the City, a user of City water engages in practices which
result in the needless waste of water and continues to do so after reasonable
notice to discontinue wastefulness has been given, the Public Works Director or
any officer may refer the matter to the city council. (1989 Code § 14-135; amd.
1998 Code)
   C.   Termination Of Service; Meeting: The city council may thereupon
consider terminating the right of the individual to use culinary water. If it
elects to consider the matter of termination, it shall give notice to the water
user of the intention to terminate his water connection at least five (5) days
prior to the meeting of the city council at which termination of water service
is to be considered. The notice shall inform him of the time and place of the
meeting and the charges which led to the consideration of the termination.
   D.   Appearance By Water User: A water user whose right to utilize City
water is being reviewed shall have opportunity to appear with or without
counsel and present the reasons why his water service should not be
discontinued.
   E.   Determination: After due hearing, the city council may arrive at a
determination. If the determination is to discontinue the wasteful water user's
service connection, the city council shall notify him of the decision and of
the period during which the service will remain discontinued. (1989 Code § 14-
135)
8-1-18: LEAKS ON PROPERTY OWNER'S SIDE:
   A.   Detection; Time For Repair: A written notice signed by a public works
employee and the homeowner will be submitted to the City office upon detection
of any major water leak. The leak will be repaired within a reasonable time as
determined by the Public Works Department, not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
   B.   Adjustment Of Overage Amount: By compliance of the property owner, the
city council reserves the right to adjust the overage amount due as they deem
fair. However, if the water leak is not repaired within the allotted time
frame, the entire amount will become due on the date stated on the water bill.
(Res. 95-005, 2-14-1995)
8-1-19: WATER METERS:
   A.   Number Of Meters; Dispute: Except as otherwise expressly permitted by
this Chapter, all structures, dwelling units, establishments and persons using
water from the City water system must have such number of water meters
connected to their water system as are necessary in the judgment of the Public
Works Director to adequately measure use and determine water charges to the
respective users. Whenever a dispute between the Public Works Director and the
property owner arises as to the appropriate number of meters to be installed on
any premises, the matter shall be heard and determined by the city council
after due notice in writing to the parties involved. (1989 Code § 14-136; amd.
1998 Code)
   B.   Meters Furnished By City: Meters will be furnished by the City upon
application for a connection, and upon payment of such connection fees and
other costs as may be established by the city council from time to time by
resolution. Meters shall be deemed to be and remain the property of the City.
   C.   Meter Readings: The Public Works Director shall cause meter readings to
be taken regularly and shall advise the City Treasurer thereof for the purpose
of recording the necessary billings for water service.
   D.   Tampering: Meters may be checked, inspected or adjusted at the
discretion of the City. Meters shall not be adjusted or tampered with by the
customer. Meter boxes shall not be opened for the purpose of turning the water
on or off, except by an authorized representative of the City unless special
permission is given by the City through its representatives for the customer to
do so.
   E.   Meter Testing: If a customer submits a request to the Public Works
Director for a water meter test, the City may, if under the circumstances it
deems it advisable, and at its discretion, order a test of the meter measuring
the water delivered to such customer. If such request is made within twelve
(12) months after the date of the last previous test, the customer may be
required to pay the cost of such test. If the meter is found in such test to
record from ninety seven percent (97%) to one hundred three percent (103%) of
accuracy under methods of testing satisfactory to the city council, the meter
shall be deemed to accurately measure the use of water. (1989 Code § 14-136;
amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Estimation In Case Of Failure: If the City's meters fail to register at
any time, the water delivered during the period of failure shall be estimated
on the basis of previous consumption during a period which is not questioned.
In the event a meter is found to be recording less than ninety seven percent
(97%) or more than one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy, the City shall
make such adjustments in the customer's previous bills as are just and fair
under the circumstances. (1989 Code § 14-136)
   G.   Damage By Customer: All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other
materials of the City on or near the customer's premises caused by any act or
neglect of the customer shall in the discretion of the City be repaired by and
at the expense of the customer. The customer shall pay all costs and expenses,
including a reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue to the City
through its efforts to repair the damage to the lines, meters or to other
equipment of the Department or collect such costs from the customer.
   H.   Maintenance Of Area: It is the customer's responsibility to keep any
debris, shrubbery, grass or any other material from the area immediately
surrounding the meter box. (1989 Code § 14-136; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-20: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Scope: The City may furnish water service from its water system to
persons outside the City in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(1989 Code § 14-151)
   B.   Petition For Service: Any person located outside the City limits who
desires to be supplied with water services from the City water system and is
willing to pay in advance the whole expense of extending the water system to
his property, including the cost of extending any water main beyond its present
location, may make application to the city council by petition containing:
      1.   A description of the proposed extension.
      2.   A map showing the location thereof. (1989 Code § 14-152)
      3.   An offer to pay the whole expense incurred by the City in providing
such extension and to advance such expense as shall be verified by the Public
Works Director. The city council and the person seeking such extension may
enter into an agreement providing in detail the terms under which the extension
may be utilized by others in the future and the terms under which all or any
portion of the cost of installing such extension may be refunded. (1989 Code §
14-152; amd. 1998 Code)
      4.   An acknowledgement that the City, in granting the petition, need
supply only such water to the petitioner which from time to time the city
council deems beyond the requirements of water users within the City limits,
and that such extension shall be the property of and subject to the control of
the City. (1989 Code § 14-152)
   C.   Costs Determined By Public Works Director: Upon receipt of such
petition and map and before the petition is granted, the city council shall
determine what portion, if any, of the extension of the City water mains to the
City limits the City shall construct, and shall obtain from the Public Works
Director a verified statement showing the whole cost and expense of making such
extension. Such costs and expenses shall include administrative and supervisory
expenditures of the City, which shall in no event be deemed to be less than ten
percent (10%) of the cost of materials and labor. (1989 Code § 14-154; amd.
1998 Code)
   D.   Extensions May Be Master Metered: When an extension supplying more than
one house or user outside the City limits is connected to City water mains, the
Public Works Director may require a master meter to be installed near the point
where the connection is to be made to the City main. This installation will be
at the expense of the persons served by such extension according to the regular
rates for meter installation. Responsible parties must agree to pay all bills
for water served through the meter at the applicable water rates. (1989 Code §
14-153; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-21: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The City shall not be held liable for any damage to a water service user by
reason of stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply service caused by
fires, scarcity of water, accidents to the water system or its mains, or which
occurs as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other
unavoidable cause. This Chapter shall not be construed to extend the liability
of the City beyond that provided in the Governmental Immunity Act 1 . (1989
Code § 14-131)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 63-30-1.
CHAPTER 2
   BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: General Purposes
8-2-2: Definitions
8-2-3: Responsibilities
8-2-4: Policy
8-2-5: Requirements
8-2-1: GENERAL PURPOSES:
   A.   Protection Of Water Supply: The City desires to protect the public
potable water supply of the City from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system or
the customer's private water system such contaminates or pollutants which could
backflow into the public water systems; and
   B.   Elimination Or Control Of Cross-Connections: The City desires to
promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or
potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water system, plumbing
fixtures and industrial piping system; and (1989 Code § 14-161; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Maintenance Of Backflow Prevention: The City desires to provide for the
maintenance of a continuing program of cross- connection control which will
systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all
potable water systems. (1989 Code § 14-161)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
   APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: A device or assembly accepted by the Utah
Department of Health, Bureau of General Sanitation, as meeting applicable
specifications or is suitable for the proposed use of prevented backflow.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the City's public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary
water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's
public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring,
river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids". These
waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and
constitute an unacceptable water source over which the City does not have
authority for sanitary control.
   BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system
from any source other than the intended source.
   BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source
other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the
potable water supply system.
   BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow, as defined in the International Plumbing Code.
   CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the potable water supply by
sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a
degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through
poisoning or through the spread of disease.
   CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
fixtures between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which
contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of
questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur
into the potable water system. This would include any temporary connections,
such as swing connections, removable sections, four (4) way plug valves,
spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multi-
port tubes.
   CROSS-CONNECTION, CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow
assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is
physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or
control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer's water
system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention
assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's
water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot
be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection
(isolation).
   CROSS-CONNECTION, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system
and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly
properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the
protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The person designated to be in charge of the Water
Department of the City is invested with the authority and responsibility for
the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. (1989 Code § 14-165; amd. 1998
Code)
8-2-3: RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Public Works Director: The Public Works Director shall be responsible
for keeping the public potable water distribution system free from
contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminates or pollutants
through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of said Public Works
Director, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required (at the
customer's water service connection; or, within the customer's private water
system) for the safety of the water system, the Public Works Director or his
designated agent shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such
an approved backflow prevention assembly at a specific location on his
premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly at the
customer's own expense; and, failure, refusal or inability on the part of the
customer to install, have tested and maintain said assembly shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements
have been satisfactorily met. (1989 Code § 14-162; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Building Inspector: The Building Inspector of the City has the
responsibility to not only review building plans and inspect plumbing as it is
installed, but, has the explicit responsibility of preventing cross-connections
from being designed and built into the structures within the City. Where the
review of building plans suggests or detects the potential for a cross-
connection being made an integral part of the plumbing system, the Building
Inspector has the responsibility to require such cross-connections be either
eliminated, or provided with an approved backflow prevention assembly in
accordance with the Plumbing Code. The Building Inspector's responsibility
begins at the point of service (the downstream side of the meter) and carries
throughout the entire length of customer's water system. The Building Inspector
should inquire about the intended use of water at any point where it is
suspected that a cross-connection might be made or where one is actually called
for by the plans. When such a cross- connection is discovered, it will be
mandatory that a suitable, approved backflow prevention assembly be required by
the plans and be properly installed in accordance with the International
Plumbing Code. (1989 Code § 14-163; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Technician:
      1.   When employed by the customer or the Public Works Director to test,
repair, overhaul and/or maintain backflow prevention assemblies, a backflow
assembly technician will have the following responsibilities: (1989 Code § 14-
164; amd. 1998 Code)
         a.   Be responsible for ensuring acceptable testing equipment and
procedures are used for testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention
assemblies. (1989 Code § 14-164)
         b.   Make reports of such testing and/or repair to the customer,
Public Works Director and the Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation on forms
approved for such use by the Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation. The report
shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used. (1989 Code § 14-
164; amd. 1998 Code)
         c.   It is the technician's responsibility to ensure replacement parts
are equal in quality to parts originally supplied by the manufacturer of the
assembly being repaired.
         d.   It will be the technician's responsibility not to change the
design, material or operational characteristics of the assembly during repair
or maintenance.
         e.   A certified technician shall perform the work and be responsible
for the competence and accuracy of all tests and reports.
         f.   It will be the technician's responsibility to ensure his license
is current, the testing equipment being used is acceptable to the State and is
in proper operating condition. (1989 Code § 14-164)
         g.   Failure to report a failing assembly to the Bureau of Drinking
Water/Sanitation and the Public Works Director within five (5) working days,
may be grounds for revocation of the technician's certification. (1989 Code §
14-164; amd. 1998 Code)
         h.   The technician shall be equipped with, and be competent to use,
all necessary tools, gauges and other equipment necessary to properly test,
repair and maintain backflow prevention assemblies. (1989 Code § 14-164; amd.
1998 Code)
         i.   The certified technician must tag each double-check valve,
pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow assembly and air gaps,
showing the serial number, date tested and by whom. The technician's license
number must also be on this tag. (1989 Code § 14-164)
      2.   In the case of a customer requiring a commercially available
technician, any certified technician is authorized to make the test and report
the results of that test to the customer, Public Works Director and the Bureau
of Drinking Water/Sanitation. If such a commercially tested assembly is in need
of repair, the City requires a licensed plumber make the actual repair. (1989
Code § 14-164; amd. 1998 Code)
8-2-4: POLICY:
   A.   Protection: No water service connection to any premises shall be
installed or maintained by the Public Works Director unless the water supply is
protected as required by State laws, regulations, codes and this Chapter.
Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the Public Works
Director if a backflow prevention assembly required by this Chapter for control
of backflow and cross-connections is not installed, tested and maintained, or
if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed
or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not
be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
   B.   Inspection Of System: The customer's system shall be open for
inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the Public
Works Director to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or
sanitary hazards, including violation of this Chapter, exist. When such a
condition becomes known, the Public Works Director shall deny or immediately
discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical break in the
service line until the customer has corrected the condition in conformance with
the State and City statutes relating to plumbing, water supplies and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
   C.   Installation Of Approved Assembly: An approved backflow prevention
assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system,
at or near the property line, or immediately inside the building being served;
but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line,
whenever the Public Works Director deems the protection of the water supply to
be in the best interest of the water supply customers. (1989 Code § 14-166;
amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Type Of Protective Assembly: The type of protective assembly required
under subsection C of this Section, shall depend upon the degree of hazard
which exists at the point of cross-connection (whether direct or indirect), as
stipulated in the International Plumbing Code. (1989 Code § 14-166; amd. 1998
Code)
   E.   Previously-Approved Assemblies: All presently installed backflow
prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this Section but
were approved assemblies for the purposes described herein at the time of
installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the
inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection
8-2-5A of this Chapter, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so
long as the Public Works Director is assured that the existing assembly is not
moved from the present location or requires no more than minimum maintenance.
When the Public Works Director finds that the maintenance of this assembly
constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved
backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this Chapter. (1989
Code § 14-166; amd. 1998 Code)
8-2-5: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Inspection And Maintenance: It shall be the duty and responsibility of
the customer-user at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are
installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least
once per year at the customer-user's expense. In those instances where the
Public Works Director deems the hazard to be great, he may require certified
inspections and tests at a more frequent interval. These inspections and tests
shall be performed by a certified backflow assembly technician, licensed
through the State Department of Health. It shall be the duty of the Public
Works Director to see that these tests are made according to the standards set
forth by the State Department of Health, Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation.
(1989 Code § 14-167; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Degree Of Protection; Exposure For Observation: Backflow prevention
assemblies shall be installed in water supply lines to provide at least the
degree of protection stipulated in the International Plumbing Code. All
backflow prevention assemblies shall be exposed for easy observation and be
readily accessible. (1989 Code § 14-167; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Working Condition: All backflow prevention assemblies installed in a
potable water supply system for protection against backflow shall be maintained
in good working condition by the person having control of such assemblies. The
State Department of Health, Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation and the Public
Works Director having jurisdiction, may inspect such assemblies and, if found
to be defective or inoperative, shall require the replacement thereof. No
assembly shall be removed from use, relocated or another assembly substituted,
without the approval of the Public Works Director. (1989 Code § 14-167; amd.
1998 Code)
   D.   Testing: All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten
(10) working days of installation.
   E.   Safety Hazards: No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so
as to create a safety hazard; for example, installed over an electrical panel,
steam pipes, boilers, pits or above ceiling level. (1989 Code § 14-167)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Sewer Department And System
8-3-3: Use Of System Required
8-3-4: Application For Connection
8-3-5: Sewer Permit
8-3-6: Rates And Connection Fees
8-3-7: Payments
8-3-8: Delinquency; Discontinuance Of Service
8-3-9: Building Sewers
8-3-10: Use Of Public Sewers
8-3-11: Inspection; Power And Authority
8-3-12: Operational Cost Review
8-3-13: Private Wastewater Disposal
8-3-14: Penalty
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this Chapter shall be as follows:
   ADDENDUM: The document appended hereto entitled "Service User Charge
System". The addendum is incorporated in this Chapter the same as though fully
set forth herein. The Service User Charge System includes sections A through H.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building
wall.
   BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also called house connection.
   CESSPOOL: An underground reservoir for liquid waste (as household sewage).
   EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from processes, trade or
business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or
business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
   MAY: Is permissible (see Shall).
   NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet (including storm sewers) into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
   OWNER: The owner of the real property to which the sewer system is connected
or to which the sewer system is required to be connected, which ownership is
reflected on the records of the Davis County Recorder as of the date a charge
or fee is assessed by the City. Any person who sells real property, subject to
a charge or fee assessed under this Chapter, by means of a contract or
instrument which does not transfer legal title to the buyer but only purports
to transfer equitable title to the buyer, shall be deemed the owner of the
premises for purposes of this Chapter.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ions concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven (7) and a hydrogen ion
concentration of 107.
   PRIVY: A small building having a bench with holes through which the user may
defecate or urinate.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency, public
utility or the City.
   RESIDENTIAL FLOWS: The flow strengths and flow volume set out in the
addendum attached hereto.
   RESIDENTIAL, HEAVY AND LIGHT COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USERS: Any industrial
or commercial user who discharges waste into the system requiring higher than
normal biochemical oxygen demand or greater than normal total suspended solids.
   SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted
intentionally.
   SEPTIC TANK: A tank in which the solid matter of continuous flowing sewage
is disintegrated by bacteria.
   SEWAGE: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater".
   SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SHALL: Is mandatory (see May).
   SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty
four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater
treatment works.
   STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed Storm Sewer): A drain or sewer for conveying
water, ground water, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface
of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
   SYSTEM: The sewer, wastewater or combined wastewater and storm or surface
water facilities of the City.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER: The water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the
effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant".
   WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently. (1989 Code § 14-201; amd. 1998 Code)
8-3-2: SEWER DEPARTMENT AND SYSTEM:
   A.   Created: The Sewer Department of the City is hereby created. It shall
administer the operation and maintenance of the sewer system of the City. (1989
Code § 14-202)
   B.   Superintendent: There is hereby created the position of Superintendent
of the Sewer Department, who shall be the Director of Public Works for the
City. The Superintendent of the sewer system shall manage and supervise the
City sewer system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to
resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the City Council from time to
time prescribing his powers and duties and directing the manner and frequency
with which he shall make reports to the Mayor relating to the sewer system. All
of the functions and activities of the Superintendent shall be carried on under
the direction of the Mayor. (1989 Code § 14-203)
8-3-3: USE OF SYSTEM REQUIRED:
   A.   Objectional Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City,
any human excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (1989 Code § 14-211)
   B.   Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. (1989 Code §
14-212)
   C.   Privy Vault, Septic Tank Or Cesspool: Except as hereinafter provided,
it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
wastewater. (1989 Code § 14-213)
   D.   Distance To Public Sewer: The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes,
situated within the City is hereby required, at the owner(s) expense, to
install suitable sewer facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so,
provided the sewer is within three hundred feet (300') of the owner's property
line. The owner shall be charged a monthly sewer fee effective sixty (60) days
after receiving notice. (1989 Code § 14-214; amd. 1998 Code)
8-3-4: APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION:
   A.   Any person, other than a subdivider or developer seeking multiple
connections, who desires or is required to secure a new connection to the City
sewer system, shall file with the Public Works Director for each such
connection a written and signed connection application in the form supplied by
the City.
   B.   Whenever a subdivider or developer desires or is required to install
multiple sewer connections and extensions for a subdivision or development, the
subdivider or developer shall enter into a written agreement with the City,
which shall constitute an application for permission to make the extensions and
connections. The agreement shall specify the terms and conditions under which
the sewer extensions and connections shall be made and the payments that shall
be required.
   C.   All persons who use the sewer system shall adhere to this chapter and
the Central Weber Sewer Improvement District Wastewater Control Rules and
Regulations as they presently exist or as they may be modified or amended in
the future by the district. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and
the Rules and Regulations, the Central Weber Sewer Improvement District
Wastewater Control Rules and Regulations shall control. (Ord. 19-04, 2-12-2019)
8-3-5: SEWER PERMIT:
   A.   Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City. (1989 Code §
14-231)
   B.   Classification: There shall be two (2) classes of sewer connection
permits: 1) Class I for residential and light commercial services; and 2) Class
II for services to heavy commercial establishments producing industrial wastes.
Class I for residential and light commercial services is defined to include
users with less than four hundred (400) gallons of culinary water per day and
Class II for heavy to commercial establishments defined to include users with
over four hundred (400) gallons of culinary water use per day. (1989 Code § 14-
232)
   C.   Application; Fee: In either case, the owner or its agent shall make
application on a form obtained from the City. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Public Works Director. A permit and inspection
connection fee will be charged. (1989 Code § 14-232; amd. 1998 Code)
8-3-6: RATES AND CONNECTION FEES:
   A.   Service User Charge System: A document entitled "Service User Charge
System" is on file in the City Recorder's Office. This addendum is incorporated
by reference and made a part of this chapter and a part of the ordinances of
the City and its title shall be known and it may be referred to as the
"addendum" in any document, pleading or proceeding pertaining to the sewer or
wastewater system of the City. References to the "addendum" shall be made only
when there is ambiguous declaration or statement in this or any other City
ordinance and any resolutions or proceedings affecting the City sewer and
wastewater system. (1989 Code § 14-232; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Established: The rates, penalty fee for delinquency in payment,
connection fee, reconnection fee, inspection fee and other charges incidental
to connection and services from the City sewer system shall be fixed from time
to time by resolution enacted by the City Council. The City Council may from
time to time promulgate rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and collecting
charges for water services and all other rules necessary for the management and
control of the water system. Rates for services furnished shall be uniform with
respect to each class or classes of service established or that may hereafter
be established. (1989 Code § 14-233)
   C.   Separate Assessments: A separate assessment shall be made against the
owner of real property for any and all charges, fees, assessments, obligations
or liabilities under this chapter on the same basis as provided in subsection
8-1-7B of this title. The intent of this provision is to charge every user of
sewer services who is also charged for water services under subsection
8-1-7B of this title. A duplex or any other multi-unit housing structure shall
be charged a separate connection fee for each unit and a separate monthly
service fee for each unit. A basement apartment shall be charged a monthly
service fee but shall not be charged a separate connection fee if the basement
apartment utilizes the same lateral as the main residence. (1989 Code § 14-241)
8-3-7: PAYMENTS:
   A.   Responsibility: Irrespective of the occupant, user, tenant, cotenant,
permissive user, contract purchaser or any other person, firm, partnership,
corporation or entity being in possession of the premises to which a connection
is supplied or service is made available, the owner of the premises according
to the records of the Davis County Recorder as of the date the charge, fee or
assessment is made, unless designated otherwise, shall be legally responsible
for the payment of all charges, fees, assessments, obligations or liabilities
of a user. Any person who sells property subject to this chapter by means of a
contract or instrument which does not transfer legal title to the buyer but
only purports to transfer equitable title to the buyer and thus retains legal
title to the property in the seller's name, shall be deemed the owner of the
premises. If any delinquent sewer connection, sewer user charge, repairs,
maintenance or any other obligation is imposed against any premises, property,
buildings or structures, the obligation shall be deemed by the City as a lien
upon all of the real property on which any use is made from a sewer connection.
Water service to delinquent property shall be turned off by the City for
failure to pay said fee, assessment, charge or liability and will not be turned
on again to those premises where a delinquency occurs unless and until all
liabilities to the City for sewer service are paid in full.
   B.   Order Of Utility Credit: All payments for utilities, whether "water" or
"sewer" shall be credited first to sewer assessments, fees or charges. (1989
Code § 14-242)
   C.   Billings: All bills for sewer service shall be rendered at the rates
set by the City, together with surcharges, if any, on the same bill with the
City's water bill. Each bill shall show the amount of the sewer service charges
separate from the water bill, but the total thereof shall be considered one
charge for the combined use of water and services of the sewer system. The
portion of the bill rendered for water service cannot be paid separately from
the portion rendered for sewer services. (1989 Code § 14-245)
8-3-8: DELINQUENCY; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Statement Of Charges: The Public Works Director, Water Department, or
such other person as the City Council may designate, shall furnish to each user
by mail or leave at his place of residence or usual place of business, a
written or printed statement stating the sewer service charges assessed against
him once each month or at such other regular intervals as the City Council
shall direct. The statement shall specify the amount of the bill, the place of
payment and the date due. (1989 Code § 14-246; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Collection: Collection of sewer charges and overdue sewer charges shall
be by the same methods as set out for the collection of overdue water charges
found in Section
8-1-4 of this Title. (1989 Code § 14-246)
8-3-9: BUILDING SEWERS:
   A.   Costs And Expenses: All costs and expenses incidental to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Nothing
herein shall preclude the City from turning off the water to the property as a
result of nonpayment as provided in this Chapter. (1989 Code § 14-234; amd.
1998 Code)
   B.   One Sewer For Each Building: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the
rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole system will be considered as one building sewer.
The City does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for
damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
(1989 Code § 14-235)
   C.   Former Serving Sewers: Building sewers which formerly serviced
buildings, which buildings no longer exist or are torn down, may be used in
connection with newly constructed buildings only when the building sewer is
examined and tested by the Public Works Director and found to meet all
requirements of this Chapter. (1989 Code § 14-236; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Construction: The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of
all sanitary sewers, including building sewers, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench,
shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or
other applicable rules and regulations of the City and the State. In the
absence of these Code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual
of Practice No. 9 shall apply. (1989 Code § 14-237)
   E.   Elevation: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought from
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer. Where such means are necessary, the
owner shall be responsible for all installations, maintenance and operating
costs for their operation. (1989 Code § 14-238)
   F.   Runoff; Ground Water: No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface
runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such
connection is approved by the City and the Utah Department of Environmental
Quality for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. (1989 Code § 14-
239)
   G.   Code Compliance: The connection of the building sewer into the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or
other applicable rules and regulations of the City and the State, or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight, any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the City before installation. All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City and to a condition equal to or better than the
condition existing prior to the work being performed. (1989 Code § 14-240)
8-3-10: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Unpolluted Waters Prohibited: No person shall discharge or cause the
discharge of any unpolluted waters such as storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sewer. Storm
water runoff from limited areas, which storm water may be polluted at times,
may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the City and Utah
Department of Environmental Quality. (1989 Code § 14-261)
   B.   Unpolluted Drainage: Storm water other than that exempted under
subsection A of this Section and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to
natural outlets approved by the City and the Utah Department of Environmental
Quality. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters shall also be
discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet. (1989 Code § 14-262)
   C.   Prohibited Water Or Wastes; Payment Of Increased Costs:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described water liquids or wastes to any public sewers:
         a.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
         b.   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or other
wastes, to contaminate or interrupt any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from
the works; (1989 Code § 14-263)
         c.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths
(5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment or persons; and (1989 Code § 14-263; amd. 1998
Code)
         d.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, under ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
      2.   Each person or user which discharges any toxic pollutants which
cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent of the sludge of the
wastewater treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. (1989 Code § 14-
263)
   D.   Limitations Of Specific Substances: The following described substances,
materials, waters or wastes shall be limited in discharges to Municipal system
to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, the
sludge of any Municipal system, the wastewater treatment process or equipment,
will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or equipment or will
not otherwise endanger lives, public property or constitute a nuisance. The
City may set limitations below if such more severe limitations are necessary to
meet the above objectives. In setting these requirements, the City will give
consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to
flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the sewers, capacity of
the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The limitations or
restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged
to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the City
are as follows:
      1.   Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      2.   Wastewater containing more than twenty five (25) milligrams per
liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral
oil origin.
      3.   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or
grease.
      4.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in commercial kitchens for the purpose
of consumption on the premises.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the State for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the State.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life of
concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable
State or Federal regulations.
      8.   Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a "slug"
as defined herein.
      9.   Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
      10.   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes. (1989 Code § 14-264)
   E.   Action Of City: If any water or wastes are discharged or are proposed
to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated above and which are determined by the
City to have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes,
equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the City may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
this Chapter. If the City permits the pretreatment of equalization or waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the City and the Utah State Department of Health;
      4.   A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location;
      5.   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities;
      6.   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the Municipal sewer. (1989 Code § 14-265)
   F.   Measurements, Tests And Analysis: All measurements, tests and analysis
of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
Chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American
Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and
frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by
the City. (1989 Code § 14-266)
   G.   Construction Of Provisions: No statement contained in this Section
shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between
the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment. (1989 Code §
14-267)
   H.   Damage To System: No persons shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently
break, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenances or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any persons violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest and charged according to
law. (1989 Code § 14-268)
8-3-11: INSPECTION; POWER AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   Entrance Permitted: Duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing pertinent to the discharge to the Municipal system in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter. (1989 Code § 14-271; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Industrial Processes Information: Duly authorized City employees are
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system. Industrial users may withhold information when they have established
that the revelation of said information to the public might result in an
advantage to competitors. (1989 Code § 14-272)
   C.   Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when
liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified
herein, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients are
introduced into public sewers; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Plumbing Code and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the
maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the
proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captivated material and
shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to
review by the City. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not
performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste
disposal firms. (1989 Code § 14-273; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Pretreatment Or Flow-Equalization Facilities: Where pretreatment or
flow-equalization facilities are provided or required for any water or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at its expense. (1989 Code § 14-274)
   E.   Building Sewer Carrying Industrial Wastes: When determined necessary by
the City, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structures, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the City. The structure shall be installed by
the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times. (1989 Code § 14-275)
   F.   Compliance Information: The City may require any user of sewer services
to provide information needed to determine compliance with this Chapter. These
requirements may include:
      1.   Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
      2.   Chemical analysis of wastewaters.
      3.   Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
      4.   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or
other materials important to sewer control. (1989 Code § 14-276)
   G.   Safety Rules: While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to herein, the duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees, and
the City shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company growing out of
the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence
or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. (1989 Code § 14-277)
   H.   Easements: Duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities
lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (1989 Code § 14-278)
8-3-12: OPERATIONAL COST REVIEW:
The City shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance, long-
term debt service relating to the wastewater treatment works, as well as each
user's wastewater contribution percentage at least once every year, and will
revise the user charge system as necessary to assure equity of the system
established herein and to assure that sufficient funds are obtained from the
City's user charge system to: a) adequately operate and maintain the wastewater
treatment works; b) cover said debt service; and c) pay all charges and
assessments required by the Central Weber Sewer Improvement District. The City
will apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of
operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and
adjust this rate accordingly. (1989 Code § 14-251)
8-3-13: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
   A.   Applicability: Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system
complying with the provisions of this Section. (1989 Code § 14-221)
   B.   Permit Required; Application And Fee: Before commencement of
construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first
obtain a written permit issued by the City. The application for such permit
shall be made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall
supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as deemed
necessary. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the City at the time
the application is filed. (1989 Code § 14-222)
   C.   Use; Inspection: Permission to use the system for a private wastewater
disposal system shall not be authorized until the installation is completed in
compliance with the approved plans applicable with all State and local codes
and this Chapter. Authorized City employees shall be allowed to inspect the
work at any stage of construction. The applicant for the permit shall notify
the Public Works Director when the work is ready for final inspection and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within two (2) business days of the receipt of notice by the Public Works
Director. (1989 Code § 14-223; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Compliance: The type, capacities, location and layout of a private
wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the
Department of Environmental Quality of the State. No permit shall be issued for
any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than twelve thousand (12,000)
square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet. (1989 Code § 14-224)
   E.   Availability Of Public Sewer: At such time as a public sewer becomes
available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system
(pursuant to Section
8-3-3 of this Chapter), the owner shall pay the connection fee and make a
direct connection to the public sewer within sixty (60) days after receiving
notice of availability from the City, in compliance with this Chapter, shall
pay the monthly fee to the City and the private disposal system shall be
disconnected and made inoperable. (1989 Code § 14-225; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Operation And Maintenance: When a public sewer is not available, the
owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the City. (1989 Code §
14-226)
   G.   Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this Section shall
be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed
by the Utah State Department of Health. (1989 Code § 14-227)
8-3-14: PENALTY:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of
this Chapter, except nonpayment of charges, shall be served by the City with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
(1989 Code § 14-281)
   B.   Misdemeanor: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided for the notice, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense. (1989 Code § 14-282; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Liability: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall become liable to the City for the expense, loss, attorney fees or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation. (1989 Code § 14-283)
CHAPTER 4
   SECONDARY WATER
SECTION:
8-4-1: Secondary Water Connections To Be Provided At All Future Water
Connections
8-4-2: Penalty
8-4-1: SECONDARY WATER CONNECTIONS TO BE PROVIDED AT ALL FUTURE WATER
CONNECTIONS:
All subdividers, builders or other persons obtaining a culinary water
connection for noncommercial property within South Weber City shall be required
to procure a secondary water supply for their property; provided further, that,
prior to the approval of any application for a culinary connection within South
Weber City, there shall be presented proof that secondary water is available at
the property or that secondary water will be provided within sixty (60) days
from the date that culinary water connection is approved, or an agreement
entered that it will be acquired at such time as the secondary water rights are
available. If secondary water rights are not available, each person who obtains
a culinary water connection shall connect to a secondary source within sixty
(60) days after receiving written notice that secondary water is available.
(Ord. 04-8, 5-25-2004)
8-4-2: PENALTY:
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to disconnection of its culinary water at the discretion of the public
works director and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 04-8, 5-25-2004)
CHAPTER 5
STORM SEWER UTILITY
SECTION:
8-5-1: Findings
8-5-2: Purpose
8-5-3: Definitions
8-5-4: Creation And Operation
8-5-5: Fee
8-5-6: Billing
8-5-1: FINDINGS:
The city council makes the following findings regarding storm water runoff and
the city's storm sewer system:
   A.   The city's existing storm sewer system consists of a network of manmade
and natural facilities, structures and conduits, including ground water and
aquifers, that collect and route storm water runoff.
   B.   The city's existing storm sewer system does not adequately handle the
storm water runoff generated in the city.
   C.   The city's anticipated growth will place increased demands on the
already inadequate storm sewer system.
   D.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled storm water runoff endangers
the city's ground water supply.
   E.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled storm water runoff causes
erosion and property damage.
   F.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled storm water runoff hinders the
city's ability to provide emergency services to its residents.
   G.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled storm water runoff impedes the
regular flow of traffic in the city.
   H.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled storm water runoff poses health
hazards to the citizens of the community.
   I.   Storm water runoff carries concentrations of oil, grease, nutrients,
chemicals, heavy metals, toxic materials and other undesirable materials that
may jeopardize the integrity of ground waters and receiving waters, including
the city's culinary water supply.
   J.   All developed properties in the city contribute to the need for the
storm sewer system by converting natural ground cover into impervious surfaces.
   K.   All developed properties in the city make use of or benefit from the
city's operation and maintenance of the storm sewer system.
   L.   The state department of environmental quality (DEQ) has determined that
some of the city's storm water sumps must be included on the prioritized
contamination sources for culinary wells.
   M.   The EPA and the DEQ are developing additional storm water permitting
requirements that will apply to cities.
   N.   Absent effective maintenance, operation, regulation and control,
existing storm water drainage conditions in the city constitute a potential
hazard to the health, safety and general welfare of the city, its residents,
and its businesses.
   O.   A storm sewer utility is the most equitable and efficient method of
managing storm water in the city and ensuring that each property in the city
pays its fair share of the amount that the property contributes to, benefits
from, and otherwise uses the storm sewer system. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-5-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
city and its inhabitants by improving the city's storm sewer system, managing
and controlling storm water runoff, protecting property, preventing polluted
waters from entering the city's water supply and other receiving waters, and
establishing a viable and fair method of financing the construction, operation
and maintenance of the storm sewer system. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
   DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has been altered from its natural
condition by grading, filling, or the construction of improvements or other
impervious surfaces.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT ("ERU"): The average amount of impervious
surface, expressed in square feet, on developed single-family residential
parcels in South Weber. One ERU equals two thousand eight hundred (2,800)
square feet of impervious surface area.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities or at greater rates of flow than
the natural surface. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-5-4: CREATION AND OPERATION:
   A.   Creation: The city council hereby creates and establishes a storm sewer
utility as part of the city's overall sewer system. The storm sewer utility
shall plan, design, construct, maintain, administer and operate the city's
storm sewer system.
   B.   Enterprise Fund: The city council hereby establishes a storm sewer
utility enterprise fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial
transactions related to the storm sewer utility. All storm sewer utility
service charges shall be deposited in the enterprise fund. Money in the storm
sewer utility enterprise fund shall not be commingled with or transferred to
other city funds. However, the storm sewer utility may pay other city funds for
services and expenses directly attributable to the storm sewer utility. The
enterprise fund shall be operated according to state law and city policy.
   C.   Facilities And Assets: The storm sewer utility shall operate
independently of city operations funded by the general fund. The storm sewer
utility shall have the same relationship to the city as other city utilities,
such as the water utility and the sanitary sewer (wastewater) utility. Upon
creation of the utility, all of the city's storm sewer facilities and assets
(other than streets and other facilities and assets designated by the city
manager) shall be transferred to the storm sewer utility in consideration for
the storm sewer utility's agreement to take primary responsibility for
planning, designing, constructing, maintaining, administering and operating the
city's storm sewer system.
   D.   Administration: The storm sewer utility shall be administered by the
city's public works director. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-5-5: FEE:
   A.   Imposed: Each developed parcel of real property in the city shall be
charged a storm sewer utility fee.
   B.   ERU: The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent residential
units (ERUs) contained in the parcel. The city council finds that the ERU is
the most accurate measurement for determining the amount that each parcel
contributes to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the storm sewer utility.
Based on a study completed by an independent engineer, the city council finds
and establishes that one ERU equals two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square
feet of impervious surface area.
   C.   Calculation: The city council finds that each single-family residential
parcel contributes approximately the same amount of storm water runoff;
therefore, each developed single-family residential parcel shall pay a base
rate of one ERU. All nonsingle-family residential parcels shall pay a multiple
of this base rate, expressed in ERUs, according to the measured impervious area
on the parcel. The city council may adopt separate rates for PRDs, condominiums
and other uses that are not easily handled under the standard rate schedule.
   D.   Charge Per ERU: The amount charged for each ERU shall be established by
resolution of the city council.
   E.   Exemptions And Credits: The city council may establish exemptions and
credits to the storm sewer utility fee by resolution.
   F.   Policies: The public works director may adopt policies, consistent with
this chapter and any resolutions passed by the city council, to assist in the
application, administration and interpretation of this chapter and any
resolutions related to the storm sewer utility.
   G.   Appeals: Any person or entity that believes that this chapter, or any
storm sewer utility rate resolution, was interpreted or applied erroneously may
appeal to the public works director ("director"). The appeal shall be in
writing, shall state any facts supporting the appeal, and shall be made within
ten (10) days of the decision, action, or bill being appealed. The director may
elect to hold a hearing on the appeal. The director shall decide the appeal
within ten (10) days of when the appeal is filed. If the person or entity is
not satisfied with the director's decision, a further appeal may be made to the
city manager (or his or her designee). The appeal to the city manager shall
follow the same procedure as the appeal to the director. The city manager's
decision shall be final and binding on all parties. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-5-6: BILLING:
The city council finds that the city's storm sewer system, sanitary sewer
system, culinary water system, and solid waste collection system are
interrelated services that are part of a unified city plan to provide for the
health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents in an environmentally
responsible manner. Therefore, the storm sewer utility fee shall be included on
the city's regular monthly utility bill for any given property. If there is no
regular utility bill for the property, the storm sewer utility fee shall be
charged to the owner of the property. The fee shall be deemed a civil debt owed
to the city by the person or entity paying for the city utility services
provided to the property. All properties shall be charged the fee, regardless
of whether or not the owner or occupant of the property requests the storm
sewer utility service. Failure to pay any portion of the utility bill may
result in termination of water service. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
CHAPTER 6
WATER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose And Findings
8-6-2: Applicability
8-6-3: Definitions
8-6-4: Prohibited Obstructions
8-6-5: Prohibited Discharges
8-6-6: Prohibited Storage And Debris
8-6-7: Best Management Practices
8-6-8: Authority To Enter Or Inspect
8-6-9: Requirement To Monitor And Analyze
8-6-10: Damage System
8-6-11: Authorized Access
8-6-12: Wetlands And Permits
8-6-13: Federal And State Compliance
8-6-14: Violation And Enforcement
8-6-15: Storm Water Construction Activity
8-6-16: Connection Permit
8-6-17: Exemptions
8-6-18: Enforcement And Appeals
8-6-19: Violations And Penalties
8-6-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of the storm water regulations set forth in the
municipal code is to comply with phase II of the clean water act (Act) and the
applicable regulations of the environmental protection agency (EPA) and the
Utah department of environmental quality (DEQ).
   B.   Findings. The city council makes the following findings regarding storm
water:
      1.   Facilities. The city operates a storm water system consisting of a
network of man-made and natural facilities, structures and conduits, that
collect and route storm water runoff.
      2.   Endangerment. Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled storm water
runoff endangers public health and safety by causing, among other things:
flooding, pollution, property damage, erosion, traffic and emergency response
interruption, and impacts the ground water supply.
      3.   Pollution. Storm water runoff carries concentrations of oil, grease,
nutrients, chemicals, heavy metals, toxic materials, and other undesirable
materials that can damage the integrity of ground waters and receiving waters,
including the culinary water supply.
      4.   Impervious Surfaces. Developed properties in the city contribute to
the storm water system by converting natural ground cover into impervious
surfaces.
      5.   Maintenance. Developed properties in the city make use of and
benefit from the city's operation and maintenance of the storm water system.
      6.   Regulations. The Act, EPA, DEQ, and applicable rules mandate storm
water regulations that apply to the city and otherwise.
      7.   Operation. Effective maintenance, operation, regulation, and control
of the storm water system is necessary for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the city, its residents, and its businesses. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-
2025)
8-6-2: APPLICABILITY:
The storm water regulations in the municipal code apply to all developments of
one (1) or more acres of land, or any part of a common development plan
regardless of the size of any of the individually owned or developed sites.
(Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall be defined in the municipal code relating
to storm water as follows:
APPLICANT: A person that applies for an authorization to discharge under a
construction storm water permit to conduct or propose to conduct a use of land
for a construction site.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPS: A range of management procedures, schedules
of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices which have been demonstrated to effectively control the
quality and/or quantity of storm water runoff, and which are compatible with
the planned land use. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. A list of sample BMP's
and their effectiveness ratings can be found in the most current version of the
storm water management plan adopted by the city or as otherwise provided.
CITY: The geographical boundaries of South Weber City, Utah, and also refers to
the classification of the jurisdictional area within a municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4).
COMMON DEVELOPMENT PLAN: Development that is contiguous to an area where
multiple separate distinct construction activities may be taking place at
different times or different schedules under an overall plan. For example, if a
developer buys a large parcel and subdivides lots, builds roads, installs
pipes, and runs electricity with the intention of constructing homes or other
structures, this would be considered a common development plan. If the land is
parceled off or sold, and construction occurs on plots that are less than one
(1) acre by separate, independent builders, this activity still would be
subject to storm water permitting requirements. The common development plan
also applies to other types of land development such as industrial or business
parks.
DEBRIS: Any dirt, rock, sand, vegetation, trash, junk, or litter.
DETENTION BASIN: An area designed to detain peak flows from storm water runoff
and to regulate release rates of that water into the storm drainage system,
also allowing debris to settle out. Detention basin outlets may also be
connected to downstream storm drains. Flows entering detention basins are
released via outlet piping.
   A.   Regional detention basins mean large detention basins owned and
maintained by the city.
   B.   Local detention basins mean smaller basins typically in a development
or subdivision that is constructed by the development or subdivision which,
following construction and acceptance, the ownership, operation, and
maintenance may either be conveyed and maintained by the city, association, or
private owner(s) as determined by the city.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate of any
parcel to alter it from its natural condition by site preparation, grading,
filling, and/or the construction of improvements or other impervious surfaces.
It also includes a site plan, building permit, subdivision, or construction of
facilities, buildings, or other structures.
DIRECTOR: The person designated by the city to enforce storm water regulations.
DISTURB: To alter the physical condition, natural terrain, or vegetation of
land by clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, filling, building, or other
construction activity.
DRAIN INLET: A point of entry into a sump, detention basin, or storm drain
system.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT OR ERU: The average amount of impervious surface,
expressed in square feet, on developed single family residential parcels in the
city. One ERU equals two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet of
impervious surface area.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial presence or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed. Hazardous material includes, but is not
limited to, any hazardous substance designated under 40 CFR Part 116 pursuant
to section 311 of the clean water act.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: An unlawful connection of:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
may allow an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system. Examples
include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Any conveyance which allows non storm water discharge such as
sewage, processed wastewater, or any other wastewater (black or grey) to enter
the storm drain system.
      2.   Any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains or
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency.
   B.   Any drain or conveyance connected to or discharging to the storm drain
system, which has not been:
      1.   Documented as part of approved plans, maps, or equivalent records of
the city.
      2.   Otherwise approved in writing by the city.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any non-storm water discharge to the storm water system.
Illicit discharges include both:
   A.   Direct connections, including but not limited to: wastewater piping
either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the storm water system.
   B.   Indirect connections, including but not limited to: infiltration into
the storm water system or spills collected by drain inlets.
IMMEDIATE THREAT: A situation where pollutant discharge to state waters is
already occurring. This refers to a present and active risk that requires
immediate attention to prevent or mitigate further contamination.
IMMINENT THREAT: A situation that poses a high likelihood of pollutant
discharge to state waters within forty-eight (48) hours if corrective actions
are not taken. This refers to conditions that suggest a serious risk is
developing but has not yet resulted in an actual discharge.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities or at a greater rate of flow than
the natural surface. Such impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to:
roofs, concrete, asphalt, and similar improvements that prevent or impede the
natural absorption of water into the soil.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM OR MS4: A conveyance or system of
conveyances including: road drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, or
political body, including any agency of the State of Utah and the United States
government.
POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste, paints,
varnishes, solvents; oil and other automotive fluids, non-hazardous liquid and
solid wastes and yard wastes, refuse, rubbish, trash, garbage, litter, or other
discarded or abandoned objects, articles; and accumulations, that may cause or
contribute to pollution such as floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not
limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete resonates); and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
REDEVELOPMENT: Alterations of a property that change the impervious surface on
the site more than ten (10) percent.
RETENTION BASIN: A ground depression area designed to retain flows from storm
water runoff, to encourage infiltration into surrounding sub surface soils, and
may include overflow piping. A retention basin allows debris to settle from the
storm water discharge and must be periodically cleaned and dredged.
SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW OR SSOS: A discharge of untreated sanitary wastewater
or SSOs.
SOURCE PROTECTION ZONE: An area that is protected as a source of culinary or
drinking water determined by geo-hydrology and designed to protect groundwater
aquifers and well from development or pollution.
STORM DRAIN: A closed conduit for conducting collected storm water.
STORM WATER: Any flow that occurs during or following any form of natural
precipitation. Storm water includes only the portion of such flow that is
composed of precipitation.
STORM WATER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PLAN: A plan approved by the city before any
person may excavate, grub and clear, grade, or perform any type of construction
activity that will disrupt or cause a change in the natural landscape in the
city of one (1) acre or more, or any part of a common development plan. This
plan approval is required in conjunction with a SWPPP.
STORM WATER PROGRAM: The overall approach by the city in administering,
funding, creating and implementing policies that support the objectives of the
Act, EPA, and DEQ relating to storm water management in conjunction with the
ongoing maintenance and operation of the storm water system.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN OR SWPPP: The required plan as approved
by DEQ and the city before any construction activity occurs as part of a
development.
STORM WATER SYSTEM: The system of conveyances including, but not limited to:
sidewalks, road drainage systems, catch basins, detention basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, man made channels, sumps, and storm drains generally owned
and operated by the city or its designee, designed and used for collecting or
conveying storm water. The storm water system is also referred to as MS4.
STORM WATER RUN-OFF: Water generated by storm water flows over land.
SUMP: A city approved formalized underground structure, surrounded by drain
rock, that is used in rare special conditions to collect storm water, which
allows the slow release of water into the surrounding sub soil.
VIOLATION: Failure to implement or maintain preferred best management practices
(See Also Utah Code 19-5-108.3). (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-4: PROHIBITED OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   Unlawful Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Obstruct the flow of water in the storm water system.
      2.   Contribute to the obstruction of the flow of water in the storm
water system.
      3.   Cover or obstruct any drain inlet.
   B.   Exemptions. The following obstructions are exempt:
      1.   Street and/or storm water improvement projects authorized by the
city.
      2.   Flood control and prevention activities performed by the city.
      3.   Obstructions approved by the city and/or state as part of a SWPPP.
      4.   Obstructions occurring during clean up periods established by the
city. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-5: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   A.   Unlawful Discharges. It is unlawful for any person to discharge non
storm water discharges to the MS4 including spills, illicit connections,
illegal dumping, and SSOs into the storm sewer system. All SSOs must be
reported to the division of water quality and to the MS4s local wastewater
treatment facility.
   B.   Exemption. The following discharges are exempt, unless the city
identifies these discharges as significant sources of pollutants to waters of
the state or as causing or contributing to a violation of water quality
standards:
      1.   Water line flushing;
      2.   Landscape irrigation;
      3.   Diverted stream flows;
      4.   Rising ground waters;
      5.   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration;
      6.   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
      7.   Discharges from potable water sources;
      8.   Foundation drains;
      9.   Air conditioning condensate;
      10.   Irrigation water;
      11.   Springs;
      12.   Water from crawl space pumps;
      13.   Footing drains;
      14.   Lawn water runoff;
      15.   Individual residential car washing;
      16.   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      17.   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
      18.   Residual street wash water;
      19.   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges; and
      20.   Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activity. (Ord.
2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-6: PROHIBITED STORAGE AND DEBRIS:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain, store, keep, deposit, or leave any
pollutant or hazardous material, or any item containing a pollutant or
hazardous material, in a manner that may result in the discharge of the
pollutant or hazardous material to the storm water system. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-
2025)
8-6-7: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
Any person connecting to the storm water system, developing a parcel of one (1)
acre or more, or developing a common development plan shall employ the
appropriate BMPs as adopted by the city. The BMPs may be structural and/or
nonstructural, depending on the needs of the site. The BMPs employed shall be
designed to ensure that the quality and quantity of storm water released to the
storm water system meets the requirements of applicable law and the city's
NPDES permit. Design shall ensure that the development shall not exceed the
designed capacity of the storm water system or jeopardize the integrity of the
storm water system. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-8: AUTHORITY TO ENTER OR INSPECT:
   A.   Access. The director may enter all private properties for the purposes
of inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling, repairing, or maintaining any
portion of the storm water facilities lying within an actual or prescriptive
easement. The director shall perform other duties necessary for the proper
operation of the storm water system. All entry and maintenance shall be
completed according to any special terms of any easement.
   B.   Inspections. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
provision of the municipal code, or whenever the city has cause to believe that
there exists, or potentially exists, a condition which constitutes a violation
of the municipal code, the city may direct its qualified personnel to enter the
premises at all reasonable times to inspect, detect, investigate, eliminate,
and enforce any suspected non storm water discharges, including illicit
discharges, illegal dumping, or other violation. During the same time the city
may inspect and collect records related to storm water compliance.
   C.   Refusal. In the event an owner or occupant refuses entry after a
request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to
seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such
entry.
   D.   Access. The access for the city to inspect storm water control measures
on private property that is vested under this section and includes both
construction phase and post construction access. Upon approval of the director,
the city may allow the owner/operators or a qualified third party to conduct
maintenance so long as:
      1.   At least annual certification, in the form of inspection
documentation which has been performed, is provided to the city.
      2.   The structural controls are adequately operating and maintained as
such were designed to protect water quality as provided in the original
maintenance agreement and plans submitted upon vesting and approval of the
site.
      3.   A maintenance agreement is required on private property that is
vested after the effective date of this chapter and includes both construction
phase and post construction access and where owner/operators or a qualified
third party to conduct maintenance as provided herein. Said maintenance
agreement shall be promulgated in the form and manner as determined by the
Director so long as the agreement includes at a minimum:
         a.   Allows the city oversight authority of the storm water measures.
         b.   A provision that the agreement acts as a covenant that runs with
the land.
         c.   Allows the city to inspect and perform necessary maintenance or
corrective actions neglected by the owner/operators or the qualified third
party.
         d.   Allows the city to recoup the costs from the owner/operator as
necessary to cover the expenses for necessary actions conducted by the city.
   E.   Interpretation. The city interprets this regulation as secondary and
subservient to the United States Constitution and the Utah State Constitution
as applied to property rights, land use, development, and similar rights.
Specifically, the intent of this regulation is not to be applied to violate
vested property rights nor to be a physical invasion of property rights as
determined by the United States Supreme Court in Loretto v. Teleprompter
Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419 (1982). The city recognizes that the United
States supreme court interprets property right in conjunction with the laws and
constitutions of each state. Therefore, Utah law also plays an important role
in defining property rights. For the purpose of determining when a property
right is vested the city shall continue to apply the Utah supreme court ruling
in Western Land Equities, Inc. v. City of Logan, 617 P.2d 388 (1980), that
states a property owner is vested to follow the city regulations in effect at
the time a land use application is filed. Furthermore, where there is vagueness
in any land use regulation, including the storm water regulations, it shall be
interpreted in favor of the property owner. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-9: REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR AND ANALYZE:
If a test or inspection by the city, its designee, or other authorized agency
indicates that a site is causing or contributing to storm water pollution,
illegal discharges, and/or non-storm water discharges to the storm water system
or waters of the United States, and if the violation continues after notice of
the same, the city or other authorized agency may require any person engaged in
the illicit activity and/or the owner of operator of the site to provide, at
their own expense, monitoring and analyses as required by the city or other
applicable agency to ensure compliance with the municipal code. (Ord. 2025-11,
5-20-2025)
8-6-10: DAMAGE SYSTEM:
Any person who damages any portion of the storm water system or any irrigation
system shall be responsible for repairing the damage. The damage shall be
repaired by a licensed contractor and, where applicable, be repaired in
accordance with the current adopted public works standards for development,
design, and construction adopted by the city. It is unlawful to remove or alter
any portion of the storm water system or irrigation system without permission
from the director or owner of the irrigation system. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-11: AUTHORIZED ACCESS:
It is unlawful for any person to open any storm water access hole, grate, lid,
cover, inlet, head gate, valve, pipe or other otherwise access any storm water
facility without express permission from the director. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-
2025)
8-6-12: WETLANDS AND PERMITS:
Any development that may affect any wetland or potential wetland, regardless of
whether such wetlands are identified or unidentified, shall provide to the city
an accurate wetland delineation that has been completed within the past
eighteen (18) months prior to city approval of the development. Any delineated
wetland shall be accurately shown on all construction plans and any plat map
relating to the development. Prior to issuance of any building permit, the
developer shall accurately stake and install appropriate BMPs all on site
delineated wetlands and shall maintain such until the notice of termination has
been completed. The developer shall also provide to the city a copy of the EPA
wetlands 404 permit, stream alteration permit, regulator letters, and other
related permit or regulator documents required by any regulatory agency
relating to the development. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-13: FEDERAL AND STATE COMPLIANCE:
Nothing in the storm water regulations shall be interpreted to relieve any
person from an obligation to comply with an applicable federal, state, or local
law. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-14: VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
Where a person has violated the municipal code storm water regulations the
following procedure applies:
   A.   First Notice Of Violation. A written notice of violation shall be
issued to the contractor or property owner and documented in the city records
by the director who issued the warning. The notice should include an
explanation/ identification of each specific violation, associated reference
from the permit and a deadline to correct each violation.
      1.   Correction Period. The city shall give no sooner than one (1)
business day for immediate threats to water quality and no longer than seven
(7) calendar days for imminent threats for the violation(s) to be corrected.
      2.   Follow-Up Inspection. A follow-up inspection shall be conducted
following the correction period. The city shall provide the contractor or
property owner written that the violation(s) are either deemed resolved or
escalated to a second notice of violation.
   B.   Second Notice Of Violation. A written notice of violation shall be
issued to the contractor or property owner and documented in the city records
by the director who issued the violation. The notice should include an
explanation/identification of each specific violation that remains from the
first notice of violation, associated reference from the permit, a deadline to
correct each violation, and warning that a fine can be issued if the violation
(s) are not corrected within the new timeframe specified.
      1.   Correction Period. The city shall give no sooner than twenty-four
(24) hours for immediate threats to water quality and no longer than seven (7)
calendar days for imminent threats for the violation(s) to be corrected.
      2.   Follow-Up Inspection. A follow-up inspection shall be conducted
following the correction period and the violation either deemed resolved or
escalated to a third notice of violation. The city shall provide the contractor
or property owner written notice that the violation(s) are either deemed
resolved or escalated to a third notice of violation.
   C.   Third Notice Of Violation. A written notice shall be issued to the
contractor or property owner stating that the previously noticed violation(s)
have not been addressed, and fines have now been imposed for each associated
violation. The notice should include an explanation/identification of each
specific violation that remains from the second notice of violation, associated
administrative fine amount for each violation, and timeframe specified for
payment and correction.
      1.   Correction Period. The city shall give no sooner than twenty-four
(24) hours for immediate threats to water quality and no longer than seven (7)
calendar days for imminent threats for the violation(s) to be corrected.
      2.   Follow-Up Inspection. A follow-up inspection shall be conducted
following the correction period and the violation either deemed resolved or
escalated to a third notice of violation. The city shall provide the contractor
or property owner written that the violation(s) are either deemed resolved or
additional fines imposed.
      3.   Administrative Fines. An administrative fine for each occurrence
shall be imposed for each business day that the specific violation continues
beginning on the day after the day on which the authority issues the
administrative fine; and within thirty (30) days after the day on which the
applicant corrects the violation. Fines collected shall be deposited into the
city's storm water education and outreach program.
         a.   Fines shall be as follows:
            (1)   Five hundred dollars ($500) per occurrence for working
without an approved storm water permit;
            (2)   Three hundred dollars ($300) per occurrence for tracking mud
on road;
            (3)   Two hundred fifty dollars ($250) per occurrence for failure
to clean up or report spills;
            (4)   One hundred dollars ($100) per occurrence for failure to
conduct storm water inspections (only applicable if contractor has agreed to
conduct own inspections);
            (5)   One hundred dollars ($100) per occurrence for failure to
maintain storm water records; and
            (6)   Five hundred dollars ($500 )per occurrence for failure to use
general best management practices, as determined by the city.
         b.   Fine(s) imposed shall be paid directly to the city within thirty
(30) days of issuance.
         c.   Failure to pay fine(s) may result in additional action by the
city including, but not limited to, the deduction of the amount of the fine
from an existing escrow account, withholding acceptance or final approval, or
referral of unpaid fine(s) to city attorney.
   D.   Stop Work Order. The city may issue a stop work order if there is
clearly documented reason articulating an immediate threat to water quality.
      A stop work order may not be issued if the contractor or property owner
has selected the preferred best management practice for site conditions and is
properly implementing said practice, but a violation results from a deficiency
in the preferred best management practice.
   E.   Special Cases.
      1.   The city can issue a stop work order earlier than in the process
described in this section if the city can document that the violation imposes
an immediate and/or imminent threat to water quality.
      2.   The city can correct a violation for the contractor or property
owner and recoup the costs if the contractor or property owner refuses to
correct the violation and there is imminent significant harm to water quality
or the storm water system.
      3.   The city cannot issue a stop work order if the violation is a result
of a properly installed and maintained BMP per specifications from the
preferred BMP list. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-15: STORM WATER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY:
   A.   Design. All storm water shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the current public works standards. Storm water outfall design and water
quality shall meet federal, state, and local discharge requirements.
   B.   Construction.
      1.   BMPs.
         a.   The storm water management plan contains a listing of BMPs that
can be used on a site. BMPs typically fall into the following categories:
            (1)   Perimeter control.
            (2)   Erosion controls.
            (3)   Sediment control.
            (4)   Materials handling and spill prevention.
            (5)   Waste management.
            (6)   Good housekeeping.
         b.   The application of some BMPs include, but are not limited to:
            1.   Oil Separators (OWS). Oil Separators shall be required on all
sites with parking facilities that exceed two (2) acres, automobile salvage or
wrecking areas, or smaller sites anticipating oily discharges such as mechanic
shops or similar facilities. Oil separators must be capable of removing
particulates down to one hundred fifty (150) microns. Possible products
include, but are not limited to: BaySaver, Storm Cerptor, Vortechnic. Where oil
separators are required, sizing and design of OWS must be reviewed by the city
engineer prior to installation. Consideration must be given to frequency and
ease of maintenance of the structure. Basins shall have agreements in place
with the city to periodically clean the separator in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications. Manufacturers' recommendations for sizing shall
be followed with calculations submitted to the city. The separator may either
be installed upstream or downstream of the basin keeping in mind that flows on
the outlet of the basin would be smaller.
      2.   Inlet Protection (IP). The storm water management plan may allow
straw bales, silt fences, or curb snakes (after asphalt is placed). Filter
fabric under the grate shall not be permitted since drainage is greatly
inhibited.
      3.   Tracking Pads (CR). Sites must have a tracking pad to eliminate mud
from being tracked onto the adjacent street. If mud is tracked, the contractor
shall be responsible to sweep the streets as necessary.
      4.   Surface Sweeping (SC). If mud or dirt is tracked onto a travel
surface such as a road or parking area, the developer or owner shall be
responsible for sweeping the surface to remove the mud and dirt.
      5.   Concrete Washout (CWM). A place must be located within the
subdivision or on the site for concrete washout. No washout will be permitted
on the street which would then continue to the storm drain. The washout area
may need to be maintained and temporarily excavated until the building
foundations and driveways are constructed, or some other arrangement made.
      6.   Silt Fences (SF). Silt fences must be installed to prohibit the flow
of sediments off the site in accordance with manufacturers recommendations and
the storm water management plan.
      7.   Notice Sign. All development and subdivisions are required to at
least one (1) notice sign that is clearly visible at each entryway to the
subdivision indicating that the SWPPP must be obtained and followed. Said
notice sign shall be maintained by the original development or subdivision
applicant until termination. The specific wording on the sign relating to storm
water, and other related requirements, may be prescribed and modified by the
city as needed to meet challenges created by development and to give notice to
requirements of law.
   C.   Plan Approval Required. Storm water construction activity prevention
plan approval is required in conjunction with the SWPPP before any person may
excavate, grub and clear, grade, or perform any type of construction activity
that will disrupt or cause a change in the natural landscape within the city
that is one (1) acre or more, or any part of a common development plan.
Development of a subdivision greater than or equal to one (1) acre in size
qualifies under this section even if each of the individual lots in the
subdivision are smaller than one (1) acre.
      1.   Process. Any person or entity desiring a storm water construction
activity plan approval must first submit a "Notice of Intent" (NOI) with DEQ.
Upon DEQ approval of the NOI, any person desiring a storm water construction
activity plan approval must file the SWPPP with the city along with any
documentation necessary for the city to calculate the number of ERUs for each
parcel upon completion of development.
      2.   Approval. The storm water construction activity plan is approved and
issued in conjunction land use and / or building permit approval. The city may
impose conditions in connection with the approval to enforce the activity plan
and SWPPP and include specific measures to prevent erosion, unlawful discharge,
sediment accumulation, debris removal, and other storm water measures for the
construction site.
      3.   Effect. Unless otherwise revoked or suspended for a violation, a
storm water construction activity plan approval is effective for the full
period of the construction activity. The construction activity will not be
considered to be completed until the following events occur:
         a.   Termination. The storm water construction activity plan approval
shall be considered terminated after the applicant notifies the city of
completion of the project and a final inspection is performed to verify site
stabilization. The permittee shall also verify the site is stabilized and give
"Notice of Termination" to DEQ. The applicant shall keep and maintain all
permit required improvements on the site until termination.
         b.   Amendments. If the proposed construction activity for a site to
which a plan approval pertains is materially altered from the time of approval,
an amended storm water construction activity plan and SWPPP shall be submitted
for approval.
   D.   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. A SWPPP is required for all
sites disturbing one (1) acre or more or any part of a common development plan.
The SWPPP shall contain the information required in the general permit and by
DEQ. The city may require additions, changes, modifications, and amendments to
the SWPPP in order to conform to the storm water management plan adopted by the
city or to remedy deficiencies occurring at the construction site during
construction.
   E.   Erosion And Sediment Control. The applicant of the SWPPP shall install
the erosion and sediment control measures required by the approved SWPPP prior
to commencing other construction activity on the site. The erosion and sediment
control measures shall be properly installed and maintained in accordance with
the SWPPP, specifications of a manufacturer, and best practices. The applicant
shall maintain such measures on the site until the city accepts termination.
   F.   Inspection And Entry. The written approval of a storm water activity
plan and SWPPP authorizes the EPA, DEQ, City, or other applicable agency to
enter the site and inspect compliance with the construction activity plan and
SWPPP. The applicant shall also make available upon request inspection of storm
water records for the construction site. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-16: CONNECTION PERMIT:
   A.   Permit. A permit is required to make any connection, directly or
indirectly, to the storm water system.
   B.   Application. For a person to connect to the storm water system the
person must:
      1.   Submit a completed application form as provided by the city.
      2.   Incorporate BMPs that meet the requirements of the storm water
regulations.
      3.   Provide a maintenance plan, including any maintenance agreement
outlining how the applicant will maintain the storm water improvements listed
in the application.
      4.   The application may be submitted to the city in conjunction with a
building permit or subdivision approval, whichever is applicable.
   C.   Approval. The storm water connection permit application shall be
reviewed by the city and may be issued, modified, or denied in conjunction with
the building permit.
   D.   Consideration. In considering whether to issue a connection permit, the
city shall determine:
      1.   Whether the application is complete.
      2.   Whether all development fees have been paid.
      3.   Whether the application complies with all storm water regulations
and policies.
      4.   Whether the application conforms to city storm water system plans.
      5.   Whether the application incorporates effective BMPs.
      6.   The potential for the connection to introduce pollutants into the
storm drain system.
      7.   Whether the proposed connection creates a safety hazard.
      8.   Whether the proposed connection affects the integrity of the storm
sewer system infrastructure.
      9.   Whether the proposed connection endangers any ground water or
drinking water supply.
      10.   Whether the applicant has submitted a maintenance plan and any
maintenance agreement ensuring the proper maintenance and upkeep of the
applicant's connection and on-site storm water improvements.
   E.   Failure. Failure to construct or maintain storm water improvements in
accordance with an approved storm water connection permit shall be a violation
of this chapter.
   F.   Drawings. Any person connecting to the storm water system shall provide
the "as built" drawings showing the details and the location of the connection
along with any location device. The plans shall be provided in a format
acceptable to the city. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-17: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
   A.   Public. Activities of a public utility or government entity. Activities
to remove or alleviate an emergency condition, restore utility service, restore
transportation, or otherwise protect public health, safety, and welfare.
   B.   Agriculture. Bona fide agricultural and farming operations. (Ord. 2025-
11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-18: ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS:
Violations, enforcement, and penalties of this chapter are set forth in section
8-6-14. An aggrieved person may appeal to the city appeal authority by filing
an appeal in writing, stating the facts supporting the appeal, within ten (10)
days of the decision being appealed. All appeals shall be handled in accordance
with the procedure in the municipal code for the appeal authority. The decision
of the appeal authority shall be final. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-20-2025)
8-6-19: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Violations, enforcement, and penalties of this chapter are set forth in section
8-6-14 and as established in Utah Code 19.5.108, as amended. (Ord. 2025-11, 5-
20-2025)
CHAPTER 7
STORM WATER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PERMIT
SECTION:
8-7-1: Purpose And Intent
8-7-2: Permit; When Required
8-7-3: Permit Application
8-7-4: Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
8-7-5: Proper Operation And Maintenance
8-7-6: Inspection And Entry
8-7-7: Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit
8-7-8: Violations And Enforcement
8-7-9: Exemptions
8-7-10: Appeal
8-7-11: Compliance With Federal And State Law
8-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent the discharge of sediment and other
construction related pollutants from construction sites. Sediment and debris
from construction sites are a major source of pollution to waterways and water
systems located within the city and surrounding areas. Each year storm water
runoff carries tons of sediment from construction sites into local drainage
systems, irrigation systems, canals, rivers, and lakes. Sediment from storm
water runoff also clogs and obstructs storm drains, culverts, and canals and
causes damage to private property, wildlife habitat and water quality. (Ord.
07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-7-2: PERMIT; WHEN REQUIRED:
A South Weber City storm water construction activity permit is required before
any person or entity may excavate, grub and clear, grade, or perform any type
of construction activity that will disrupt or cause a change in the natural
landscape upon any of the following types of property located within the city:
   A.   One Acre Or More: Any parcel, lot or land development which is equal to
or greater than one acre (43,560 square feet) in size. A subdivision
development greater than or equal to one acre in size qualifies under this
subsection even if each of the individual lots in the subdivision is smaller
than one acre.
   B.   Less Than One Acre: Any parcel, lot or land development smaller than
one acre in size, if any portion of the parcel, lot or land development lies
within the area known as erosion sensitive areas.
   C.   Special Concern Areas: Any parcel, lot or land development for which
the city determines that because of the nature or type of the parcel, lot or
development, disturbance of the land is likely to result in erosion or the
transport of sediment off of the site by storm water to a degree substantially
greater than that which would occur under natural landscape conditions. (Ord.
07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-7-3: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Any person or entity desiring a storm water construction activity permit must
first file an application with the development services department. The
application may be submitted independently, or as part of an application for a
preliminary site plan approval, site plan approval, or building permit.
   A.   Content: The application shall include a storm water pollution
prevention plan which meets the criteria set forth in section
8-7-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Timing: The applicant shall file the application on or before the
following dates:
      1.   Subdivision: The date that the applicant submits the preliminary
subdivision plat application if the applicant proposes to develop a
subdivision.
      2.   Site Plan: The date that the applicant submits a site plan
application if the applicant proposes to develop a site plan or amended site
plan.
      3.   Building Permit: The date that the applicant submits a building
permit application if the applicant proposes to construct a building on an
existing lot or parcel.
      4.   Other: At least two (2) weeks before the developer intends to
perform any type of work not listed above that would require a storm water
construction activity permit pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   Compliance: If an applicant's development comes under more than one of
the categories listed above, then the applicant shall submit the storm water
construction activity permit application on the earliest of the listed dates.
Failure to comply with the application dates set forth above is not a criminal
offense, but may delay the applicant's project. Failure to acquire a required
storm water construction activity permit is grounds for denying a related
subdivision application, site plan application, conditional use permit
application, or building permit application. It is unlawful to commence work
(move dirt) on a development site before obtaining a required storm water
construction activity permit.
   D.   Fee: The applicant for a storm water construction activity permit shall
pay a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.
   E.   Application Approval: The storm sewer utility manager or designee shall
approve the application and grant the permit if the application is complete and
meets the criteria set forth in section
8-7-4 of this chapter. The storm sewer utility manager shall deny the
application or approve the application with conditions if he or she determines
that the measures proposed in the plan fail to meet the criteria set forth in
section
8-7-4 of this chapter. Conditions the storm sewer utility manager may impose in
connection with the approval of a permit include, but are not limited to, the
establishment of specific measures and controls to prevent erosion and the
discharge of sediment, debris and other construction related pollutants from
the site by storm water.
   F.   Term: Unless otherwise revoked or suspended, a storm water construction
activity permit shall be in effect for the full period of the construction
activity. The construction activity will not be considered to be completed
until the following events occur:
      1.   Subdivisions: For permits associated with a subdivision plat
approval:
         a.   The permittee must complete all required subdivision
improvements; and
         b.   One of the following three (3) events must occur:
            (1)   The city issues a final certificate of occupancy for each lot
in the subdivision, or
            (2)   Individual storm water construction activity permits have
been issued for each lot in the subdivision not having a final occupancy
permit, or
            (3)   The property has been revegetated or landscaped in a manner
that eliminates erosion and sediment discharge or that brings the property back
to its natural state.
      2.   Site Plans: For permits associated with a site plan approval, the
date that the permittee has completed all required landscaping and all outside
construction work associated with the site plan.
      3.   Building Permits: For permits associated with a building permit
application, the date that the city issues a final occupancy permit for the
structure covered by the building permit.
      4.   Other: For permits issued that are not tied to other approvals from
the city, the date that the permittee has completed all work associated with
the permit and takes steps required by the permit to prevent further erosion
and runoff from the site.
   G.   Termination: No storm water construction activity permit shall be
considered terminated until the permittee submits a notice of termination of
construction activity permit ("notice") to the city and the notice is accepted
by the city. The city shall accept the notice if the permittee has met the
requirements of the permit and this chapter. The permittee shall keep and
maintain all permit required improvements on the site until the city accepts
the notice.
   H.   Amendments: In the event that the proposed construction activity for a
site to which a permit pertains is materially altered from that described in an
original plan in a way that may have a significant impact upon the
effectiveness of the measures and controls described in the original plan, the
permittee shall file an amended storm water pollution prevention plan which
meets the criteria set forth in section
8-7-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-7-4: STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN:
   A.   Required Information: The storm water pollution prevention plan (the
"plan") shall contain the following information:
      1.   Site Description: A site description (including a map with spot
elevations and contour lines) which includes a description of the nature and
location of the construction activity, a description of the intended sequence
of major activities which will disturb soils for major portions of the site
(e.g., grubbing, excavation, grading, utilities, and infrastructure
installation, etc.), and estimates of the total area of the site and the total
area of the site that is expected to be disturbed by excavation, grading, or
other activities;
      2.   Control Description: A description of the proposed measures and
controls that will be implemented during construction activity and/or while the
site is not stable. The plan must clearly describe the times during the
construction process that the measures will be implemented for each major
activity identified pursuant to subsection A1 of this section. The plan shall
also state the name and phone number of the person or entity responsible for
implementation of each control measure.
   B.   Goals And Criteria: The proposed measures and controls described in the
plan shall be designed to meet the following goals and criteria:
      1.   Prevent Or Minimize Discharge: The proposed measures and controls
shall be designed to prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable,
the discharge of sediment, debris and other construction related pollutants
from the construction site by storm water runoff into the storm drainage
system.
      2.   Prevent Or Minimize Construction Debris: The proposed measures and
controls shall be designed to prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent
practicable, the deposit, discharge, tracking by construction vehicles, or
dropping of mud, sediment, debris or other potential pollutants onto public
streets and rights of way. Any such discharge shall be cleaned up and removed
immediately upon notification to the permittee or when it otherwise comes to
the attention of the permittee. At a minimum, the deposit or discharge shall be
cleaned and removed at the end of the work shift in which the deposit occurred,
or at the end of the workday, whichever comes first.
      3.   BMPs: The proposed measures and controls shall consist of best
management practices (BMPs) available at the time that the plan is submitted.
BMPs may include, but shall not be limited to, temporary silt or sediment
fences, sediment traps and detention ponds, gravel construction entrances and
wash down pads to reduce or eliminate off site tracking, straw bale sediment
barriers, establishment of temporary grasses and permanent vegetative cover,
use of straw mulch as a temporary ground cover, erosion control blankets,
temporary interceptor dikes and swales, storm drain inlet protection, check
dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, level spreaders, rock outlet
protection, reinforced soil retaining systems, and gabions.
      4.   Stabilization: The proposed measures and controls shall be designed
to preserve existing vegetation, where possible. Disturbed portions of the site
shall be stabilized. Stabilization practices may include temporary seeding,
permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer
strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation, and other
appropriate measures. Use of impervious surfaces for stabilization should be
avoided. Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in
disturbed portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily
or permanently ceased, but in no case more than fourteen (14) days after the
construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or
permanently ceased, except under the following circumstances:
         a.   If the initiation of stabilization measures by the fourteenth day
after construction activity temporarily or permanently ceases is precluded by
snow cover or frozen ground conditions, stabilization measures shall be
initiated as soon as practicable; or
         b.   If construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily
ceased, and earth disturbing will resume within twenty one (21) days, temporary
stabilization measures need not be initiated on that portion of the site.
      5.   Minimize Risk Of Discharge Of Other Materials: The proposed measures
and controls shall be employed to minimize the risk of discharge of
construction related pollutants (such as paint, thinners, solvents and other
chemicals) from the construction site. Such measures may include implementation
of storage practices to minimize exposure of the material to storm water as
well as spill prevention and response. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-7-5: PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
The recipient of a storm water construction activity permit (the permittee)
shall install the erosion and sediment control measures required by the
approved storm water pollution prevention plan before commencing any
construction activity on the site to which the plan applies or at such times
indicated in the plan. The erosion and sediment control measures shall be
properly installed and maintained in accordance with the permit, the
manufacturers' specifications, and good engineering practices. The permittee
shall maintain such measures on the site until the city accepts the termination
of the permit pursuant to subsection
8-7-3G of this chapter. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-7-6: INSPECTION AND ENTRY:
The permittee shall allow any authorized employees and representatives of the
city, representatives of the state of Utah division of water quality, and
representatives of the EPA, to enter the site to which a permit applies at any
time and to inspect the erosion and sediment control measures maintained by the
permittee. The permittee shall also allow inspection of any records pertaining
to the conditions of the permit. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-7-7: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Revocation Or Suspension: A storm water construction activity permit
may be revoked or suspended by the director upon the occurrence of any one of
the following events:
      1.   Failure of a permittee to comply with the plan or any condition of
the permit; or
      2.   Failure of a permittee to comply with any provision of this chapter
or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation related to storm
water; or
      3.   A determination by the director that the erosion and sediment
control measures implemented by a permittee pursuant to the plan are inadequate
to prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of
sediment, debris or other pollutants from the construction site by storm water.
   B.   Notice: The city shall mail a permittee written notice of noncompliance
before revoking or suspending a permit. The notice shall state the location and
nature of the noncompliance and shall also specify what action is required for
the permittee to avoid revocation or suspension of the permit. The notice shall
allow the permittee a reasonable time to take the necessary corrective action
to avoid revocation or suspension of the permit which time, in the absence of
exceptional circumstances, shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than thirty
(30) days. The notice shall be mailed to the address listed for the permittee
in the application. If the permittee fails to correct the problems identified
in the notice during the time specified in the notice, the director may suspend
or revoke the permit by mailing or delivering written notice of the suspension
or revocation to the permittee. The permittee may appeal a suspension or
revocation of the permit pursuant to the appeal procedure set forth in section
8-7-10 of this chapter.
   C.   Exceptional Circumstances: For purposes of this section, exceptional
circumstances include, but are not limited to, situations which involve a risk
of injury to persons, damage to storm drain facilities, or damage to other
property or the environment. The city may take any steps the city deems
necessary to alleviate any such exceptional circumstances as defined above, and
may bill the owner, developer, or contractor responsible for creating the
exceptional circumstances for the cost of alleviating said circumstances.
   D.   Stop Work Order: A stop work order may be issued upon the revocation or
suspension of a permit, or upon the discovery of work being conducted without a
required permit. The stop work order may be issued by inspectors in the public
works department or the development services department. No construction
activity may be commenced or continued on any site for which a permit has been
revoked or suspended until the permit has been reinstated or reissued.
   E.   Reinstatement: A storm water construction activity permit may be
reinstated or reissued upon compliance with all provisions of this chapter and
all permit conditions, or in the case of a suspension for reasons provided in
subsection A of this section, upon the filing of an amended storm water
pollution prevention plan which is designed to correct the deficiencies of the
original plan. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-7-8: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a class
C misdemeanor. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
   B.   Violators of this chapter are also subject to any penalties that may be
imposed by the state of Utah, under the authority of the Utah water quality
act, title 19, chapter 5 of the Utah code.
   C.   In addition to any criminal fines and/or penalties which may be
assessed for a violation of this chapter, the city shall have the right to
issue a stop work order or to install and/or maintain appropriate erosion and
sediment control measures on any site which is required to have such measures
in the event that construction activity is commenced or continued without such
measures having been installed as required by this chapter. The city shall have
the right to have such measures installed or maintained by city personnel or to
hire a private contractor to perform such work and the contractor and/or the
property owner shall be liable for any and all expenses related to performing
such work plus a twenty five percent (25%) penalty charge. The city may assess
said charges against the bond posted by the contractor and/or property owner.
   D.   Violators of this chapter may also be subject to prosecution, fines and
penalties from the state of Utah and the United States EPA. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-
2007)
8-7-9: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
   A.   Actions by a public utility, the city, or any other governmental entity
to remove or alleviate an emergency condition, restore utility service, or
reopen a public thoroughfare to traffic;
   B.   Actions by any other person when the city determines, and documents in
writing, that the actions are necessary to remove or alleviate an emergency
condition, restore utility service, or reopen a public thoroughfare to traffic;
   C.   Construction activities which disturb less than five hundred (500)
square feet of land surface area, or which consist of the excavation and/or
fill of less than twenty (20) cubic yards of material;
   D.   Landscape maintenance activities on fully developed properties,
necessary to maintain the existing developed landscape; and
   E.   Bona fide agricultural and farming operations which constitute the
principal use of any lot or tract of ground located within the city and which
meet the requirements of the zoning code of the city. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-7-10: APPEAL:
   A.   An applicant for a storm water construction activity permit or a
permittee of a storm water construction activity permit may appeal any decision
or directive made by the city or its representatives pursuant to this chapter.
The party desiring to appeal shall file a notice of appeal with the city
recorder's office within ten (10) days of the decision or directive being
appealed. The notice of appeal shall contain the following information:
      1.   The appellant's name, address and daytime telephone number;
      2.   A short statement describing the basis for the appeal; and
      3.   The relief sought by the appellant.
   B.   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the city recorder shall set a
date for an informal hearing to consider the appeal. The informal hearing shall
be conducted before the city hearing officer in accordance with policies
established by the city administrator. The city hearing officer shall uphold
the decision or directive being appealed unless the city's hearing officer
finds that there has been an error in the interpretation or implementation of
this chapter. The city hearing officer shall render a decision on the appeal
within ten (10) days of the informal hearing with the appellant. The city
hearing officer shall have authority to affirm, reverse or modify any decision
or directive appealed pursuant to this section. (Ord. 07-14, 6-12-2007)
8-7-11: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW:
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to relieve any person or entity
from any obligation to comply with applicable federal and state laws and
regulations pertaining to clean water and/or storm water runoff. (Ord. 07-14,
6-12-2007)
CHAPTER 8
IMPACT FEE FACILITIES PLAN
SECTION:
8-8-1: Introduction
8-8-2: Growth Projections
8-8-3: Service Area
8-8-4: Level Of Service
8-8-5: Future Development Needs
8-8-6: Excess Capacity
8-8-7: Certification
8-8-1: INTRODUCTION:
   A.   The impact fee analysis (IFA) will be completed and used as the means
for new developments to pay for their impact on the existing sewer system. The
State of Utah requires an IFFP to be prepared before an impact fee can be
implemented in the city. The law also requires the IFFP only contain the costs
for short-term growth (six (6) to ten (10) years) and cannot include
improvements which would raise the existing level of service. This section will
summarize information from the previous sections as it relates to the enactment
of the impact fee for the city.
   B.   Title 11-36a, section 300, of the UAC outlines the requirements of the
IFA, which is also required to be prepared before an impact fee can be
implemented. South Weber's financial consultant will prepare the IFA. (Ord.
2025-16, 8-26-2025)
8-8-2: GROWTH PROJECTIONS:
   A.   Long term growth projections for South Weber city are discussed in
section 3.2. This section focuses on the growth during the next decade (2025 to
2035).
   B.   As described in section 3.2, South Weber City is expected to reach a
build-out population of twelve thousand four hundred twenty-nine (12,429)
around 2039. The ERU growth rate is projected to mimic population growth,
equating to a total of approximately four thousand one hundred forty-eight
(4,148) ERUs. This would result in an additional one thousand three hundred
twenty-six (1,326) ERUs from what is estimated in 2025.
   C.   Through 2035, South Weber City is expected to reach a population of
eleven thousand four hundred fifty-seven (11,457) and have three thousand five
hundred eighty (3,580) total ERUs. Table 13 contains the projected population
and ERUs for the next ten (10) years as applicable and analyzed for the CFP.
Table 13. Population and ERU Projections (IFFP)
Year Population Residential ERUs Non- Residential ERUs Total ERUs Addt'l ERUs
Table 13. Population and ERU Projections (IFFP)
Year Population Residential ERUs Non- Residential ERUs Total ERUs Addt'l ERUs
2025 9,033      2,566            256                   2,822      -
2026 9,262      2,631            263                   2,894      72
2027 9,494      2,697            270                   2,967      145
2027 9,729      2,764            276                   3,040      218
2029 9,967      2,832            283                   3,115      293
2030 10,208     2,900            290                   3,190      368
2031 10,452     2,969            297                   3,266      444
2032 10,699     3,039            304                   3,343      522
2033 10,948     3,110            311                   3,421      600
2034 11,201     3,182            318                   3,500      678
2035 11,457     3,255            325                   3,580      758
 
(Ord. 2025-16, 8-26-2025)
8-8-3: SERVICE AREA:
The existing sewer system serves all residents in the South Weber City boundary
within one (1) interconnected system. In future years, it is assumed that all
annexed areas will be included in the existing system. It is anticipated that
most additions will be completed by developers. (Ord. 2025-16, 8-26-2025)
8-8-4: LEVEL OF SERVICE:
For the sewer system, the residents expect they will be able to use the system
under normal operating conditions, including during peak use times, without the
associated connections or pipe segments backing up. Unique or unforeseen
circumstances such as blockages, infiltration, inflow, line breaks, or other
unanticipated problems are not considered in this chapter. (Ord. 2025-16, 8-26-
2025)
8-8-5: FUTURE DEVELOPMENT NEEDS:
Based on the model, the existing sewer system is capable of handling future
development; therefore, no projects are recommended. Attention should be given
to the watch areas identified in the capital facilities plan. (Ord. 2025-16, 8-
26-2025)
8-8-6: EXCESS CAPACITY:
   A.   Future growth will utilize the remaining capacity in the existing sewer
system and future projects described in the CFP. Sewer projects constructed
using available city funds were analyzed to determine the remaining capacity.
In this section, excess capacity, if any, will be determined and evaluated.
   B.   Utah Code 11-36a-202 "Prohibitions on impact fees" states:
      1.   A local political subdivision or private entity may not:
         a.   Impose an impact fee to:
         (1)   Cure deficiencies in a public facility serving existing
development;
         (2)   Raise the established level of service of a public facility
serving existing development;
         (3)   Recoup more than the local political subdivision's or private
entity's costs actually incurred for excess capacity in an existing system
improvement;
One (1) project was found to be eligible under the UAC Code listed above.
Public Works Facility Project: The city has bonded for and is currently
constructing a new public works facility. The new public works facility will
serve both the existing and future needs of the sewer system. Utility
enterprise funds and impact fees are planned to be used to make the payments on
the bond. The city has established that the sewer system accounts for thirty
percent (30%) of the use and, therefore, thirty percent (30%) of the total cost
of the facility. Additional information can be found in Appendix A, Exhibit 7.
 
ERUs Served
 Total ERUs Served - 4,418
 Future ERUs Served - 1,326 (32%)
 
 
Total Cost of Project (Sewer Portion Only)
 Facility Bond (P&I)   $4,002,695
 Property Cost   88,221
 Total Cost   $4,090,916
 Percent Impact Fee Eligible   32%
 Impact Fee Eligible Portion of the Public Works Facility
  Project   $1,309,093
 
(Ord. 2025-16, 8-26-2025)
8-8-7: CERTIFICATION:
   A.   "I certify that the attached impact fee facilities plan:
      1.   Includes only the costs of public facilities that are:
         a.   Allowed under the Impact Fees Act; and
         b.   Actually incurred; or
         c.   Projected to be incurred or encumbered within six (6) years after
the day on which each impact fee is paid;
      2.   Does not include:
         a.   Costs of operation and maintenance of public facilities;
         b.   Costs for qualifying public facilities that will raise the level
of service for the facilities, through impact fees, above the level of service
that is supported by existing residents; and
      3.   Complies in each and every relevant respect with the impact fees
act." (Ord. 2025-16, 8-26-2025)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Adoption Of Building And Residential Codes
9-1-2: Building Permit
9-1-3: Building Permit Fees
9-1-4: Temporary Occupancy
9-1-5: Premises Identification
9-1-6: Secondary Water Connection
9-1-7: Penalty
9-1-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES:
   A.   Adoption Of The Building Code: The building code, as published by the
International Conference Of Building Officials and currently adopted by the
state of Utah by the uniform building standards act is hereby adopted by
reference and made part of these ordinances. Any successive amendments,
editions, and/or appendices adopted by the state of Utah are hereby
incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective upon the date effective
as Utah state statute. Copies of said building codes are on file in the office
of the city recorder. (Ord. 13-01, 1-8-2013)
   B.   Revisions To The International Residential Building Code:
Section R101.1 (Title.) Insert: South Weber City.
Table R301.2 (1) Insert:   DESIGN CRITERIA TABLE
DESIGN CRITERIA                             
Snow load - ground                         57 PSF
Snow load - roof minimum                   40 PSF + drifting
Wind speed                                 120 mph (3 second gust)
Wind exposure category:                     
   East of 1900 East and north of 7800  C
South
   All other areas of South Weber City  B
Seismic - international building code      D
Seismic - international residential code   D2
Winter design temperature                  6°F
Frost depth                                30 inches
Subject to damage from:                     
   Weathering                           Severe
   Termite                              Slight
   Decay                                None to slight
Flood hazard                               See area map, available at city
                                            office
 
Section P2603.6.1 (Sewer depth.) Insert: Thirty inches (30").
(Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
9-1-2: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   Building Permit Required: A building permit is required for the
construction, alteration, repair, removal, modification, or occupancy of any
structure within city limits. No permit shall be necessary where the
alteration, repair, or modification is minor as determined by the building
inspector. Applications for a building permit will be provided by the city and
issued through the planning and building department.
   B.   Building Permit Review And Issuance: Upon receipt of a complete
building permit application, the following review process shall take place:
      1.   The application is checked for completeness and input into the
building permit numbering system.
      2.   The building official and the fire chief (where applicable) shall
review the application, building plans and site plans, ensuring the application
meets the adopted city, building, and fire codes.
      3.   If the proposed structure includes a fire sprinkler system, the
plans and calculations shall be sent by the city to a sprinkling system
specialist for independent review. The applicant will be billed by the city for
reimbursement of the cost of the independent review.
      4.   Once all approvals have been granted, the applicant shall be
notified the permit is available for pick up and of the total building permit
fee and impact fees due.
      5.   No construction is permitted to take place until the permit
application has been approved and all applicable fees have been paid by the
applicant. (Ord. 13-01, 1-8-2013)
9-1-3: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Permit Fee: The city council shall from time to time enact by
resolution the fees to be paid for the application for a building permit based
upon the valuation of the home.
   B.   Completion Fee: As adopted in the current fee schedule, all
applications for building permits require a completion fee to ensure total
project completion. This fee will be returned to the payer of the fee after
receiving a satisfactory final inspection from the building inspector. If the
building is of new construction, a certificate of occupancy will also be issued
after receiving a satisfactory final inspection from the building inspector.
(Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
   C.   Forfeiture: In the event a permanent certificate of occupancy has not
been issued or a final inspection has not been approved within two (2) years of
the issuance of the building permit, the completion fee shall be forfeited to
the city. Furthermore, any adjustment, moving, or tampering with the water
meter shall result in forfeiture of the completion fee to the city. (Ord. 13-
01, 1-8-2013)
9-1-4: TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Permitted: Temporary occupancy may only be permitted if there are
unfinished exterior items during the period of October 1 through March 30.
   B.   Requirements: An applicant requesting temporary occupancy prior to
obtaining a final inspection for exterior items must comply with the following
conditions:
      1.   Submit escrow to the city for completion, including materials and
labor, of exterior items, the amount for which will be determined by the
building inspector.
      2.   The contractor/homeowner must submit an escrow agreement from a
loaning institution stating that funds totaling the determined escrow amount
are being held by said institution for the purpose of finishing and obtaining a
final inspection. The agreement must state that the amount will not be released
without written authorization from the city and that all remaining funds are to
be released to the city upon written demand after the expiration of the time
granted if improvements have not been completed.
      3.   All items are to be completed by a reasonable date set by the
building inspector, not to exceed one year.
      4.   If the items are not completed within the set time, the escrow
amount, along with the completion fee, will be forfeited to the city. This
forfeiture does not relieve the contractor or the homeowner from completing the
improvements if for some reason the escrow amount is not sufficient to complete
the improvements.
   C.   Penalty For Unauthorized Occupancy: If any person takes temporary or
permanent occupancy prior to receiving written permission from the building
inspector a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day will be assessed. Water
service will be terminated after forty eight (48) hours' notice is posted on
the property. (Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
9-1-5: PREMISES IDENTIFICATION:
All premises shall have permanently attached address numbers plainly visible
and legible from any public access. The numbers shall be a minimum size of
three inches (3") and be a color that contrasts with the background. Any
premises that are concealed from public access must post the address in a
location visible from public access. (Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
9-1-6: SECONDARY WATER CONNECTION:
See title 8, chapter 4 of this code for secondary water connection
requirements. (Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
9-1-7: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a Class
B misdemeanor as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. (Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Adoption Of Plumbing Code
9-2-2: Revisions
9-2-3: Penalty
9-2-1: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE:
The International Plumbing Code, published by the International Code Council,
is hereby adopted by reference and made part of these ordinances. Any
successive amendments, editions, and/or appendices adopted by the State of Utah
is hereby incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective upon the date
it is effective as a Utah State Statute. A copy of said code is on file in the
Office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 13-01, 1-8-2013)
9-2-2: REVISIONS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
   A.   Section 101.1 (Title.) Insert: South Weber City.
   B.   Section 305.6.1 (Sewer Depth.) Insert: Thirty inches (30").
   C.   Section 904.1 (Vent Terminals; Roof Extension.) Insert: Twelve inches
(12").
(Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
9-2-3: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a Class
B misdemeanor as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. (Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
CHAPTER 3
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Adoption Of Fire Code
9-3-2: Revised Sections
9-3-3: Definitions
9-3-4: Appeals
9-3-5: Penalty
9-3-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE:
The most recent version of the International Fire Code published by the
International Code Council and adopted by the State of Utah, including all
appendices thereto, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of South Weber City.
(Ord. 17-06, 5-9-2017)
9-3-2: REVISED SECTIONS:
The following sections of appendices A, B, C and D are revised as follows:
APPENDIX A:   APPEAL AUTHORITY
Section A101 General
(Amend) A101.1 Scope. The appeal authority established within South Weber City
for the purpose of hearing applications for modification of the requirements of
the international fire code pursuant to the provisions of section 108 shall be
the South Weber appeal authority.
(Ord. 13-01, 1-8-2013)
Delete Subsections A101.2 through A101.10
APPENDIX B:   FIRE FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS
Section B104 Fire-Flow Calculation Area
(Add) B104.4 General, Single Family Dwellings. The fire area for single-family
dwellings shall be the total floor area of all floor levels within the exterior
walls, used to protect storage or use areas, except as modified in section
B104.4.1.
(Add) B104.4.1 Area Separation. Garages of single-family dwellings that are
separated by one-hour fire walls constructed in accordance with the
international building code or the international residential code, where
applicable, are allowed to be considered as separate fire areas.
Section B105 Fire Flow Requirements For Buildings
B105.1 Exception
(Add to end of section) The resulting fire flow shall not be less than 800
gallons per minute.
(Add) B105.1.1 When water mains or other fixed systems, capable of supplying
fire hydrants are available, fire hydrants shall be installed and spaced per
appendix C and section 508 of the international fire code.
APPENDIX C:   FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION
Section C103 Number Of Fire Hydrants
C103.1 Fire Hydrants Available (Add to end of section) In subdivisions
comprised of only single-family dwellings and type "U" buildings the number of
fire hydrants need not exceed the number of lots. Hydrant locations to be
determined by the fire chief.
APPENDIX D:   FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS
Figure D103.1 Dead End Fire Apparatus Access Road Turnaround
(Amend) All typical curve radiuses shall be 36'.
Appendices E, F, and G are adopted as guides.
(Ord. 07-17, 8-28-2007)
9-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Jurisdiction: Whenever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the
International Fire Code, it is the City.
   B.   Fire Marshal: Where the party responsible for the enforcement of the
International Fire Code is given the title of "Fire Marshal", add the following
definition: Fire Marshal is the Fire Chief. (Ord. 07-17, 8-28-2007)
9-3-4: APPEALS:
Whenever the Fire Chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit
applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the International
Fire Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the International
Fire Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may
appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief to the Appeal Authority, called by
the City Council, as per International Fire Code section 108.1. (Ord. 13-01, 1-
8-2013)
9-3-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person who violates any of the provisions of the
International Fire Code as adopted and amended herein, or fails to comply
therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder,
or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply
with such an order as affirmed or modified by the City or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, within the required time, shall severally for each and
every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Enforced Removal: The application of the penalty set forth in
subsection A of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal
of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 07-17, 8-28-2007)
CHAPTER 4
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-4-1: Adoption Of Mechanical Code
9-4-2: Revisions
9-4-3: Penalty
9-4-1: ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE:
The International Mechanical Code, published by the International Conference of
Building Officials is hereby adopted by reference and made part of these
ordinances. Any successive amendments, editions, and/or appendices adopted by
the State of Utah is hereby incorporated herein by reference and shall be
effective upon the date it is effective as a Utah State Statute. A copy of said
code is on file in the Office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 13-01, 1-8-2013)
9-4-2: REVISIONS:
Section 101.1 (Title.) Insert: South Weber City.
(Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
9-4-3: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a Class
B misdemeanor as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. (Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
CHAPTER 5
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-5-1: Adoption Of Electrical Code
9-5-2: Penalty
9-5-1: ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE:
The National Electrical Code published by the National Fire Protection
Association, is hereby adopted by reference and made part of these ordinances.
Any successive amendments, editions, and/or appendices adopted by the State of
Utah is hereby incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective upon the
date it is effective as a Utah State Statute. A copy of said code is on file in
the Office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 13-01, 1-8-2013)
9-5-2: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a Class
B misdemeanor and subject the violator to penalty as provided in section
1-9-1 of this Code. (Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
CHAPTER 6
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Adoption Of The Code For The Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
9-6-2: Purpose
9-6-3: Dangerous Buildings Declared A Nuisance
9-6-4: Abatement
9-6-5: Appeal Authority
9-6-1: ADOPTION OF THE CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
The uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, published by the
International Conference Of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference
and made part of these ordinances. Any successive amendments, editions and/or
appendices published by the International Conference Of Building Officials, is
hereby incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective upon the date of
publication by the International Conference Of Building Officials. (Ord. 13-01,
1-8-2013)
9-6-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a just, equitable, and practical
method, to be cumulative with and in addition to, any other remedy provided by
the provisions of this code, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings
or structures which, from any cause, endanger the life, limb, health, morals,
property, safety, or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be
required to be repaired, vacated, or demolished. The provisions of the
abatement of dangerous buildings code shall apply to all dangerous buildings
therein defined which now exists or which may exist within the city. All
buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the provisions
of the abatement of dangerous buildings code shall be subjected to the
provisions of the adopted state building codes herein. (Ord. 13-01, 1-8-2013)
9-6-3: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS DECLARED A NUISANCE:
All dangerous buildings within the terms of this chapter are hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and shall be vacated or demolished as hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 13-01, 1-8-2013)
9-6-4: ABATEMENT:
All buildings or portions thereof which are determined, after inspection by the
building official to be dangerous, are hereby declared to be public nuisances
and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. The
building official may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause
the building to be repaired, rehabilitated, and/or remediated to the extent
necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set
forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition,
to cause the building to be demolished or demolished and the materials, rubble
and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. (Ord. 13-01, 1-8-2013)
9-6-5: APPEAL AUTHORITY:
Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official
relative to the application and interpretations of this code, shall be heard
and decided by the city appeal authority as established in title 10, chapter 4
of this code. The appeal authority shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the building official.
Appeal requests shall be submitted to the city recorder within thirty (30)
business days of notice of noncompliance issued by the city building official.
The appeal authority shall not be empowered to waive requirements of this code.
(Ord. 13-01, 1-8-2013)
CHAPTER 7
DEVELOPMENT, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Development, Design, And Construction Standards Adopted
9-7-1: DEVELOPMENT, DESIGN, AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS ADOPTED:
All persons developing, designing, constructing, reconstructing, building, or
rebuilding on property located in South Weber City shall comply with the
guidelines contained in the document entitled, “South Weber City Development,
Design, and Construction Standards.” The South Weber City Development, Design,
and Construction Standards, together with appendices, is hereby adopted by the
City with the understanding that such standards may be amended, edited,
revised, or appended by resolution to meet changes to technology, materials,
regulation, policy, procedure, or methods of design or construction. Any
amendment to the Development, Design, or Construction Standards that materially
increases the cost of development when compared to the existing specification
shall be adopted by ordinance of the City Council. Any successive amendments,
editions, revisions, or appendices adopted by the City Council are hereby
incorporated herein by reference and shall become effective upon the designated
effective date.
(Ord. 19-03, 2-12-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-01, 1-10-2023)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Effect Of Chapter
10-1-3: Scope Of Title
10-1-4: Declaration Of Purpose
10-1-5: Effect On Previous Ordinances And Zoning Maps
10-1-6: Interpretation (Rep. by Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006)
10-1-7: Effect On Private Covenants And Agreements
10-1-8: Separability And Validity Clause
10-1-9: Effect Of Other Ordinances And Regulations
10-1-10: Definitions
10-1-10A: Land Use Matrix
10-1-11: Appendices
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the SOUTH WEBER CITY LAND USE ORDINANCE. (Ord.
2006-01, 2-14-2006)
10-1-2: EFFECT OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter are general in nature and as applied, affect the
entire title. (1989 Code § 12-1-002)
10-1-3: SCOPE OF TITLE:
This title is designed and enacted in accordance with the comprehensive plan
for the territory lying within the boundaries of the city to designate,
regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
location and uses of buildings and the uses of land for trade, business,
industry, residence, recreation, public activities or other purposes; to
regulate and restrict the height, number of stories, size and bulk of buildings
and other structures hereinafter erected or altered; to regulate and restrict
the height, bulk and location of objects of natural growth where such objects
are deemed to be hazardous to life or property; to regulate and determine the
size of lots, courts, yards and other open spaces and the percentage of the lot
that may be occupied; and to regulate the density and distribution of
population and for such purposes to divide the city into zones or districts of
such numbers, shape or area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these
regulations and provide for their enforcement. (1989 Code § 12-1-003)
10-1-4: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title and for which reason it is deemed necessary and for
which it is designated and enacted is to preserve and promote the health,
safety, morals, convenience, order and the general welfare of the city, its
present and future inhabitants and the public generally, and in particular:
   A.   To encourage and facilitate orderly growth and expansion.
   B.   To secure economy in governmental expenditures.
   C.   To provide adequate light, air and privacy to meet the ordinary or
common requirements of happy, convenient and comfortable living of the
inhabitants of the city, and to foster a wholesome social environment.
   D.   To enhance the economic well being of the city and its inhabitants.
   E.   To facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage,
schools, parks, recreation, open space and other public requirements.
   F.   To prevent the overcrowding and the undue concentration of population.
   G.   To stabilize and improve property values.
   H.   To encourage the development of an attractive and beautiful community.
(1989 Code § 12-1-004)
10-1-5: EFFECT ON PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND ZONING MAPS:
This title and the map entitled "South Weber City Zoning Map", which is part
hereof, is hereby declared to be a comprehensive amendment to the land use
ordinance of the city, as amended. The existing land use ordinance, as amended,
together with all maps, which are a part of said ordinance are hereby
superseded and amended to read as set forth herein; provided however, that the
ordinance codified herein, including the map entitled "South Weber City Zoning
Map", which is adopted as a part hereof, shall be deemed a continuation of the
existing land use ordinance as amended and not a new enactment; and the
ordinance codified herein shall be so interpreted upon all questions of
construction and to questions of conforming or nonconforming uses, buildings
and structures and to questions as to the dates upon which such uses, buildings
or structures become conforming and nonconforming. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006)
10-1-6: INTERPRETATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006)
10-1-7: EFFECT ON PRIVATE COVENANTS AND AGREEMENTS:
This title shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of private
covenants and agreements entered into between private persons, but shall
prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less restricted. Enforcement
of private covenants and agreements affects only the parties in interest and
the responsibility therefor may not be assumed by the City or its agents. (1989
Code § 12-1-007)
10-1-8: SEPARABILITY AND VALIDITY CLAUSE:
If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this
title is for any reason held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining provisions of
this title but shall be confined in its operation to the specific chapter,
section, subsection, sentence, clause or part of this title held invalid, and
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this title in any
other instance. (1989 Code § 12-1-008)
10-1-9: EFFECT OF OTHER ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS:
Whenever higher or more restrictive standards are established by the provisions
of any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation than are established
by the provisions of this title, the provisions of such other statute,
ordinance or regulation shall govern. (1989 Code § 12-1-009)
10-1-10: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions of words applicable particularly to certain chapters shall be
included in those chapters.
ACCESSORY         A detached subordinate building, the use of which is clearly incidental and
BUILDING:         customarily appropriate to and on the same lot as the main building or use of
                  land.
ACCESSORY USE:    A use clearly incidental, customarily appropriate and subordinate to and on
                  the same lot as the main use of the building or land.
ACRE:             A measurement of land area equal to forty-three thousand five hundred sixty
                  (43,560) square feet.
ACRE, ONE-HALF:   A measurement of land area equal to twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty
                  (21,780) square feet.
                  A farm industry area used for the commercial production, keeping, or
                  maintenance for sale of plants, or lands devoted to a soil conservation
                  management program. Agriculture uses include the tilling of soil, the raising
AGRICULTURE:      of crops, horticulture and gardening, and accessory uses. Agriculture uses
                  shall not be construed to permit any commercial activity or the keeping or
                  raising of animals or fowl, except as specifically permitted in the zone
                  requirements.
                  A structure used in conjunction with an allowed agriculture use, and not for
AGRICULTURAL      human occupancy, and complying with the requirements of § 58-56-4, U.C.A.,
BUILDING:         1953, as amended. To qualify as an agricultural building the structure must
                  meet all requirements of § 58-56-4(1), U.C.A., 1953, as amended.
ALLEY:            A public thoroughfare less than twenty-six feet (26') wide.
ALTERATION,       Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls,
STRUCTURAL:       columns, beams or girders.
ALTERED:          Any change in the construction of or addition to a building which would
                  permit an increase in capacity or change of use.
ANIMAL KEEPING:   The keeping of animals and fowl for food production or for pleasure. This
                  does not include the keeping of household pets.
APARTMENT HOUSE:  A building designed to be occupied by more than four (4) families.
                  An assisted living facility is a housing facility for people with
                  disabilities or for adults who cannot or choose not to live independently,
ASSISTED LIVING   but rather live in a group living environment under the care of State
FACILITY:         licensed professionals. An assisted living facility does not house
                  individuals under care for drug or alcohol rehabilitation, nor can one serve
                  as transitional housing for individuals reentering society from the penal
                  system.
                  A story partly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story for height
                  measurement where more than one- half (1/2) its height is above the average
BASEMENT:         level of the adjoining ground or where more than three-fourths (3/4) of any
                  wall is above the level of the adjoining ground. The average level of
                  adjoining ground shall not be measured against raised planters or soil raised
                  in a berm against the structure.
                  A one-story dwelling where more than twenty five percent (25%) of the floor
BASEMENT HOUSE:   area is below the finished surface grade at the front yard level. Basement
                  houses are not permitted under this title.
BEAUTY & BARBER   See Personal Care Services.
SERVICES:
BOARDING HOUSE    A building used for the purpose of providing meals or lodging, or both meals
AND/OR ROOMING    and lodging for pay or compensation of any kind for three (3) or more
HOUSE:            persons.
BUILDABLE AREA:   That portion of a building lot not included within any required yard or open
                  space which a main building may be located upon.
                  Any structure having walls and/or a roof supported by columns or walls
BUILDING:         intended for or used for the shelter or housing or enclosure of any person,
                  animal, chattel or property of any kind.
                  (A) The vertical distance above the lowest original ground surface at a point
                  on the perimeter of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat
                  roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the ridge or highest point
                  of a pitched or hipped roof.
                  (B) Buildings may be stepped to accommodate the slope of the terrain;
                  provided, that each step shall be at least twelve feet (12') in horizontal
BUILDING, HEIGHT  dimension. The height of each stepped building segment shall be measured as
OF:               provided in subsection (A) of this definition.
                  (C) For the purpose of this definition "original ground surface" means the
                  elevation of the ground surface in its natural state before manmade
                  alterations, including, but not limited to, grading, excavation, or filling,
                  excluding improvements required by land use ordinances. When the elevation of
                  the original ground surface is not readily apparent because of previous
                  manmade alterations, the elevation of the original grade shall be determined
                  by the Planning Commission using the best information available.
                  The principal building or one of the principal buildings upon a lot or a
BUILDING, MAIN:   building or one of the principal buildings housing the principal use upon the
                  lot.
                  A building owned and operated or owned and intended to be operated by a
BUILDING, PUBLIC: public agency of the United States of America or the State of Utah or any of
                  its subdivisions in connection with public use.
                  A use which provides various executive, management, and/or administrative
                  services and support but does not include on premises sales of goods or
BUSINESS SERVICES commodities. Typical uses are legal services, real estate, insurance,
AND PROFESSIONAL  advertising and mailing, building maintenance, employment service, management
OFFICES:          and consulting, protective services, equipment rental and leasing, auction
                  services, commercial research, development and testing, and photo finishing.
                  Medical and dental offices are not included in this definition.
CANNABIS:         Marijuana.
CANNABIS          A person that: (a) possesses cannabis; (b) grows or intends to grow cannabis;
CULTIVATION       and (c) sells or intends to sell cannabis to a cannabis cultivation facility,
FACILITY:         a cannabis processing facility, or a medical cannabis research licensee.
                  A person that: (a) acquires or intends to acquire cannabis from a cannabis
CANNABIS          production establishment; (b) possesses cannabis with the intent to
PROCESSING        manufacture a cannabis product; (c) manufactures or intends to manufacture a
FACILITY:         cannabis product from unprocessed cannabis or a cannabis extract; and (d)
                  sells or intends to sell a cannabis product to a medical cannabis pharmacy or
                  a medical cannabis research licensee.
CANNABIS PRODUCT: A product that: (a) is intended for human use; and (b) contains cannabis or
                  tetrahydrocannabinol.
CANNABIS          A cannabis cultivation facility, a cannabis processing facility, or an
PRODUCTION        independent cannabis testing laboratory.
ESTABLISHMENT:
                  A private garage not completely enclosed by walls or doors. For the purpose
CARPORT:          of this title, a carport shall be subject to all of the regulations
                  prescribed for a private garage, whether attached or detached, unless
                  specifically provided otherwise.
CHURCHES,
SYNAGOGUES,
TEMPLES/          See definition of Quasi-Public Use.
RELIGIOUS
INSTITUTION:
COMMERCIAL        See Self-Service Storage.
STORAGE:
                  A tower which supports or contains communications antennas or related
                  equipment of one of the following types:
COMMUNICATION S   Guyed Tower: A tower requiring guy wires or other stabilizers for support.
TOWER:            Lattice Tower: A self-supporting multiple sided steel frame tower.
                  Monopole Tower: A self-supporting tower consisting of a single pole without
                  guy wires or stabilizers.
CONSTRUCTION:     The materials, architecture, assembly, and installation of a building or
                  structure, including landscaping.
                  All grading, excavation, construction, grubbing, or other site preparation or
CONSTRUCTION      development activity which disturbs or changes the natural vegetation, grade,
ACTIVITY:         or any existing building or structure, or the act of adding an addition to an
                  existing building or structure, or the erection of a new primary or accessory
                  building or structure on a lot or parcel.
                  An establishment which primarily sells services constituting the
                  construction, remodeling or maintenance of buildings or grounds; or sells
CONSTRUCTION      wholesale goods to companies engaged in providing these services. This
SERVICES:         definition includes general, electrical, plumbing, heating or air
                  conditioning, roofing, landscaping, pest control, etc. This use also includes
                  lumberyards.
CONTRACTOR'S      A facility providing building construction and maintenance services including
OFFICE/STORAGE    carpentry, plumbing, roofing, electrical, air conditioning and heating, with
YARD:             a base of operations and which may include the indoor and outdoor storage of
                  building materials, equipment, or vehicles used by the construction business.
                  An open, unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a building
COURT:            or group of buildings which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by such
                  building or buildings.
                  A farming operation for the production of milk in commercial quantity and
DAIRY:            which is regularly inspected by the State Department of Agriculture or its
                  cooperating agencies.
                  A facility, operated by a person qualified and licensed by the State of Utah,
                  which provides children with day care and/or preschool instruction as a
                  commercial business and complying with all applicable State standards and
                  licensing and having regularly scheduled, ongoing enrollment for direct or
                  indirect compensation that provides childcare for less than twenty-four (24)
                  hours per day. Commercial Daycare Facilities excludes the following: (1)
DAY CARE,         Kindergartens or nursery schools or other daytime programs operated by public
COMMERCIAL:       or private elementary or secondary schools or institutions of higher
                  learning; (2) Facilities operated in connection with a fitness center,
                  shopping center or other activity where children are cared for temporarily
                  while parents or custodians of the children are occupied on the premises or
                  are in the immediate vicinity and readily available; (3) Special activities
                  or programs, including athletics, crafts instruction and similar activities,
                  conducted on a periodic basis by civic, charitable, private, or governmental
                  organizations; or (4) Clearly identified as an Accessory Use.
                  The care of children who are family and non-family members in an occupied
                  dwelling unit, and complying with all State standards and licensing, by a
                  resident of the dwelling unit at least twice a week for more than three (3)
                  children, but fewer than ten (10) children. The total number of children
DAY CARE, HOME:   being cared for shall include children under the age of four (4) years
                  residing in the dwelling unit, who are under the supervision of the provider
                  during the period of time the childcare is provided. When a caregiver cares
                  for only three (3) children under age two (2), the group size, at any given
                  time shall not exceed six (6). If there are eight or more children, there
                  must be two or more providers present.
                  Any person or organization that develops or intends to develop or sell
DEVELOPER:        property for the purpose of future development subject to the provisions of
                  this Ordinance, or other Land Use Ordinances.
                  Any of the following: (a) Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
                  lands, including but not limited to buildings or structures, mining,
                  dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; (b)
DEVELOPMENT       Any construction, reconstruction, or expansion of a building, structure, or
ACTIVITY:         use; (c) Any change in the use of a building or structure; (d) Any change in
                  the use of land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities
                  or services; (e) The act of subdividing; or (f) The act, process or result of
                  developing. This definition excludes the routine landscaping of a single
                  residence, building, or business.
DEVELOPMENT       A contract between an Applicant or owner and the City pursuant to the
AGREEMENT:        provisions of City Code or Ordinance.
DEVELOPMENT SITE: The perimeters and total area of a tract, lot, or parcel of land intended to
                  be used for a development activity.
DOG KENNELS:      See Kennel.
DRIVE-THROUGH     A facility which by design, physical facilities, service or packaging
FACILITY:         procedures, encourages or permits customers to transact business or receive
                  services or goods while remaining in their motor vehicles.
DRYCLEANING       See Laundry.
SERVICES:
                  A residential dwelling unit that is added to, created within, or detached
                  from, a primary residential structure, located on the same lot as the primary
DWELLING,         residential structure, and that provides complete, independent living
ACCESSORY UNIT:   facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
                  living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. An ADU may be either an
                  internal or external unit.
DWELLING,         An attached, or detached, dwelling unit for an employee or owner and
ACCESSORY UNIT    incidental and clearly subordinate to the existing primary building or use
FOR OWNER OR      and located on the same lot as the primary building or use.
EMPLOYEE:
DWELLING,
ACCESSORY UNIT    An ADU that is detached from the primary residential structure.
EXTERNAL (EADU)
DWELLING,
ACCESSORY UNIT    An ADU that is created within or added to the primary residential structure.
INTERNAL (IADU)
                  An individually owned dwelling unit, the ownership of which includes an
DWELLING,         undivided interest in the land and other common areas and facilities, as
CONDOMINIUM:      provided and recorded in a property deed or other instrument, as required by
                  Utah law, and which is typically maintained by an association of the owners.
                  Must meet allowed density requirements.
DWELLING, MULTI-  A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
FAMILY:
DWELLING, SINGLE- A building containing one (1) dwelling unit.
FAMILY:
DWELLING,         A one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance, which is part of a
TOWNHOUSE:        structure whose dwelling units are attached horizontally in a linear
                  arrangement, with no more than four (4) units per structure.
DWELLING, TWIN    Two (2) single-family, individual dwelling units located on a contiguous and
HOME:             individually owned lot, which has adjacent walls on one side.
DWELLING, TWO-    A building on a single lot containing two (2) attached dwelling units.
FAMILY:           Sometimes referred to as duplex.
                  A building, occupied by no more than one (1) family, designed and used for
                  residential purposes, containing one (1) or more rooms, one (1) or more
DWELLING UNIT:    kitchens, one (1) or more bathrooms, and including one (1) or more areas for
                  living and sleeping, designed to be used for human occupancy, and complying
                  with all provisions of the Building Code. A dwelling unit does not include
                  transient lodging.
                  A transportable factory built housing unit constructed on or after June 15,
                  1976, according to the Federal Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of
                  1974 (HUD Code), in one or more Sections, which, in the traveling mode, is
                  eight (8) feet or more in width or forty (40) feet or more in length, or when
                  erected on site, is four hundred (400) or more square feet, and which is
                  built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling unit
                  with, or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required
                  utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and
                  electrical systems. To meet the requirements of this Ordinance and State
                  laws, when erected on the site the home must be at least twenty four (24)
                  feet in width at the narrowest dimension, have exterior and roofing materials
DWELLING UNIT,    acceptable to the Building Code, as adopted by the South Weber City, have a
MANUFACTURED:     minimum roof pitch of 2:12, and be located on a permanent foundation, in
                  accordance with plans providing for vertical loads, uplift, and lateral
                  forces and frost protection in compliance with the Building Code. All
                  appendages, including carports, garages, storage buildings, additions, or
                  alterations must be built in compliance with the Building Code. The
                  manufactured dwelling must be connected to the required utilities, including
                  plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. All manufactured
                  dwelling units constructed on or after June 15, 1976, shall be identifiable
                  by the manufacturer's data plate bearing the date the unit was manufactured
                  and a HUD label attached to the exterior of the home certifying the home was
                  manufactured to HUD standards. A Manufactured Dwelling Unit shall be
                  identified as real property on the property assessment rolls of Davis County.
                  A person who is sixty (60) years of age or older, who desires or needs to
ELDERLY PERSON:   live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but is capable of living
                  independently.
ELECTRONIC        As used in this title, refers only to low power radio transmission and not to
COMMUNICATIONS    other forms of telecommunication technologies and generally consists of an
FACILITIES AND    antenna for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radiation as authorized
EQUIPMENT:        by the Federal Communications Commission, and a communication tower which
                  supports or contains the antenna(s) and related communications equipment.
EXCAVATION OR     The moving or removal of boulders, gravel, rocks, earth, or similar naturally
EXTRACTION:       occurring deposits from its natural position.
                  An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
                  adoption, or a group of not more than four (4) persons who are not so related
                  living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit doing their own
FAMILY:           cooking and domestic service for such a family or group. Family does not
                  include any group of individuals whose association is temporary or seasonal
                  in nature or who are in a group living arrangement because of criminal
                  offenses.
FAMILY FOOD       The keeping of domestic animals and fowl to produce food for the sole use of
PRODUCTION OR     the family occupying the premises.
FARM ANIMALS:
FARM OPERATIONS:  Operations carried out to support agricultural or farming activities on a
                  tract or parcel of land.
                  A farm industry which includes generally all phases of farm operation: the
                  keeping and raising of animals and/or fowl for domestic or commercial use,
                  fur farms, livestock feed yards, pig farms, dairy farms and similar uses, and
FARMING:          accessory uses thereto. Farming shall not include a Concentrated Animal
                  Feeding Operation or "feed lot," as defined by the U.C.A., 1953, as amended,
                  and subject to the Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (UPDES), or
                  similar activities.
                  Includes generally all phases of farming, the keeping and raising of animals
FARM INDUSTRY:    and/or fowl for domestic or commercial use on parcels of five (5) acres or
                  larger, together with accessory uses thereto. Farm Industry does not include
                  commercial animal slaughter feed lots or pig farms.
FARM STAND:       A farmer's market limited to the sale of produce and related food items grown
                  on site.
                  An area used for the sale of fresh produce and related food items, which may
FARMER'S MARKET:  have outdoor storage and sales. A farmers' market may provide space for one
                  or more vendors.
                  An accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than four
                  (4) automobiles used by the occupants of the dwelling unit to which it is
                  accessory. On a property occupied by a multiple dwelling containing more than
                  four (4) dwelling units, the capacity of such private garage shall not
GARAGE, PRIVATE:  provide more than two (2) garage stalls and one parking stall, or three (3)
                  stalls per unit. A private garage having any part of one or more walls of the
                  garage common to the dwelling shall be considered a part of the dwelling,
                  i.e., an attached garage. Any attached garage shall be subject to the same
                  front and side yard regulations as applied to the dwelling which it is
                  accessory to.
GARAGE, PUBLIC:   A building or portion thereof other than a private garage, designed or used
                  for storing driven vehicles.
GASOLINE SERVICE  See Service Station.
STATIONS:
                  An area used for the purposes of playing golf, but which may include
GOLF COURSE:      associated restaurants, commercial retail sales areas, and course maintenance
                  facilities.
                  The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the front
GRADE, FINISHED   setback line of a building or structure. On a corner or multi-frontage lot,
SURFACE:          the average level of the ground adjacent to and measured along all frontage
                  setback lines of the building.
GREENHOUSE:       See Nursery.
                  A building or portion thereof that is occupied on a twenty-four (24) hour per
GROUP HOME:       day basis by no more than eight (8) individuals living at a given point in
                  time; not a place of temporary sojourn or transient visit.
                  A dwelling unit that is occupied on a twenty-four (24) hour per day basis by
                  no more than eight (8) elderly persons in a family type arrangement. A
                  residential facility for elderly persons shall not include any of the
                  following: A facility which is operated as a business, provided that such
GROUP HOME,       facility may not be considered to be operated as a business solely because a
RESIDENTIAL       fee is charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of preparation and
FACILITY FOR      maintenance of the facility; A facility where persons being treated for
ELDERLY PERSONS:  alcoholism or drug abuse are placed; A facility where placement is not on a
                  strictly voluntary basis or where placement is part of, or in lieu of,
                  confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional institution; A
                  facility which is a healthcare facility as defined in Utah Code Annotated
                  section 26-21-2, as amended; or A facility which is a residential facility
                  for persons with a disability.
GROUP HOME,       A residence in which more than one person with a disability resides and which
RESIDENTIAL       is: Licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under title
FACILITY FOR      62A, chapter 2, of the Utah Code, licensure of programs and facilities; or
PERSONS WITH A    Licensed or certified by the Department of Human Health under Utah Code
DISABILITY:       Annotated title 26, chapter 21, Health Care Facilities Licensing and
                  Inspection Act.
                  An enclosed, indoor facility designed and used for rifle shooting, pistol
GUN RANGE,        shooting, trapshooting, skeet shooting, or other target shooting and related
INDOOR:           training or practice for the purpose of sharpshooting or improving in the use
                  of firearms.
                  An occupation conducted entirely, or in part, within the dwelling and which
                  is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for dwelling
                  purposes. Regulations applying to home occupations shall not apply to any
HOME OCCUPATION:  portion of an occupation not conducted upon the residential property. Home
                  occupations shall not be interpreted to include kennels, commercial stables,
                  restaurants or other uses which are foreign in character to a residential
                  use.
                  A building and associated facilities offering overnight accommodations for
                  guests, with access provided through a common entrance, lobby, or hallway to
HOTEL:            individual guestrooms, and which may include additional services, such as
                  restaurants, conference and meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreational
                  facilities.
                  Domesticated animals and birds ordinarily allowed in a dwelling unit and kept
                  for company or pleasure of the owner, including, but not limited to dogs,
HOUSEHOLD PET:    cats, and caged birds. Household Pets do not include domestic livestock or
                  fowl, as defined herein or inherently or potentially dangerous animals, fowl,
                  reptiles, or exotic animals.
                  A person who has a severe, chronic disability attributable to a mental or
                  physical impairment or to a combination of mental and physical impairments,
                  which is likely to continue indefinitely and which results in a substantial
                  functional limitation in three (3) or more of the following areas of major
INDIVIDUALS WITH  life activity: self-care, receptive and expressive language, learning,
DISABILITIES:     mobility, self-direction, capacity for independent living or economic self-
                  sufficiency; and who requires a combination or sequence of special
                  interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other services that are
                  individually planned and coordinated to allow the person to function in and
                  contribute to, a residential neighborhood.
                  The use of any lot, portion of lot or tract of land for the storage, keeping
                  or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap material, or
JUNKYARD:         for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other
                  vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof; provided, that this definition shall
                  not be deemed to include such uses which are clearly accessory and incidental
                  to any agricultural use permitted in the district.
KENNEL,           A facility providing for the indoor and/or outdoor commercial boarding,
COMMERCIAL:       breeding, buying, grooming, or training for fee or sale of household pets not
                  owned by the owner or occupant of the premises.
                  A use, accessory to a single-family dwelling unit in which three (3) but not
KENNEL,           more than five (5) dogs, cats or ferrets, at least four (4) months old, owned
SPORTSMAN'S OR    by the owner or occupant of the premises, are kept for the purpose of
HOBBY:            breeding, hunting, training, renting, buying, boarding, selling, or showing,
                  and which use has a valid permit from the City.
LAUNDRY:          An establishment providing home-type washing, drying, and/or ironing
                  machines, household laundry and dry-cleaning services.
                  A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building or group of
                  main buildings and accessory buildings, together with such yards, open
LOT:              spaces, lot widths and lot areas as are required by this title in having
                  frontage upon a street, except for group dwellings, where more than one
                  dwelling is placed on a lot, each dwelling structure shall be provided with a
                  minimum lot area as required for one such dwelling on a lot in the same zone.
                  An imaginary straight line lying midway between and in the main direction of
                  the longest interior lot line and the boundary line lying midway between and
                  in the main direction of the longest interior lot line and the boundary line
LOT CENTER LINE   lying opposite thereto, when it is apparent that such center line would
FOR CORNER:       intersect to front lot lines, all interior boundary lines shall be deemed to
                  be side lot lines and said lot shall not also be classified as a multi-
                  frontage lot. See section
                  10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
                  A building lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets where
LOT, CORNER:      the interior angle of interception or intersection does not exceed one
                  hundred thirty five degrees (135°). See section
                  10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
LOT DEPTH FOR     The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot
INSIDE LOTS:      line. See section
                  10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
LOT DEPTH FOR     The horizontal distance between opposite boundaries of the lot measured along
MULTIFRONTAGE AND the center line thereof. See section
CORNER LOTS:      10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
                  Any inside lot, the interior lines of which converge towards the rear
                  thereof. For the purpose of locating a dwelling thereon, an owner of a corner
LOT, INSIDE GORE  lot may have the option of classifying such lot as a gore shaped inside lot,
SHAPED:           in which case the interior lines of the same shall be designated as side lot
                  lines, and the rear lot lines shall be determined the same as required for
                  inside lots. See section
                  10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
                  A lot line separating a lot from an existing street right-of-way or, where a
LOT LINE FRONT:   new street is proposed, the proposed street right-of-way. In the case of a
                  corner lot or a multi-frontage lot, the lot line shall be the designated by
                  the City Planner when the building permit is issued.
LOT LINE          Any boundary of a lot which is not coterminous with a public street.
INTERIOR:
                  The interior line lying opposite the front lot line where such lot is also a
                  gore- shaped lot and the side lot lines thereof converge either to a point or
LOT LINE REAR FOR to a rear boundary which is less than one-half (1/2) of the minimum required
INSIDE LOTS:      lot width. The rear lot line shall be construed to be an imaginary straight
                  line across the center line of the lot at right angles, which is one-half (1/
                  2) of the required lot width in length. See section
                  10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
LOT LINE REAR FOR On multi- frontage lots, the exterior lot line so designated; corner lots,
MULTI-FRONTAGE    that interior lot line which has been designated as a rear lot line by the
AND CORNER LOTS:  lot owner or authorized person applying for the building permit.
                  Those interior lines lying opposite of each other running between the front
LOT LINE SIDE FOR and the rear lot lines or in the case of multi-frontage lots, those interior
INSIDE LOTS:      lines which run between the two (2) possible front lot lines. See section
                  10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
LOT LINE SIDE FOR For multiple frontage lots, all interior lot lines; for corner lots, that
MULTIPLE FRONTAGE interior lot line which has been designated as the side lot line by the lot
IN CORNER LOTS:   owner.
LOT, MULTI-       Any building lot, the center line of which intersects two (2) possible front
FRONTAGE:         lot lines. See section
                  10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
                  The horizontal distance between opposite lot boundary lines measured at right
LOT WIDTHS FOR    angles to the center line of the lot on the main point of such center line.
CORNER LOTS:      See section
                  10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
                  A. Rectangular-Shaped: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
                  measured along a line lying at right angles to the center line of the lot at
                  a point thirty feet (30') back from the front lot line, intersecting both
LOT WIDTHS FOR    side lot lines.
INSIDE LOTS:      B. Nonrectangular-Shaped: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
                  measured along a line lying at right angles to the center line of the lot at
                  a point sixty feet (60') back from the front lot line, intersecting both side
                  lot lines.
                  An intersection of a minor arterial street and a major collector street or
MAJOR             the intersection of two (2) major collector streets. The classification of
INTERSECTION:     streets shall be as specified in the currently adopted South Weber City
                  General Plan.
                  The assembly, fabrication or processing of large or bulky goods and materials
MANUFACTURING,    which typically require extensive building areas or land areas using raw
HEAVY:            materials or previously prepared materials, using processes and that may have
                  impacts on the use and enjoyment of adjacent property in terms of noise,
                  smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health and safety hazards.
                  The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and materials using
                  processes that are not offensive or create any odor, dust, smoke, noxious
                  gases, noise, vibration, glare, heat or other impacts to adjacent property,
MANUFACTURING,    nor create any health and safety hazards by way of materials, process,
LIGHT:            product or waste, and where all assembly, storage, fabrication or processing
                  is conducted within a building or structure and where all, equipment,
                  compressors, generators and other ancillary equipment is located within a
                  building or structure.
MEDICAL, DENTAL   A facility or group of offices for one or more physicians, chiropractors,
AND RELATED       physical therapists, dentists or other related health service for the
HEALTH SERVICES:  examination and treatment of ill and afflicted outpatients provided that the
                  patients are not kept overnight except under emergency circumstances.
MEDICAL           An indoor establishment that includes laboratories and/or experimental
LABORATORY:       equipment for medical testing, prototype design and development, and product
                  testing.
                  A business that sells goods or serves food or beverages from a self-contained
MOBILE BUSINESS:  unit either motorized or in a trailer on wheels, is readily movable, without
                  disassembling, for transport to another location.
                  A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping
                  rooms or dwelling units or a combination of both designed for or used for the
MOTEL:            temporary occupancy of automobile tourists or transients with parking space
                  or garage attached or located convenient to each unit. Includes also auto-
                  courts, tourist parks and motor lodges.
NATURAL           These areas of varying widths along streams, creeks, springs, gullies or
WATERWAYS:        washes which are natural drainage channels, as determined by the building
                  inspector, in which areas no buildings shall be constructed.
                  A parcel of land of record with frontage on a public street that was held in
                  separate ownership from adjacent property on the effective date of the
NONCONFORMING     ordinance codified herein, the dimensions of which do not meet the minimum
BUILDING LOT:     requirements for a building lot in the zone in which it is located. Adjacent
                  properties in the same ownership at the time of the adoption of the ordinance
                  codified herein, but described separately, shall be considered one lot for
                  the purpose of the ordinance codified herein.
NONCONFORMING     A building or structure or portions thereof lastly existing at the time the
BUILDING OR       ordinance codified herein became effective which does not conform to all
STRUCTURE:        height, area and setback regulations prescribed in the zone in which it is
                  located.
NONCONFORMING     A use which lastly occupied a building or land at the time the ordinance
USE:              codified herein became effective and which does not conform with the use
                  regulations of the zone in which it is located.
NURSERY, GARDEN   A use including a building, part of a building or open space for the growth,
CENTER:           display and/or sale of plants, shrubs, trees, and other materials used in
                  indoor or outdoor planting.
                  An open area other than a street used for the temporary parking of
PARKING LOT:      automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for compensation or
                  as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE:    The space within a building lot or parking lot for the temporary parking or
                  storage of one automobile.
                  A use primarily engaged in providing services generally involving the care of
PERSONAL CARE     a person or the person's appearance such as beauty and barber services,
SERVICE:          tanning, nails, massage therapy, aesthetician, permanent cosmetics, or day
                  spa, but excluding a body art/tattoo or sexually oriented business.
PET:              See Household Pet.
PLANNED DWELLING  A group of two (2) detached residential buildings, under single ownership,
GROUP:            located on one building lot, arranged in a harmonious and spacious
                  configuration.
PLANNED UNIT      An integrated design for development of residential, nonresidential,
DEVELOPMENT:      commercial, or a combination of such uses.
                  A plat of the lot drawn to scale showing its actual measurements, the size
PLOT PLAN:        and location of any existing buildings and buildings to be erected, and
                  showing the location of the lot and abutting streets.
                  A use or facility owned or operated exclusively by a public entity, having
                  the purpose of serving the public health, safety, or general welfare. Typical
PUBLIC USE:       uses include a street, public school, park, playground, recreational
                  facility, library, community building, fire stations, police station, and
                  administrative and service facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY:   A structure or facility used by a public agency to store, distribute or
                  chemically treat water, power, natural gas, or sewer.
                  A use or facility owned or operated exclusively by a private nonprofit
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: religious, recreational, charitable or philanthropic institution. Such use
                  shall have the purpose of serving the general public, and would include such
                  uses as a church, hospital, civic or social club, museum, etc.
                  A use providing a variety of recreation activities including activities that
                  are enclosed within a structure along with outdoor recreational activities on
                  the same premises, including but not limited to aerobics, weight training,
                  running track, live theater, baseball batting cages, riding arena, tennis
RECREATION        facility, miniature golf, swimming pool, or similar activities that are
CENTER:           operated for the use of persons who do not reside on the same lots as that on
                  which the recreation use is located. This use may include associated eating
                  and drinking areas, retail sales areas, and staff offices. This use
                  specifically excludes a firearm shooting range, motor vehicle and/or
                  motorbike tracks, or similar activities that may create noise, dust, or other
                  nuisances to adjoining and surrounding uses.
                  A self-propelled or permanently towable, mobile living unit typically used
                  for temporary human occupancy away from the user's permanent place of
RECREATIONAL      residence. Recreational vehicles also include such vehicles as a travel
VEHICLE:          trailer, camper, boat/watercraft, tiny home, and other similar types of
                  vehicles. For the purpose of this title, this definition does not include
                  motorcycles, off road or other similar vehicles.
                  Any site, tract or parcel of land on which facilities have been developed to
RECREATIONAL      provide temporary living quarters or recreational amenities for two or more
VEHICLE PARK:     recreational vehicles. Such a park may be developed or owned by a private,
                  public, or nonprofit organization catering to the public or restricted to the
                  organizational or institutional members and their guests.
                  The length of stay at a recreational vehicle park shall be no greater than
                  thirty (30) consecutive days provided that:
RECREATIONAL      A. The recreational vehicle:
VEHICLE PARK      1.   Is not permanently connected to utilities.
OCCUPANCY:        2.   Maintains wheels attached to the unit.
                  3.   Shall not have any permanent additions attached.
                  4.   Has left the park for at least seven (7) consecutive days before
                  returning.
RECREATIONAL      The retail sale or rental of new or used Recreational Vehicles, bicycles,
VEHICLE SALES AND motorcycles, snowmobiles, boats, or similar light recreational equipment,
RENTAL:           together with maintenance services, storage, and sales of parts.
                  A use, often accessory in nature, providing designated containers for the
RECYCLING         collection, sorting, and temporary storage of recoverable resources (such as
COLLECTION        paper, glass, metal and plastic products) to be transferred to a recycling
CENTER:           processing facility. Recycling Collection Centers involve no more than three
                  (3) collection containers up to forty (40) cubic yards in total size.
RECYCLING         A facility where recyclable and organic materials are collected, stored, and
PROCESSING        processed. Processing includes but is not limited to baling, briquetting,
FACILITY:         compacting, flattening, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, and
                  cleaning. Recycling Facility does not include Salvage Yard.
REPAIR SERVICES:  See Vehicle and Equipment Repair.
RESIDENTIAL       See Group Home.
FACILITY:
RETAIL SALES AND  Establishments engaged in the retail sale of goods and services, except those
SERVICES:         uses as otherwise clearly defined herein.
                  Establishments engaged in the retail sale of goods and services. Community
                  Commercial Retail Sales and Service businesses must conduct all sales of
                  goods and services, with all associated storage of goods and materials,
                  within a totally enclosed building (with the exception of occasional outdoor
                  "sidewalk" promotions), with no separate individual building to exceed three
RETAIL SALES AND  thousand (3,000) square feet in total gross building and the total gross
SERVICES          floor area of all buildings, on any separate, individual lot, does not exceed
(COMMUNITY        more than six thousand (6,000) square feet of gross building area. Community
COMMERCIAL):      Commercial Retail Sales and Services specifically excludes all sales,
                  accessory uses, and service uses that typically display goods or services, or
                  store goods or product in open, unenclosed areas, including but not limited
                  to, automotive, truck, recreational vehicle, trailer, and manufactured home
                  sales lots, repair yards, open storage areas, and all similar outside display
                  and storage areas of goods, materials, equipment, and vehicles.
                  A commercial retail business that occupies more than eighty thousand (80,000)
RETAIL SALES AND  square feet of floor space, is a car or motor vehicle dealer, is a retail
SERVICES          shopping facility (shopping center) that has at least one (1) anchor tenants
(REGIONAL):       if the total floor area of all tenants is more than one hundred fifty
                  thousand (150,000) square feet, or is a grocery store of more than thirty
                  thousand (30,000) square feet.
RESTAURANT:       A place of business where food is prepared and served to the public for
                  consumption on or off the premises.
                  A thoroughfare held in private ownership and controlled, serviced and
ROAD, PRIVATE:    maintained by one or more private persons, firms or corporations and used or
                  held for use primarily as a means of access to adjoining property.
SELF-SERVICE      An enclosed commercial storage facility providing independent, fully enclosed
STORAGE:          bays, which are leased to persons exclusively for storage of their household
                  goods or personal property.
                  A use of land zoned residential for a business purpose that is clearly
                  incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes,
SERVICE ACCESSORY such that the accessory uses of the land are in a location, of a size and
USE:              screened to create minimal adverse impact on current and future land uses of
                  adjoining property. The storage of any motorized equipment shall be in
                  operable order. At no time will junked or inoperable equipment or vehicles be
                  allowed.
                  An area where fuel (gasoline or diesel) or electricity is dispensed into
                  motor vehicles, and where no repairs are conducted, except work that may be
                  conducted that is closely similar in character to the following: sale and
                  installation of oil, lubricants, batteries and belts and similar accessories
SERVICE STATION:  and safety and emission inspections, and sale of pre-packaged propane. This
                  use may include a "convenience store," provided that all of the requirements
                  for such use are also met. A business that maintains an accessory use of
                  providing motor fuel only for use by vehicles operated by that business shall
                  not, by itself, be considered a service station. This use shall not include
                  activity meeting the definition of a "truck stop."
SETBACK:          The shortest horizontal distance between the structure or part thereof for
                  single family dwelling or other main building.
                  A business which depicts, portrays, or describes "specified sexual
                  activities" or "specified anatomical areas," or instruments, devices, or
SEXUAL-ORIENTED   paraphernalia which are designated or used in connection with specified
BUSINESS:         sexual activities, including but not limited to adult arcade, adult
                  bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
                  motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, or nude or seminude model
                  studio.
                  A transient lodging facility in a single-family dwelling unit, in public
SHORT-TERM        lodging facilities as part of a planned unit development (PUD), or in an
RENTAL:           accessory dwelling unit (ADU), occupied by a single group on a temporary
                  basis for less than thirty (30) consecutive days as an alternative to a hotel
                  or motel.
STABLE, PRIVATE:  A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the
                  occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC:   A stable other than a private stable.
STORY:            The portion of a building other than a cellar, included between the surface
                  of any floor and the surface of the floor or ceiling next above.
                  A story with at least two (2) of its opposite sides situated in a sloping
STORY, HALF:      roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor
                  directly below it.
                  An open way, space and/or thoroughfare, fifty feet (50') or more in width,
                  provided or dedicated and/or accepted by South Weber City or the State of
                  Utah, for public use for the purpose of providing all of the following:
                  A.   A thoroughfare for public use, designated primarily for vehicular
                  traffic.
                  B.   The principal means of access to abutting properties.
                  C.   For the installation of public utilities, service lines and/or pipes.
                  D.   Drainage facilities and other public works and appurtenances for the
                  convenience and welfare of the public generally, and the roadway of which has
                  been stabilized and maintained by the said proper public authority or has
                  been otherwise improved according to the accepted street construction
STREET, PUBLIC:   standards of the City. Also, any street which has been dedicated as a part of
                  the filing of a subdivision plat or as otherwise provided by law, and the
                  required improvements of which have been assured as required. Any street or
                  highway, the access rights of which are owned or controlled by a public
                  authority shall not be construed to be a public street, except for access for
                  the purpose of this title.
                  E.   Where a public thoroughfare existed prior to the adoption of the
                  ordinance codified herein which fulfills all the requirements for a public
                  street, except for the required width, said thoroughfare may be classified as
                  a public street for the purposes of establishing building lots fronting
                  thereon; provided, that the depth of that portion of each intended building
                  lot needed to complete the required width for a public street, as determined
                  by the Planning Commission and the City Engineer is dedicated to public use.
STRUCTURAL        See definition of alteration, structural, as defined in this section.
ALTERATIONS:
STRUCTURE:        That which is framed, erected, constructed or placed upon the ground, but not
                  including fences which are six feet (6') or less in height.
TEMPORARY
BUILDING          A structure which is intended for temporary or short term use and incidental
INCIDENTAL TO     to construction.
CONSTRUCTION:
TEMPORARY USE:    A use or event established for a maximum period of ninety (90) days, such use
                  or event being discontinued after the expiration of ninety (90) days.
TINY HOME:        See recreational vehicle.
                  A building, facility, or portion thereof, excluding inpatient medical care
                  facilities and group homes in which sleeping accommodations and sanitary
                  facilities are offered to the public and intended for rental to transients
                  with daily, weekly or seasonal charge. A transient lodging facility includes
                  any unit, group of units, dwelling, building, or group of buildings within a
TRANSIENT         single complex of buildings rented to guests more than three times in a
LODGING:          calendar year for periods of less than 30 days or one calendar month,
                  whichever is less, or which is advertised or held out to the public as a
                  place regularly rented to guests for periods of less than thirty (30) days or
                  one calendar month, whichever is less. Transient lodging includes but is not
                  limited to a boarding house, short-term rental, dormitory, motor lodge,
                  tourist court, or similar building or group of buildings.
                  A commercial use that primarily involves providing fuel to tractor-trailer
TRUCK STOP:       trucks owned by numerous different companies. Such use may also include
                  related retail sales, repair services, laundry services, and showers. It may
                  also include activities associated with a service station.
VACATION RENTAL:  See short-term rental.
                  A Licensed and operable automobile, truck, trailer, boat or other device in
VEHICLE:          which a person or thing is or can be transported from one (1) place to
                  another.
                  An establishment primarily engaged in the major repair or painting of motor
VEHICLE AND       vehicles or heavy equipment, including auto body repairs, installation of
EQUIPMENT REPAIR  major accessories and transmission and engine rebuilding services. Typical
(MAJOR):          uses include major automobile repair garages, farm equipment repair, paint,
                  and body shops.
                  An establishment providing motor vehicle repair or maintenance services and
                  conducted entirely within completely enclosed buildings, but not including
                  paint and body shops or other activities associated with Vehicle and
                  Equipment Repair (Major). Typical uses include businesses engaged in the
VEHICLE AND       following activities: electronic tune-ups, brake repairs (including drum
EQUIPMENT REPAIR  turning), air conditioning repairs, generator and starter repairs, tire
(MINOR):          repairs, front end alignments, battery recharging, lubrication, and sales,
                  repair and installation of minor parts and accessories such as tires,
                  batteries, windshield wipers, hoses, windows, etc. Vehicle and Equipment
                  Repair (Minor) may include the retail sale of fuels, lubricants and other
                  supplies for motor vehicles.
VEHICLE AND       A facility providing for the sale, lease, or rental of new or used vehicles,
EQUIPMENT SALE    including automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or boats.
AND RENTAL:       The cleaning and routine maintenance of motor vehicles is allowed as an
                  accessory use.
WAREHOUSING:      A building or structure used to maintain an inventory of materials, supplies,
                  or goods related to one or more businesses.
                  A business that maintains an inventory of materials, supplies and goods
WHOLESALE TRADE   related to one or more industries and sells bulk quantities of such
OR DISTRIBUTION:  materials, supplies and goods from its inventory to retail companies within
                  the industry and which may include the parking and storage of distribution
                  vehicles and accessory activities.
                  A system of components which converts the kinetic energy of the wind into
                  electricity or mechanical power, and which includes but is not limited to
WIND ENERGY       equipment for energy storage, power conditioning, control systems, and
SYSTEM:           transmission systems, where appropriate, to provide electricity or mechanical
                  power for individual, residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial,
                  utility, or governmental use.
WIND ENERGY       Tower mounted or roof mounted wind energy systems with a rated nameplate
SYSTEMS, LARGE:   capacity of more than one hundred (100) kW.
WIND ENERGY       Tower mounted or roof mounted wind energy systems with a rated nameplate
SYSTEMS, SMALL:   capacity of one hundred (100) kW or less.
                  A facility used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic or
                  electro-optic information, including wireless telecommunications facilities
                  such as "cellular" or "PCS" (Personal Communications Systems) - communication
                  and paging systems. This use is not required to be located on a separate lot
WIRELESS          or to comply with the minimum lot size requirement for the District in which
TELECOMMUNICATION it is located but is required to meet the design and locational requirements,
FACILITY:         as established for such uses, as provided by this chapter. Telecommunications
                  Site/Facility does not include radio antennas complying with the ruling of
                  the Federal Communications Commission in "Amateur Radio Preemption, 101 FCC
                  2nd 952 (1985)" or a regulation related to amateur radio service adopted
                  under 47 C.F.R. Part 97.
YARD:             A space or lot other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
                  ground upward.
                  Any yard between the front lot line or street right-of-way boundary line and
                  the front line of the main building; any yard meeting the minimum frontage
YARD, FRONT:      requirements of the applicable zone may be designated as the front yard. See
                  section
                  10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
YARD, REAR:       A yard between the rear lot line or neighboring setback line and the rear
                  line of a main building.
                  Any yard between the side lot line or neighboring setback line and the
YARD, SIDE:       sideline of the main building extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
                  See section
                  10-1-11, appendix A of this chapter.
ZERO LOT LINE     The location of a structure on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the
SETBACK:          structure’s sides rests directly on a lot line.
 
(Ord. 18-07, 9-25-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-05, 5-25- 2021; Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023;
Ord. 2023-11, 8-22-2023; Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-1-10A: LAND USE MATRIX:
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
Uses in this matrix which have no designation for a particular zone are not
permitted in that zone.
Uses not defined in this matrix/code section are not permitted.
*Subject to unique legal requirements
**Uses mandated as allowed by State law
 C CH CR LI TI NR A RL RLM R M RP R5
                                           C CH CR LI TI NR A RL RLM R M RP R5
Accessory Building                         P P  C  C  P  P  P P  P   P   P  P
Accessory Use                              P P  C  C  P  P  P P  P   P   P  P
Agriculture                                P P  C           P P  P   P   P  P
Agricultural Building                      P P  C           P P  P   P   P  P
Animal Keeping                                              P P  P   P
*Assisted Living Facility                  P                     C   C   C  C
Beauty and Barber Services                 P P
Building, Public                           P P  C  C  P  P  C C  C   C   C  C
Business Services and Professional Offices P P     C  P
Cannabis Cultivation Facility**                       C
Cannabis Production Establishment**                   C
Commercial Storage                                 C  P
*Communications Tower                      C C  C  C  C  C  C C  C   C   C  C
Construction Services                              C  C
Contractor’s Office/Storage Yard                 C  C
Day Care, Commercial                       C
Day Care, Home                                              C C  C   C   C  C
Drive-Through Facility                     C C
Drycleaning Or Laundry Services            C C     C
Dwelling, Accessory Unit (External)                         C C  C   C
Dwelling, Accessory Unit (Internal)**                       P P  P   P
Dwelling, Accessory Unit For Owner Or              C  P
Employee
Dwelling, Condominium                                                       P
Dwelling, Multi-Family                                                      P
Dwelling, Single-Family                                     P P  P   P   P  P
Dwelling, Townhouse                                                         P
Dwelling, Twin Home                                           C  C   C   C  P
Dwelling, Two-Family                                          C  C   C   C  P
Dwelling Unit, Manufactured                                   C  C   C      C
Electronic Communications Facilities and   C C  C  C        C
Equipment
Excavation or Extraction                                 C
Family Food Production or Farm Animals                      P P  P   P
Farm Industry                                   C           P
Farm Stand                                                  P P  P   P   P  P
Farmer’s Market                          C C
Gasoline Service Stations                  C C
Golf Course                                     C        C
*Group Home                                C
*Group Home, Residential Facility For      C                  C  C   C   C  C
Elderly Persons
*Group Home, Residential Facility For      C                  C  C   C   C  C
Persons With A Disability
Gun Range, Indoor                          C C     C
Home Occupation                                             P P  P   P   P  P
Hotel                                        C
Kennel, Commercial                         C       C  C     C
Kennel, Sportsman’s or Hobby                              C C  C   C
Manufacturing, Light                               C  P
Medical, Dental and Related Heath Services P P
Medical Laboratory                         C C     C  C
Mobile Business                            C C  C
Nursery, Garden Center                     C C        P  P  C
Personal Care Service                      P P
Public Use                                 C C  C  C  P  P  C C  C   C   C  C
Public Utility                                     C  P  P  C C  C   C   C  C
Quasi-Public Use                           P P  C  C  P  P  C C  C   C   C  C
Recreation Center                          C C  C
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Rental      P P  C  P  P
Recycling Collection Center                        C  C
Recycling Processing Facility                      C  C
Retail Sales and Services                  P P
Retail Sales and Services (Community       P P
Commercial)
Retail Sales and Services (Regional)       P P
Restaurant                                 P P
Self-Service Storage                               C  P
Service Accessory Use                                       C C  C   C
Service Station                            C C
Sexually Oriented Business                            C
Short Term Rental                                           C C  C   C   C  C
Stable, Private                                             P P  P   P
Stable, Public                                  C           P
Temporary Building Incidental To           C C     C  P  P  P P  P   P
Construction
Temporary Use                              C C
Transient Lodging
Vehicle and Equipment Repair (Major)         C     C
Vehicle and Equipment Repair (Minor)         C     C
Vehicle and Equipment Sale and Rental        C
Warehousing                                        C  P
Wholesale Trade or Distribution                    C
Wind Energy Systems, Large                               P
 
(Ord. 2021-04, 5-25-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023; Ord. 2023-11, 8-22-
2023; Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-1-11: APPENDICES:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f16a5ed618c4ec2c872b44142ab358bc7c7f25cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1609.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f16a5ed618c4ec2c872b44142ab358bc7c7f25cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1611.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f16a5ed618c4ec2c872b44142ab358bc7c7f25cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1613.png]
 
(1989 Code § 12-1-010)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-2-1: Effect Of Chapter
10-2-2: Administrative And Enforcement Officers
10-2-3: Permits And Licenses; Conformance Required
10-2-4: Plot Plan Required
10-2-5: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-2-6: Records Maintenance
10-2-7: Adoption And Amendments
10-2-8: Violation; Penalty
10-2-1: EFFECT OF CHAPTER:
This chapter affects this entire title with respect to the administration
thereof and establishes the responsibility for such administration and the
penalties for violation of any provision of this title. (1989 Code § 12-20-001)
10-2-2: ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS:
   A.   Zoning Administrator:
      1.   The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint a
zoning administrator to carry out the duties and responsibilities relative to
zoning issues.
      2.   The zoning administrator shall enforce the provisions of this title
or other ordinances affecting or regulating the physical development of the
city which are now in effect or which may hereafter be adopted. (Ord. 96-2, 10-
22-1996, eff. 12-1-1996)
      3.   The city council may, by resolution or ordinance from time to time
entrust such administration and enforcement in whole or in part to any other
officer of the city without amendment to this title, who shall also serve under
the same direction and be subject to all of the provisions of this title or to
other ordinances setting forth the duties and responsibilities of the
enforcement officer. (1989 Code § 12-20-002; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Duties:
      1.   The enforcement officer shall represent the city in carrying out the
stated purposes of this title and in so doing shall cause all required permits
be obtained by persons required to do so. Enforcement officers shall not grant
a permit for the construction or alteration of any building or structure if
such construction or alteration would be in violation of any of the provisions
of this title. It shall be his duty to inspect or cause to be inspected all
buildings in the course of construction, alteration or repair. (1989 Code § 12-
20-003)
      2.   It shall be the duty of the enforcement officer to inspect or cause
to be inspected all plans for the construction or repair of buildings, to visit
all buildings in the course of construction, to enforce or cause to be enforced
all of the provisions of this title pertaining thereto, particularly with
respect to location requirements, to hold and enforce any decision in the
administration of this title, entering actions in court in cooperation with the
city attorney when necessary, and his failure to do so should not legalize any
violation of such provisions. Also where any building, sign or structure is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained
or where any buildings, structure or land is used in violation of this title,
or any amendment thereto, the enforcement officer and the city attorney, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings
to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate such
violation to prevent the occupancy of such buildings, structure or land or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct of business or use in or about such premises.
(1989 Code § 12-20-009; amd. 1998 Code)
      3.   The basic responsibilities of the enforcement officer shall also
concern the use of buildings and structures and the erection of signs. It shall
be the joint responsibility of all enforcement officers to seek complete
enforcement of this title and to this end they shall cooperate and coordinate
their efforts and shall cooperate with the city attorney in entering any action
in the courts. The city attorney shall cooperate with the enforcement officers
and in so doing may initiate any action deemed by him to be advisable and shall
diligently prosecute any and every action initiated to secure compliance
herewith. (1989 Code § 12-20-009)
10-2-3: PERMITS AND LICENSES; CONFORMANCE REQUIRED:
All departments, officials and employees of the city which are vested with the
duty or authority to issue permits and licenses shall conform to the provisions
of this title, and shall issue no permit or license for use, building or
purpose where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this title.
All applicable permits and licenses shall be approved by the applicable
enforcement officers. Any such permit or license, if issued in conflict with
the provisions of this title, shall be null and void. (1989 Code § 12-20-008;
amd. 1998 Code)
10-2-4: PLOT PLAN REQUIRED:
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plot plan
signed and dated by the applicant. Such plot plan shall be drawn to scale and
shall show the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the
existing buildings, if any, the building to be erected, the location of
driveways into the property, the location and plan for off street parking
facilities, the location and name of abutting streets, the location and width
and such other information as may be necessary to accurately locate the lot and
to provide for the enforcement of this title. (1989 Code § 12-20-005)
10-2-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No land shall be changed in use or occupancy, except for the use of plans in
conjunction with agriculture, and no building shall be changed in use or
structurally altered until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by
the building inspection department which has been approved by the proper
enforcement officers. A like certificate shall be required for the purpose of
maintaining, renewing, changing or extending a nonconforming use, and also a
prerequisite to the application and/or receipt of a business license.
   A.   Application:
      1.   Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made to the
building inspector.
      2.   Certificates of occupancy either for the whole or part of a building
or parcel of land, except land in conjunction with agriculture, shall be
applied for before a new building is occupied, or land is used and before a
license for a contemplated change of use of buildings and/or land may be issued
or before the use of land and/or buildings is changed.
   B.   Issuance: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the
contemplated use of the land and/or building for which said certificate is
requested is in full compliance with the requirements of this title and such
certificate bears thereon the approval of the building inspector or his
authorized representative. Said certificate shall be issued upon request of the
owner and/or occupant of the building or premises, or of a licensed contractor.
   C.   Limitation; Effective Certificates:
      1.   Unless a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued or approval
otherwise given as provided for herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to
make connection to or furnish water or electrical service for any new building,
except for a temporary use incidental to construction.
      2.   After such certificate has been issued, unless proven to be in error
within one year of date of issue, the building or part thereof to which it
applies shall be deemed to be in full compliance with the requirements hereof.
(1989 Code § 12-20-006)
10-2-6: RECORDS MAINTENANCE:
The building inspector shall maintain an accurate file of all building permits
and an accurate file of all certificates of occupancy issued and a record of
all nonconforming uses of buildings and/or land and the extent thereof. (1989
Code § 12-20-007)
10-2-7: ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Adoption: The planning commission shall provide notice and hold a
public hearing on a proposed land use ordinance or zoning map and prepare and
recommend to the city council a proposed land use ordinance and zoning map that
represents the planning commission's recommendation for regulating the use and
development of land within all or any part or area of South Weber City. The
city council may adopt or reject the proposed land use ordinance or zoning map
either as proposed by the planning commission or after making any revision that
the city council considers appropriate.
   B.   Amendments: The City Council may, from time to time, amend the number,
shape, boundaries or areas of any zone, or any regulation of or within such
zones or any other provisions of this title, but such amendments shall not be
made or become effective unless the same shall have been proposed by or be
first submitted to the Planning Commission for its recommendation. The City
Council may adopt or reject the proposed land use ordinance or zoning map
either as proposed by the Planning Commission or after making any revision that
the City Council considers appropriate.
   C.   Rezoning Applications And Concept Development Plans:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to ensure that rezoning
decisions are made with a clear understanding of the intended development, to
protect the community from speculative zoning changes, and to ensure
consistency with the South Weber City general plan and the orderly development
of the city.
      2.   Applicability: This section shall apply to all applications seeking
a zoning map amendment (rezoning) within the corporate limits of South Weber
City to any zoning district that is mixed-use, non-residential, or R-5.
      3.   Concept Plan Requirements:
         a.   Application Timing: All applications for zoning map amendments
shall be accompanied by a concept development plan. Applications submitted
without a concept plan shall be deemed incomplete and shall not be processed
until such time as the required concept plan is submitted.
         b.   Application Requirements:
         (1)   Proposed land uses and zoning districts.
         (2)   A written narrative explaining how the proposal aligns with the
South Weber general plan.
         c.   Concept Plan Content: The concept plan shall include the
following, as applicable. Items H-K will be required at the zoning
administrator's discretion based on the estimated cost:
         (1)   Lot layout and dimensions, including minimum lot sizes.
         (2)   Location and configuration of streets, access points, and
circulation systems.
         (3)   Proposed residential densities and building square footage
estimates.
         (4)   Pedestrian and bicycle pathways.
         (5)   Proposed open spaces, parks, and recreational amenities.
         (6)   Phasing plans.
         (7)   Conceptual utility layout, including water, sewer, and
stormwater systems.
         (8)   General landscape buffers, screening, and berming.
         (9)   Parking layout and ratio estimates.
         (10)   Building scale and massing diagrams.
         This subsection shall not be interpreted to require engineering or
architectural drawings.
         d.   Plan Review: The concept plan shall be reviewed by city staff and
forwarded to the planning commission and city council as part of the rezone
application.
      4.   Binding Nature Of Concept Plan:
         a.   Approval: Upon approval of the zoning map amendment, the concept
plan shall be deemed binding. Any future development on the rezoned property
shall substantially conform to the approved concept plan.
         b.   Significant Deviation: Any significant deviation from the
approved concept plan shall require an amendment to the zoning map amendment
and shall be subject to the same review and approval procedures as the original
rezone application, including public notice and hearings. Significant
deviations include, but are not limited to:
         (1)   Land Use Alterations: Introducing new land uses not identified
in the approved concept plan.
         (2)   Density Modifications: An increase or decrease in residential
units or floor area by more than ten percent (10%).
         (3)   Layout Adjustments: A reconfiguration of the site affecting more
than twenty percent (20%) of the building placements, street alignments, or
open space distribution.
         (4)   Changes in the phasing schedule that materially impact
infrastructure or amenity delivery.
         c.   Review Process. Amendments required under this section shall
follow the same planning commission recommendation and city council approval
process as a new zoning map amendment.
      5.   Zoning Reversion:
         a.   Conditions For Reversion. The zoning of the property shall revert
to its prior classification under the following conditions, unless the
landowner requests and receives an extension of the zoning approval following
the process outlined in subsection 2:
         (1)   Failure to obtain preliminary subdivision or site plan approval
within twenty-four (24) months of rezoning approval.
         (2)   Abandonment of development activity for a period exceeding
twelve (12) consecutive months.
         (3)   Initiation of development is inconsistent with the approved
concept plan without approval under section D.
         b.   Reversion Process. The landowner shall notify the city, in
writing, of its request to extend the zoning approval. Such notice shall occur
at least sixty (60) days prior to the date on which the zoning would otherwise
revert to its prior classification. The request to extend it shall follow the
procedures for a zoning map amendment, including planning commission
recommendation and city council decision following a public hearing pursuant to
Utah Code §10-9a-205.
      6.   Minor Modifications: Minor modifications to an approved concept plan
that do not meet the thresholds for significant deviation may be approved
administratively by the zoning administrator. Such modifications may include
minor adjustments in building placement (up to ten (10) feet), utility
realignment, or similar changes that do not materially affect the layout,
density, or public infrastructure commitments of the plan. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024; Ord. 2025-15, 8-26-2025)
10-2-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor or a comparable civil penalty. Upon conviction of a Class C
misdemeanor by a court of competent jurisdiction, the person so convicted shall
be subject to penalty as provided in Title 1, Chapter 9 of this Code.
The City has sole discretion in deciding whether to enforce violations of this
title through civil or criminal means. The City’s may enforce the violation of
any provision of this title criminally as provided in Title 1, Chapter 9 of
this Code, or civilly through its Administrative Code Enforcement program as
provided in Title 1, Chapter 10. The City may use any of the remedies available
under the law in both civil and criminal prosecution of violations of this
title.
Any ongoing violation of the provisions of this title shall be considered a
separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of any
violation of this title is committed or continued by such person and shall be
punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013; amd. Ord. 2022-01, 3-22-
2022)
CHAPTER 3
PLANNING COMMISSION 1
SECTION:
10-3-1: Established
10-3-2: Scope
10-3-3: Terms Of Office; Removal
10-3-4: Organization
10-3-5: Powers And Duties
10-3-6: Records; Minutes
10-3-7: Expenses (Rep. by Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
10-3-8: General Plan (Rep. by Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
10-3-9: Mandatory Referral (Rep. by Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006)
10-3-10: Action By Commission (Rep. by Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-9a-301 et seq.
10-3-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created a planning commission pursuant to section 10-9a-301,
Utah Code Annotated, as amended, to carry out the provisions thereof, whose
primary duties shall be to act as an advisory council to the city council on
all matters pertaining to planning and zoning within and for the city, to be
known as the South Weber planning commission. The planning commission shall
consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent
of the city council. Members shall receive reimbursement for reasonable
expenses incurred in performing their duties as members of the planning
commission based on meetings actually attended. The reimbursement rate shall be
established by resolution of the city council. Appointments shall be non-
political. It is the intent of the city council that the planning commission
represent the concerns of diverse citizen groups, as well as the broad
interests of the community as a whole; that membership of the planning
commission represents a fair cross section of the community and provide
balanced representation in terms of geographic, professional, neighborhood and
community interest; and that a wide range of expertise relating to development
of a healthy and well-planned community be sought when establishing or altering
the composition of the membership of the planning commission. Candidates for
appointment shall be considered each year from a pool of viable applicants.
(Ord. 13-02, 2-26-2013; amd. Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
10-3-2: SCOPE:
Matters pertaining to: a) the use and zoning of land for private or public
purposes; b) the location, widening, narrowing, abandonment, extensions or
relocation of proposed or existing streets; c) the location of public
buildings, parks or open spaces; and d) the subdivision of land, including the
location and extent of public or private utilities, shall be submitted to the
planning commission for consideration and recommendation before action is taken
thereon by the city council or other city official. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006;
amd. Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
10-3-3: TERMS OF OFFICE; REMOVAL:
   A.   Term of Office: Members of the planning commission shall serve a term
of three (3) years and shall not serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. No
former member of the planning commission shall be eligible for re-appointment
unless one year has passed since that former member last served on the planning
commission. Each term shall begin on February 1 of the year of appointment and
shall end on January 31 of the year when the appointment expires or until a
successor is appointed. The terms of planning commission members shall be
staggered. A planning commission member may be appointed for a term of less
than three (3) years to provide for staggered terms or to complete a vacated,
unexpired term. Any member of the planning commission appointed to a term of
five (5) years prior to terms being reduced to three (3) years shall be
permitted to remain a member of the planning commission until his or her
original term expires. A partial term shall count as one term for purposes of
determining term limits if a planning commission serves for eighteen (18)
months or more of that partial term.
   B.   Removal from Office: A planning commission member shall be required to
attend at least seventy five percent (75%) of the meetings during a calendar
year, otherwise removal from the planning commission by the mayor shall be
considered. The mayor may remove any member of the planning commission without
cause as determined solely by the discretion of the mayor and as approved by a
majority of the city council. Any member of the planning commission so removed
shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council if a hearing is
requested in writing within five (5) days of a city council vote. The purpose
of the hearing is to allow the member being removed to be heard on the issue of
removal. (Ord. 13-02, 2-26-2013; amd. Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
10-3-4: ORGANIZATION:
On or before February 28, but not before February 1, of each year, the planning
commission shall elect one of its members to act as chairperson and another of
its members to act as vice chairperson. The term of the chairperson and vice
chairperson shall begin upon election and continue until a new or continuing
chair and vice chair are elected the following year. No member shall be
permitted to serve as chairperson or vice chairperson for more than two
consecutive terms. The chairperson will preside at all meetings of the planning
commission unless absent, in which case the vice chairperson will preside. The
planning commission shall adopt such bylaws, policies, and procedures for its
own organization and for the transaction of business not in conflict with city
ordinances or state laws, which policies and procedures shall be approved by
the city council before taking effect. The affirmative vote of three (3) or
more members of the planning commission shall be required for any action or
recommendation. Report of official acts and recommendations of the planning
commission shall be made by conveyance of the meeting minutes to the city
council, which shall indicate how each individual member of the planning
commission voted with respect to such act or recommendation. A member of the
planning commission may be requested to attend a city council meeting to make a
verbal report on the Planning Commission's recommendations. (Ord. 13-02, 2-26-
2013; amd. Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021; Ord. 2022-06, 5-24-2022)
10-3-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Entrance Upon Land: The Planning Commission, its members and employees,
in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land at reasonable
times to make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary
monuments and marks thereon. The Planning Commission shall have such powers as
may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote Municipal
planning.
   B.   Administrative Duties: The Planning Commission shall:
      1.   Prepare and recommend a general plan and amendments to the general
plan to the City Council;
      2.   Recommend Land Use Ordinances and maps, and amendments to Land Use
Ordinances and maps, to the City Council;
      3.   Administer provisions of this land use title as specifically
provided in this land use title;
      4.   Recommend subdivision regulations and amendments to the City
Council;
      5.   Recommend approval or denial of subdivision applications;
      6.   Advise the City Council on matters as directed by the City Council;
      7.   Hear and decide conditional use permits as assigned by city code;
and
      8.   Exercise any other powers necessary to enable it to perform its
function.
   C.   Public Hearings; Reports and Recommendations: For purposes of holding
public hearings, the Planning Commission is recognized as the Land Use
Authority for South Weber City, as defined by Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-103;
10-9a-404, 10-9a-502, 10-9a-503, 10-9a-602, and 10-9a-608, or as otherwise
required. The Planning Commission may hold public hearings and shall do so as
required by law. It may make reports and recommendations relating to the plan
and development of the City to public officials and agencies, other
organizations and citizens. It may recommend to executive or legislative
officials, programs for public improvements. The City Council shall not hold
any public hearing for any Land Use Ordinances, applications, or amendments
unless specifically required by State law or a procedural motion approved by
the City Council. (Ord. 19-08, 3-12-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
10-3-6: RECORDS; MINUTES:
All matters and requests to the Planning Commission shall be submitted to the
commission in writing on a form approved by the commission. The minutes of each
meeting of the Planning Commission shall be recorded and preserved in
accordance with state law. Minutes of each meeting of the Planning Commission
shall bear thereon its approval as attested to by the Chairperson. All official
actions shall be recorded therein and copies of all letters of approval or
denial shall be preserved. All records of the Planning Commission shall be made
available for public inspection during reasonable hours. (Ord. 13-02, 2-26-
2013; amd. Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
10-3-7: EXPENSES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
10-3-8: GENERAL PLAN:
(Rep. by Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
10-3-9: MANDATORY REFERRAL:
(Rep. by Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006)
10-3-10: ACTION BY COMMISSION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2021-01, 2-23-2021)
CHAPTER 4
APPEAL AUTHORITY
SECTION:
10-4-1: Established
10-4-2: Powers And Duties
10-4-3: Appeals
10-4-4: Variances
10-4-5: Decision By Appeal Authority
10-4-1: ESTABLISHED:
The general appeal authority shall be an unbiased attorney with expertise in
land use and preappointed by the mayor to serve this purpose for a preapproved
fee. (Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013)
10-4-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The appeal authority shall act in a quasi-judicial manner and serve as the
final arbiter of issues involving the interpretation or application of land use
ordinances. The appeal authority shall hear and decide appeals from
administrative decisions applying the land use ordinance and appeals from fees
charged in land use applications, and shall hear requests for variance from the
terms of this title. The appeal authority may not entertain an appeal of a
matter in which any participating member of the appeal authority had first
acted as the land use authority.
Legislative decisions shall be appealed directly to a court of competent
jurisdiction in accordance with state law. (Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013)
10-4-3: APPEALS:
   A.   Application:
      1.   The applicant, a board or officer of the municipality, or any person
adversely affected by the land use authority's decision administering or
interpreting a land use ordinance may, within thirty (30) days from the
decision, appeal that decision to the appeal authority by alleging that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the land
use authority in the administration or interpretation of the land use
ordinance.
      2.   An applicant who has appealed a decision of the land use authority
administering or interpreting the municipality's geologic hazard ordinance may
request the municipality to assemble a panel of qualified experts, per Utah
code, to serve as the appeal authority for purposes of determining the
technical aspects of the appeal. One member of this panel is selected/appointed
by the applicant, one member is selected/appointed by the city and the third
member of the panel is mutually agreed upon. The cost of these experts is to be
equally shared.
   B.   Burden Of Proof: The appellant has the burden of proving that the land
use authority erred. (Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013)
10-4-4: VARIANCES:
   A.   Application: Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of
the requirements of a land use ordinance as applied to a parcel of property
that he owns, leases, or in which he holds some other beneficial interest may
apply to the appeal authority for a variance from the terms of the ordinance.
   B.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The appeal authority may grant a
variance only if:
      1.   Literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an unreasonable
hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of the land use ordinances. In determining whether or not enforcement
of the land use ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship, the appeal
authority may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship is
located on or associated with the property for which the variance is sought;
comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from conditions that are
general to the neighborhood; and is not self-imposed nor economic.
      2.   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not
generally apply to other properties in the same zone. In determining whether or
not there are special circumstances attached to the property, the appeal
authority may find that special circumstances exist only if the special
circumstances relate to the hardship complained of; and deprive the property of
privileges granted to other properties in the same zone.
      3.   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial
property right possessed by other property in the same zone;
      4.   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and will
not be contrary to the public interest; and
      5.   The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial
justice done. (Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013)
10-4-5: DECISION BY APPEAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   Written Decision: A decision of the appeal authority takes effect on
the date when the appeal authority issues a written decision. A written
decision constitutes a final decision.
   B.   No District Court Review Until Administrative Remedies Exhausted: In
accordance with Utah code, no person may challenge in district court a
municipality's land use decision until that person has exhausted the person's
administrative remedies. (Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Zoning Map
10-5-2: Boundary Determination
10-5-1: ZONING MAP:
Boundaries of each of the districts of the city which are hereby zoned and the
zones therein are hereby established as shown on the map entitled South Weber
zoning map, or as hereinafter amended, which map or maps are attached and all
boundaries, notations and other data shown thereon are made by this reference
as much a part of this title as if fully described in detail herein. The said
map or maps shall be filed in the custody of the city recorder and may be
examined by the public, subject to any reasonable regulations established by
the city recorder. (1989 Code § 12-2-001; amd. 1998 Code)
10-5-2: BOUNDARY DETERMINATION:
   A.   Street, Alley Or Block: Whenever the boundary is indicated as being
approximately upon the centerline of a street, alley or block, or along a
property line, then unless otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the
centerline of such street, alley or block or such property line shall be
construed to be the boundary.
   B.   Waterway: Whenever such boundary line is indicated as being
approximately at the line of any river, irrigation canal or other waterway or
any section line, then in such case the center of such stream, canal or
waterway or the boundary line of such public land or such section line shall be
deemed to be the boundary.
   C.   Undetermined; Use Of Scale: Where such boundary lines cannot be
determined by the above rules, their location may be found by the use of the
scale appearing upon the map. (1989 Code § 12-2-002; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-
2021)
ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL MODERATE DENSITY ZONE (R-M)
SECTION:
10-5A-1: Purpose
10-5A-2: Permitted Uses
10-5A-3: Conditional Uses
10-5A-4: Building Lot Requirements
10-5A-5: Location Of Structures
10-5A-6: Maximum Structure Height
10-5A-7: Off Street Parking
10-5A-8: Permitted Signs
10-5A-9: Private Right-Of-Way
10-5A-1: PURPOSE:
To provide for areas in appropriate locations where quiet, moderate density,
residential neighborhoods may be established and protected. The regulations of
this zone are designed to promote compatible land uses consistent with a
suburban environment enjoyed by residents within the zone. With proper controls
that ensure the integrity of the zone, alternate forms of residential living
are provided for by allowing flexibility in housing type, preference and costs.
(Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2021-06,
5-25-2021)
10-5A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 19-13, 5-21-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-
06, 5-25-2021)
10-5A-4: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Density: There shall be no more than 2.80 building lots per acre
contained within the boundaries of each phase of every subdivision or planned
unit development; except when previously completed phases of the same
development have sufficiently low density so that the average is still 2.80
building lots per acre or less.
      1.   Areas within a given development that contain land use easements
purchased by the State of Utah for the purpose of protecting the health and
safety of the citizens of Utah and assuring the continued operation of Hill Air
Force Base as an active military base, shall not be utilized in density
calculations.
   B.   Lot Area: There shall be a minimum of nine thousand (9,000) square feet
in each lot.
   C.   Lot Width:
      1.   A maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of all lots within any
development phase may be a minimum of eighty feet (80') in width; and
      2.   A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of all lots within any
development phase shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100') in width; and
      3.   The width of all lots within any development phase shall average a
minimum of ninety feet (90') in width. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 1505,
7-14-2015; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021; Ord. 2022-07, 4-12-2022)
10-5A-5: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
All buildings and structures shall be located as provided in chapter 11 of this
title and as follows:
 
Structures            Front Setback          Side Setback          Rear Setback
                      60 foot right-of-way:
                      25 feet from all front 10 feet minimum on
                      lot lines              each side, except 20
Dwellings             70 foot right-of-way:  feet minimum for side 25 feet
                      20 feet from all front fronting on a street
                      lot lines

                                             10 feet minimum on
External accessory    25 Feet from all front each side, except 20  10 Feet
dwelling units        lot lines.             feet on side fronting
                                             on a street.
                      60 foot right-of-way:
                      25 feet from all front
Other main buildings  lot lines              20 feet minimum for   25 feet
                      70 foot right-of-way:  each side
                      20 feet from all front
                      lot lines
                                             Same as for dwellings, except when
                                             the structure is at least 10 feet
                                             behind the main building or 10
                                             feet behind a line extending from
                                             the rear corners of the main
                                             building to the side lot lines
                                             parallel to the rear lot line(s);
Detached accessory    25 feet from all front the side and rear setbacks may be
buildings and garages lot lines              reduced to 1 foot; provided, that
                                             the structure must be at least 20
                                             feet from main buildings on
                                             adjacent lots; and on corner lots
                                             the minimum setback for a side
                                             facing a street is 20 feet and
                                             minimum rear setback adjacent to a
                                             side lot line is 10 feet
 
(Ord. 09-09, 8-11-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021; Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-5A-6: MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
Main buildings or structures, two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five
feet (35'). (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5A-7: OFF STREET PARKING:
The provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full
force and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use.
(Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5A-8: PERMITTED SIGNS 1 :
Class 1 signs shall be permitted. For home occupations or service accessory
businesses, Class 2 signs will be allowed in addition to Class 1 signs. For
public and institutional uses as allowed by conditional use permit, Class 3
signs will be allowed in addition to Class 1 signs. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000;
amd. Ord. 2001-4, 2-13-2001; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
10-5A-9: PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section C, B
or A.
   B.   A maximum of four (4) dwelling units or lots shall be permitted
utilizing private rights-of-way. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE B. RESIDENTIAL LOW-MODERATE DENSITY ZONE (R-LM)
SECTION:
10-5B-1: Purpose
10-5B-2: Permitted Uses
10-5B-3: Conditional Uses
10-5B-4: Building Lot Requirements
10-5B-5: Location Of Structures
10-5B-6: Maximum Structure Height
10-5B-7: Off Street Parking
10-5B-8: Permitted Signs
10-5B-9: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5B-1: PURPOSE:
To provide for areas in appropriate locations where quiet, moderate/low
density, residential neighborhoods may be established and protected and where
there may be animal keeping on some parcels. The regulations of this district
are designed to promote compatible land uses consistent with a suburban
environment enjoyed by residents within the district. With proper controls that
ensure the integrity of the district, alternate forms of residential living are
provided for by allowing flexibility in housing type, preference and costs.
(Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2021-06,
5-25-2021)
10-5B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 18-07, 9-25-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-
06, 5-25-2021)
10-5B-4: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Density: There shall be no more than 1.85 building lots per acre
contained within the boundaries of each phase of every subdivision or planned
unit development; except when previously completed phases of the same
development have sufficiently low density so that the average is still 1.85
building lots per acre or less.
      1.   Areas within a given development that contain land use easements
purchased by the State of Utah for the purpose of protecting the health and
safety of the citizens of Utah and assuring the continued operation of Hill Air
Force Base as an active military base, shall not be utilized in density
calculations.
   B.   Lot Area: There shall be a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet
in each lot.
   C.   Lot Width:
      1.   A maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of all lots within any
development phase may be a minimum of eighty feet (80') in width; and
      2.   A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of all lots within any
development phase shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100') in width; and
      3.   The width of all lots within any development phase shall average a
minimum of ninety feet (90') in width. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 15-
05, 7-14-2015; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021; Ord. 2022-07, 4-12-2022)
10-5B-5: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
All buildings and structures shall be located as provided in chapter 11 of this
title and as follows:
 
Structures            Front Setback          Side Setback          Rear Setback
                      60 foot right-of-way:
                      25 feet from all front 10 feet minimum on
                      lot lines              each side, except 20
Dwellings             70 foot right-of-way:  feet minimum for side 25 feet
                      20 feet from all front fronting on a street
                      lot lines

                                             10 feet minimum on
External accessory    25 Feet from all front each side, except 20  10 Feet
dwelling units        lot lines.             feet on side fronting
                                             on a street.
                      60 foot right-of-way:
                      25 feet from all front
Other main buildings  lot lines              20 feet minimum for   25 feet
                      70 foot right-of-way:  each side
                      20 feet from all front
                      lot lines
                                             Same as for dwellings, except when
                                             the structure is at least 10 feet
                                             behind the main building or 10
                                             feet behind a line extending from
                                             the rear corners of the main
                                             building to the side lot lines
                                             parallel to the rear lot line(s);
Detached accessory    25 feet from all front the side and rear setbacks may be
buildings and garages lot lines              reduced to 1 foot; provided, that
                                             the structure must be at least 20
                                             feet from main buildings on
                                             adjacent lots; and on corner lots
                                             the minimum setback for a side
                                             facing a street is 20 feet and
                                             minimum rear setback adjacent to a
                                             side lot line is 10 feet
 
(Ord. 09-09, 8-11-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021; Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-5B-6: MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
Main buildings or structures, two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five
feet (35'). (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5B-7: OFF STREET PARKING:
The provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full
force and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use.
(Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5B-8: PERMITTED SIGNS 1 :
Class 1 signs shall be permitted. For home occupations or service accessory
businesses, Class 2 signs will be allowed in addition to Class 1 signs. For
public and institutional uses as allowed by conditional use permit, Class 3
signs will be allowed in addition to Class 1 signs. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000;
amd. Ord. 2001-4, 2-13-2001; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
10-5B-9: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section C, B
or A.
   B.   A maximum of four (4) dwelling units or lots shall be permitted
utilizing private rights-of-way. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE C. RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY SEVEN ZONE (R-7)
Article repealed by Ord. 2023-02.
ARTICLE D. RESIDENTIAL LOW DENSITY ZONE (R-L)
SECTION:
10-5D-1: Purpose
10-5D-2: Permitted Uses
10-5D-3: Conditional Uses
10-5D-4: Building Lot Requirements
10-5D-5: Location Of Structures
10-5D-6: Maximum Structure Height
10-5D-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-5D-8: Permitted Signs
10-5D-9: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5D-1: PURPOSE:
To provide for areas in appropriate locations where quiet, low density,
residential neighborhoods may be established and protected. The regulations of
this zone are designed to promote compatible land uses consistent with a
semirural residential environment enjoyed by residents within those districts.
With proper controls that ensure the integrity of the zone, alternate forms of
residential living are provided for by allowing diversity in housing type,
preference and costs. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2021-06,
5-25-2021)
10-5D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 18-07, 9-25-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-
06, 5-25-2021)
10-5D-4: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Density: There shall be no more than 1.45 building lots per acre
contained within the boundaries of each phase of every subdivision or planned
unit development; except when previously completed phases of the same
development have sufficiently low density so that the average is still 1.45
building lots per acre or less.
      1.   Areas within a given development that contain land use easements
purchased by the State of Utah for the purpose of protecting the health and
safety of the citizens of Utah and assuring the continued operation of Hill Air
Force Base as an active military base, shall not be utilized in density
calculations.
   B.   Lot Area: There shall be a minimum of twelve thousand (12,000) square
feet in each lot.
   C.   Lot Width:
      1.   A maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of all lots within any
development phase may be a minimum of eighty feet (80') in width; and
      2.   A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of all lots within any
development phase shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100') in width; and
      3.   The width of all lots within any development phase shall average a
minimum of ninety feet (90') in width. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 15-
05, 7-14-2015; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021; Ord. 2022-07, 4-12-2022)
10-5D-5: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
All buildings and structures shall be located as provided in chapter 11 of this
title and as follows:
 
Structures            Front Setback          Side Setback          Rear Setback
                      60 foot right-of-way:
                      30 feet from all front 10 feet minimum for
                      lines                  each side, except 20
Dwellings             70 foot right-of-way:  feet minimum for side 30 feet
                      25 feet from all front fronting on a street
                      lot lines

                                             10 feet minimum on
External accessory    25 Feet from all front each side, except 20  10 Feet
dwelling units        lot lines.             feet on side fronting
                                             on a street.
                      60 foot right-of-way:
                      30 feet from all front
Other main buildings  lot lines              20 feet minimum for   30 feet
                      70 foot right-of-way:  each side
                      25 feet from all front
                      lot lines
                                             Same as for dwellings, except when
                                             the structure is at least 10 feet
                                             behind the main building or 10
                                             feet behind a line extending from
                                             the rear corners of the main
                                             building to the side lot lines
                                             parallel to the rear lot line(s);
Detached accessory    30 feet from all front the side and rear setbacks may be
buildings and garages lot lines              reduced to 1 foot; provided, that
                                             the structure must be at least 20
                                             feet from main buildings on
                                             adjacent lots; and on corner lots
                                             the minimum setback for a side
                                             facing a street is 20 feet and
                                             minimum rear setback adjacent to a
                                             side lot line is 10 feet
 
(Ord. 09-09, 8-11-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021; Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-5D-6: MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
Main, accessory and temporary buildings and structures, two and one-half (21/2)
stories, not to exceed thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd.
Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5D-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
The provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full
force and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use.
(Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5D-8: PERMITTED SIGNS 1 :
Class 1 signs shall be permitted. For home occupations or service accessory
businesses, Class 2 signs will be allowed in addition to Class 1 signs. For
public and institutional uses as allowed by conditional use permit, Class 3
signs will be allowed in addition to Class 1 signs. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000;
amd. Ord. 2001-4, 2-13-2001; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
10-5D-9: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section C, B
or A.
   B.   A maximum of four (4) dwelling units or lots shall be permitted
utilizing private rights-of-way. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE E. AGRICULTURAL ZONE (A)
SECTION:
10-5E-1: Purpose
10-5E-2: Permitted Uses
10-5E-3: Conditional Uses
10-5E-4: Building Lot Requirements
10-5E-5: Location Of Structures
10-5E-6: Maximum Structure Height
10-5E-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-5E-8: Permitted Signs
10-5E-9: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to promote and preserve open space and areas where
families may engage in food production and keep limited numbers of animals and
fowl. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5E-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A oft his
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2001-
4, 2-13-2001; Ord. 01-24, 11-27-2001; Ord. 02-7, 5-28-2002; Ord. 13-11, 5-14-
2013; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5E-4: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Density: There shall be no more than 0.90 building lots per acre
contained within the boundaries of each phase of every subdivision or planned
unit development; except when previously completed phases of the same
development have sufficiently low density so that the average is still 0.90
building lots per acre or less.
      1.   Areas within a given development that contain land use easements
purchased by the State of Utah for the purpose of protecting the health and
safety of the citizens of Utah and assuring the continued operation of Hill Air
Force Base as an active military base, shall not be utilized in density
calculations.
   B.   Lot Area: There shall be a minimum of twelve thousand (12,000) square
feet in each lot.
   C.   Lot Width:
      1.   For lots less than one-half (½) acre, the same as subsection 10-5D-
4C of this chapter.
      2.   Lots one-half (½) acre to ninety nine one-hundredths (0.99) acre in
area shall be at least one hundred feet (100') in width.
      3.   Lots one acre or larger shall be at least one hundred fifty feet
(150') in width. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 15-05, 7-14-2015; Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021; Ord. 2022-07, 4-12-2022)
10-5E-5: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
All buildings and structures shall be located as provided in chapter 11 of this
title and as follows:
 
Structures            Front Setback          Side Setback          Rear Setback
                      60 foot right-of-way:
                      30 feet from all front 10 feet minimum for
                      lot lines              each side, except 20
Dwellings             70 foot right-of-way:  feet minimum for side 30 feet
                      25 feet from all front fronting on a street
                      lot lines

                                             10 feet minimum on
External accessory    25 Feet from all front each side, except 20  10 Feet
dwelling units        lot lines.             feet on side fronting
                                             on a street.
                      60 foot right-of-way:
                      30 feet from all front
Other main buildings  lot lines              20 feet minimum for   30 feet
                      70 foot right-of-way:  each side
                      25 feet from all front
                      lot lines
                                             Same as for dwellings, except when
                                             the structure is at least 10 feet
                                             behind the main building or 10
                                             feet behind a line extending from
                                             the rear corners of the main
                                             building to the side lot lines
                                             parallel to the rear lot line(s);
Detached accessory    30 feet from all front the side and rear setbacks may be
buildings and garages lot lines              reduced to 1 foot; provided, that
                                             the structure must be at least 20
                                             feet from main buildings on
                                             adjacent lots; and on corner lots
                                             the minimum setback for a side
                                             facing a street is 20 feet and
                                             minimum rear setback adjacent to a
                                             side lot line is 10 feet
 
(Ord. 09-09, 8-11-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5E-6: MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
Main buildings and structures, two and one-half (21/2) stories, not to exceed
thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5E-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
The provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full
force and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use.
(Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5E-8: PERMITTED SIGNS 1 :
Class 1 signs shall be permitted. For home occupations or service accessory
businesses, Class 2 signs will be allowed in addition to Class 1 signs. For
public and institutional uses as allowed by conditional use permit, Class 3
signs will be allowed in addition to Class 1 signs. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000;
amd. Ord. 2001-4, 2-13-2001; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
10-5E-9: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section C, B
or A.
   B.   A maximum of four (4) dwelling units or lots shall be permitted
utilizing private rights-of-way. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE F. AGRICULTURAL-AIRCRAFT HAZARD ZONE (A-10)
(Rep. by Ord. 2021-07, 5-25-2021)
ARTICLE G. COMMERCIAL ZONE (C)
SECTION:
10-5G-1: Description And General Limitation
10-5G-2: Commercial Development Over One Acre
10-5G-3: Architectural Site Plan Review
10-5G-4: Permitted Uses
10-5G-5: Conditional Uses
10-5G-6: Building Lot Requirements
10-5G-7: Location Of Structures
10-5G-8: Maximum Structure Height
10-5G-9: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-5G-10: Permitted Signs And Lighting
10-5G-11: Special Provisions And Limitations
10-5G-12: Landscaping Requirements
10-5G-13: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5G-1: DESCRIPTION AND GENERAL LIMITATION:
Zone C has been established for the purpose of providing space within the
various neighborhoods of the City for the establishment of neighborhood
shopping centers used primarily to provide the retailing of convenience goods,
the furnishing of certain personal services and the weekly household or
personal needs of the residents of abutting residential neighborhoods. C
Districts are located generally on neighborhood feeder streets or on minor
traffic streets rather than on main arterial highways. Such districts are
almost always small in size, its area being determined by the size of the
neighborhood it is designed to serve. Characteristically, it is surrounded by
residential districts. (Ord. 2002-4, 3-26-2002; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5G-2: COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT OVER ONE ACRE:
   A.   Conditional Use: Because of the possible adverse impacts of large scale
commercial developments on surrounding neighborhoods, in terms of site design
and layout, traffic control, as well as visual appearance, all C developments
greater than one acre shall fall under the conditional use permit procedure
pursuant to chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 2002-4, 3-26-2002)
   B.   Subdivided Parcels: In the event commercial parcels are subdivided and
retained under single ownership or sold separately and the total sum of all the
commercial properties was greater than one acre at the time of adoption of the
ordinance codified herein, then each commercial development must be approved as
a conditional use. (1989 Code § 12-8-002; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5G-3: ARCHITECTURAL SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All proposed C developments shall meet the requirements of chapter 12 of this
title. (Ord. 2002-4, 3-26-2002; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5G-4: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (1989 Code § 12-8-004; amd. Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2021-06, 5-
25-2021)
10-5G-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (1989 Code § 12-8-005; amd. Ord. 96-7,
12-10-1996, eff. 1-10-1997; 1998 Code; Ord. 02-7, 5-28-2002; Ord. 13-11, 5-14-
2013; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5G-6: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings must comply with the provisions of this section, except those
exempted as provided in chapter 11 of this title.
   A.   Lot width: No particular requirements, as approved by the Planning
Commission.
   B.   Lot area: No particular requirements, as approved by the Planning
Commission. (1989 Code § 12-8-006; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5G-7: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
 
 
Structures           Front Setback Side Setback       Rear Setback
                                                      No requirement, except
                                   No requirement,    that 20 feet shall be
Main and accessory   10 feet       except 10 feet     provided where the lot
structures                         minimum for sides  line is coterminous
                                   fronting on street with any residential
                                                      zone boundary
Temporary structures 10 feet       10 feet            30 feet
 
(1989 Code § 12-8-007; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5G-8: MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
Main buildings and structures, two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five
feet (35'). Temporary structures, one story. (1989 Code § 12-8-008; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5G-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full force
and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use. (1989
Code § 12-8-009; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5G-10: PERMITTED SIGNS AND LIGHTING 1 :
Class 5 signs shall be permitted. (Ord. 2004-04, 6-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2021-06,
5-25-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
10-5G-11: SPECIAL PROVISIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
Where accessory living quarters are provided as permitted herein, no window
shall be permitted in any wall of the same which is located within eight feet
(8') of a side property line. (1989 Code § 12-8-011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-
2021)
10-5G-12: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Landscaping: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the total site
shall be thoroughly landscaped, including an irrigation system to maintain such
landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of chapter 15 of this
title. For use of exceptional design and materials, as determined by the
Planning Commission, the landscaping may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the
total site.
   B.   Buffer Yard Landscaping: A buffer yard shall be required between the C
Zone and all residential zones and shall meet the requirements of chapter 15 of
this title.
   C.   Park Strip Landscaping: Park strip landscaping shall meet the
requirements of chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 18-05, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5G-13: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section A.
   B.   On-street parking shall not be permitted. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE H. HIGHWAY-COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-H)
SECTION:
10-5H-1: Purpose
10-5H-2: Development Over One Acre
10-5H-3: Architectural Site Plan Review
10-5H-4: Permitted Uses
10-5H-5: Conditional Uses
10-5H-6: Building Lot Requirements
10-5H-7: Location Of Structures
10-5H-8: Maximum Structure Height
10-5H-9: Off Street Parking
10-5H-10: Permitted Signs And Lighting
10-5H-11: Special Provisions And Limitations
10-5H-12: Landscaping Requirements
10-5H-13: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5H-1: PURPOSE:
To provide areas in appropriate locations adjacent to highways or major streets
where activities dependent upon or catering to thoroughfare traffic and the
traveling public may be established, maintained and protected. The regulations
of this district are designed to encourage harmony between traffic needs and
centers for retail commercial, entertainment, automotive facilities and other
appropriate highway related activities. (1989 Code § 12-9-001; amd. Ord. 2021-
06, 5-25-2021)
10-5H-2: DEVELOPMENT OVER ONE ACRE:
Development over one acre must follow the conditional use permit procedure of
chapter 7 of this title. (1989 Code § 12-9-002; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5H-3: ARCHITECTURAL SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All proposed C-H development shall meet the requirements of chapter 12 of this
title. (1989 Code § 12-9-003; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5H-4: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (1989 Code § 12-9-004; amd. Ord. 96-7, 12-10-1996, eff. 1-10-1997;
Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5H-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 19-09, 3-12-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-
06, 5-25-2021)
10-5H-6: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot width: No particular requirements, as approved by the Planning
Commission.
   B.   Lot area: No particular requirements, as approved by the Planning
Commission. (1989 Code § 12-9-006; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5H-7: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
 
Structures           Front Setback Side Setback             Rear Setback
                                   No requirement, except
                                   20 feet minimum for
                                   sides fronting on
                                   street. Where any wall
                                   has no windows exposed   10 feet from other
Main and accessory   50 feet       on that side, then no    zones, 20 feet from
structures                         side setback shall be    residential zones
                                   required, except that 10
                                   feet shall be provided
                                   where the lot line is
                                   coterminous with any
                                   residential boundary
Temporary structures 30 feet       10 feet                  10 feet
 
(1989 Code § 12-9-007; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5H-8: MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
Main buildings and structures, two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five
feet (35'). Temporary structures, one story. (1989 Code § 12-9-008; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5H-9: OFF STREET PARKING:
The provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full
force and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use.
(1989 Code § 12-9-009; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5H-10: PERMITTED SIGNS AND LIGHTING 1 :
Class 5 signs shall be permitted. (1989 Code § 12-9-010; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-
25-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
10-5H-11: SPECIAL PROVISIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
Where accessory living quarters are provided as permitted herein, no window
shall be permitted in any wall of the same which is located within eight feet
(8') of a side property line. (1989 Code § 12-9-011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-
2021)
10-5H-12: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Landscaping: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the total site
shall be thoroughly landscaped, including an irrigation system to maintain such
landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of chapter 15 of this
title. For use of exceptional design and materials, as determined by the
Planning Commission, the landscaping may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the
total site.
   B.   Buffer Yard Landscaping: A buffer yard shall be required between the C-
H Zone and all residential zones and shall meet the requirements of chapter 15
of this title.
   C.   Park Strip Landscaping: Park strip landscaping shall meet the
requirements of chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 18-05, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5H-13: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section A.
   B.   On-street parking shall not be permitted. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE I. TRANSITIONAL LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE (T-1)
SECTION:
10-5I-1: Purpose
10-5I-2: Development Over One Acre
10-5I-3: Architectural Site Plan Review
10-5I-4: Permitted Uses
10-5I-5: Conditional Uses
10-5I-6: Landscaping Requirements
10-5I-7: Building Lot Requirements
10-5I-8: Location Of Structures
10-5I-9: Building Coverage Regulations
10-5I-10: Off-Street Parking
10-5I-11: Permitted Signs And Lighting
10-5I-12: Performance Standards
10-5I-13: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5I-1: PURPOSE:
To provide a zone which will act as a buffer between residential uses and
natural resource excavations and where some industrial uses are appropriate and
to provide a review procedure to ensure compatibility of uses internal to this
zone and with uses in adjacent zones. (1989 Code § 12-10-001; amd. Ord. 2021-
06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-2: DEVELOPMENT OVER ONE ACRE:
Light industrial development over one acre must follow the conditional use
permit procedure pursuant to chapter 7 of this title. (1989 Code § 12-10-002;
amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-3: ARCHITECTURAL SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All proposed T-1 development shall meet the requirements of chapter 12 of this
title. (1989 Code § 12-10-003; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-4: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (1989 Code § 12-10-004; amd. Ord. 96-7, 12-10-1996, eff. 1-10-1997;
Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A oft his
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (1989 Code § 12-10-005; amd. Ord. 96-7,
12-10-1996, eff. 1-10-1997; Ord. 97-6, 4-22-1997; Ord. 13-11, 5-14-2013; Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-6: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Landscaping: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the total site
shall be thoroughly landscaped, including an irrigation system to maintain such
landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of chapter 15 of this
title. For use of exceptional design and materials, as determined by the
Planning Commission, the landscaping may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the
total site.
   B.   Buffer Yard Landscaping: A buffer yard shall be required between the T-
l Zone and all residential zones and shall meet the requirements of chapter
15of this title.
   C.   Park Strip Landscaping: Park strip landscaping shall meet the
requirements of chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 18-05, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-7: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot width: No minimum requirement, as approved by the Planning
Commission.
   B.   Lot area: No minimum requirement, as approved by the Planning
Commission. (1989 Code § 12-10-007; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-8: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
No minimum requirements, except no commercial or industrial building or
structure shall be located closer than twenty feet (20') to any street or the
average of existing buildings where at least fifty percent (50%) of the
frontage is developed. (1989 Code § 12-10-008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-9: BUILDING COVERAGE REGULATIONS:
No building, structure or group of buildings, including accessory buildings,
shall cover more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of the lot. (1989 Code §
12-10-009; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
Provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full force
and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use. (1989
Code § 12-10-010; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-11: PERMITTED SIGNS AND LIGHTING 1 :
Class 4 signs shall be permitted. (1989 Code § 12-10-011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-
25-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
10-5I-12: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards are intended to ensure that all uses within
the T-l Zone will provide the necessary control methods to protect the City
from hazards and nuisances:
   A.   General: No land or building devoted to uses authorized in this article
shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable hazards, noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare or
other disturbance. The determination of the existence of these elements shall
be made at the lot line in the case of elements that are objectionable only if
they travel off the site.
   B.   Sound Emission 1 : No use shall emit or cause the emission of sound
from a stationary source such that the one hour equivalent sound level (Leq)
caused by ground transportation as estimated for that point of measurement and
at that time of day, pursuant to FHWA-RD-77-108 highway traffic noise
prediction model, or by other techniques at least as accurate. The sound level
measuring instrumentation shall conform with ANSI Sl.4-1971 type 1, and the
measurement procedure shall be compatible with that, according to ANSI Sl.13-
1971.
   C.   Odorous Gases: No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter
shall be permitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the
property line. (1989 Code § 12-10-012; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5I-13: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section A.
   B.   On-street parking shall not be permitted. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE J. NATURAL RESOURCE ZONE (N-R)
SECTION:
10-5J-1: Purpose
10-5J-2: Establishment Of Zone
10-5J-3: Permitted Uses
10-5J-4: Conditional Uses
10-5J-5: Area, Height And Yard Regulations
10-5J-6: Permitted Signs And Lighting
10-5J-7: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5J-1: PURPOSE:
To permit the extraction and processing of a natural resource in the city such
as sand, gravel, clay, burrow, stone, rock, topsoil and road base material.
(1989 Code § 12-11-001; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5J-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONE:
The natural resource zone has been established to identify areas which contain
significant native natural resources either: a) where extraction and related
activities are currently underway; or b) where planning studies indicate that
the land is necessary for future extraction of the natural resource. Where it
can be determined that the resource is available and where existing land uses
may be somewhat buffered, the establishment of the N-R zone will be considered.
The natural resource zone would be for the purpose of conservation and
protection of mineral resources which are vital to the orderly development of
the city. There is hereby created natural resource zones, the boundaries of
which are designated on the zoning map. (1989 Code § 12-11-002; amd. Ord. 2021-
06, 5-25-2021)
10-5J-3: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (1989 Code § 12-11-003; amd. Ord. 13-11, 5-14-2013; Ord. 2021-06,
5-25-2021)
10-5J-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (1989 Code § 12-11-004; amd. 1998 Code;
Ord. 13-11, 5-14-2013; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5J-5: AREA, HEIGHT AND YARD REGULATIONS:
   A.   Area: No requirement. (1989 Code § 12-11-005)
   B.   Height: No building or structure shall be erected to a height greater
than sixty feet (60') and no dwelling structure shall be erected to a height
greater than thirty five feet (35'), except as otherwise provided by the
planning commission. (1989 Code § 12-11-010)
   C.   Width: The minimum width of any lot shall be three hundred feet (300')
at building or operation site, with a minimum street frontage of seventy feet
(70'). (1989 Code § 12-11-006)
   D.   Yard:
      1.   Side: The minimum side yard for any building shall be twenty feet
(20') and a total side yard requirement of forty feet (40'), except as
otherwise provided in chapter 11 of this title. (1989 Code § 12-11-007)
      2.   Front: The minimum front yard for structures with a twenty foot
(20') side yard shall be forty feet (40'). Those with one hundred foot (100')
side yards shall be one hundred feet (100') from zone boundary and as close as
twenty feet (20') to the property line with planning commission approval,
except as otherwise provided in chapter 11 of this title. (1989 Code § 12-11-
008)
      3.   Rear: The minimum depth of the rear yard for any building shall be
forty feet (40'). Those with one hundred foot (100') side yards shall be one
hundred feet (100') from zone boundary and as close as twenty feet (20') to the
property line with planning commission approval, except as otherwise provided
in chapter 11 of this title. (1989 Code § 12-11-009; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-
2021)
10-5J-6: PERMITTED SIGNS AND LIGHTING 1 :
Class 7 signs shall be permitted. (Ord. 2004-04, 6-22-2004; amd. Ord. 2021-06,
5-25-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
10-5J-7: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section A.
   B.   On-street parking shall not be permitted. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE K. PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE (P-O)
SECTION:
10-5K-1: Description And General Limitation
10-5K-2: Professional Office Development Over One Acre
10-5K-3: Architectural Site Plan Review
10-5K-4: Permitted Uses
10-5K-5: Conditional Uses
10-5K-6: Building Lot Requirements
10-5K-7: Location Of Structures
10-5K-8: Maximum Structure Height
10-5K-9: Off-Street Parking And Loading
10-5K-10: Permitted Signs And Lighting
10-5K-11: Landscaping Requirements
10-5K-12: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5K-1: DESCRIPTION AND GENERAL LIMITATION:
The Professional Office Zone is established to provide areas where professional
and business offices, laboratories, studios, and other office facilities may be
located in the City. The intent of the zone is to allow only those uses which
will promote a professional office environment. Uses which produce loud noises,
excessive vehicle traffic, excessive parking needs, objectionable odors,
storage of large amounts of hazardous materials, or the outside storage of
equipment or supplies are not appropriate in this zone. Buildings, signs and
other structures in this zone should be architecturally compatible with their
surroundings. (Ord. 2000-13, 12-12-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5K-2: PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DEVELOPMENT OVER ONE ACRE:
   A.   Conditional Use: Because of the possible adverse impacts of large-scale
office developments on surrounding neighborhoods, in terms of site design and
layout, traffic control, as well as visual appearance, all development in this
zone that includes a site greater than one acre in area shall fall under the
conditional use permit procedure pursuant to chapter 7 of this title.
   B.   Subdivided Parcels: In the event professional office parcels are
subdivided and retained under single ownership or sold separately and the total
sum of all the commercial properties was greater than one acre at the time of
adoption of the ordinance codified herein, then each professional office
development must be approved as a conditional use. (Ord. 2000-13, 12-12-2000;
amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5K-3: ARCHITECTURAL SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All proposed development in this zone shall meet the requirements of chapter 12
of this title and shall receive architectural site plan approval from the
Planning Commission prior to the issuance of any building permits or the
commencement of any construction. (Ord. 2000-13, 12-12-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06,
5-25-2021)
10-5K-4: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (Ord. 2000-13, 12-12-2000; amd. Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2021-
06, 5-25-2021)
10-5K-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 2000-13, 12-12-2000; amd. Ord. 13-
11, 5-14-2013; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5K-6: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings must comply with the provisions of this section, except those
exempted as provided in chapter 11 of this title.
   A.   Lot width: No particular requirements, as approved by the Planning
Commission.
   B.   Lot area: No particular requirements, as approved by the Planning
Commission. (Ord. 2000-13, 12-12-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5K-7: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
 
Structures           Front Setback Side Setback         Rear Setback
                                                        No requirement, except
                                   No requirement,      that 30 feet shall be
Main and accessory   10 feet       except 20 feet       provided where the lot
structures                         minimum for sides    line is coterminous
                                   fronting on a street with any residential
                                                        zone boundary
Temporary structures 10 feet       10 feet              30 feet
 
(Ord. 2000-13, 12-12-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5K-8: MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
Main buildings and structures, two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five
feet (35'). Temporary structures, one story. (Ord. 2000-13, 12-12-2000; amd.
Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5K-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full force
and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use. (Ord.
2000-13, 12-12-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5K-10: PERMITTED SIGNS AND LIGHTING 1 :
Class 6 shall be permitted. (Ord. 2000-13, 12-12-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-
2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
10-5K-11: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Landscaping: At least fifteen percent (15%)of the total site
shall be thoroughly landscaped, including an irrigation system to maintain such
landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of chapter 15 of this
title. For use of exceptional design and materials, as determined by the
Planning Commission, the landscaping may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the
total site.
   B.   Buffer Yard Landscaping: A buffer yard shall be required between the P-
O Zone and all residential zones. Buffer yards shall meet the requirements of
chapter 15 of this title.
   C.   Park Strip Landscaping: Park strip landscaping shall meet the
requirements of chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 18-05, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5K-12: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section A.
   B.   On-street parking shall not be permitted. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE L. LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE (L-I)
SECTION:
10-5L-1: Purpose
10-5L-2: Development Over One Acre
10-5L-3: Architectural Site Plan Review
10-5L-4: Permitted Uses
10-5L-5: Conditional Uses
10-5L-6: Landscaping Requirements
10-5L-7: Building Lot Requirements
10-5L-8: Location Of Structures
10-5L-9: Building Coverage Regulations
10-5L-10: Off Street Parking
10-5L-11: Permitted Signs And Lighting
10-5L-12: Performance Standards
10-5L-13: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5L-1: PURPOSE:
To provide a zone where some low impact industrial uses are appropriate and to
provide a review procedure to ensure compatibility of uses internal to this
zone and adjacent zones. (Ord. 08-03, 2-26-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5L-2: DEVELOPMENT OVER ONE ACRE:
Light industrial development over one acre must follow the conditional use
permit procedure pursuant to chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 08-03, 2-26-2008;
amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5L-3: ARCHITECTURAL SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All proposed L-I development shall meet the requirements of chapter 12 of this
title. (Ord. 08-03, 2-26-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5L-4: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (Ord. 08-03, 2-26-2008; amd. Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2021-06,
5-25-2021)
10-5L-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 08-03, 2-26-2008; amd. Ord. 13-11,
5-14-2013; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5L-6: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Landscaping: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the total site
shall be thoroughly landscaped, including an irrigation system adequate to
maintain such landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of chapter
15 of this title.
   B.   Buffer Yard Landscaping: A buffer yard shall be required between the L-
I Zone and all residential zones. Buffer yards shall meet the requirements of
chapter 15 of this title.
   C.   Park Strip Landscaping: Park strip landscaping shall meet the
requirements of chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 18-05, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5L-7: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot width: No minimum requirement, as approved by the Planning
Commission.
   B.   Lot area: No minimum requirement, as approved by the Planning
Commission. (Ord. 08-03, 2-26-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5L-8: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
No minimum requirements, except no commercial or industrial building or
structure shall be located closer than twenty feet (20') to any street or the
average of existing buildings where at least fifty percent (50%) of the
frontage is developed. (Ord. 08-03, 2-26-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5L-9: BUILDING COVERAGE REGULATIONS:
No building, structure or group of buildings, including accessory buildings,
shall cover more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of the lot. (Ord. 08-03,
2-26-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5L-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
Provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full force
and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use. (Ord.
08-03, 2-26-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5L-11: PERMITTED SIGNS AND LIGHTING:
Class 4 signs shall be permitted. (Ord. 08-03, 2-26-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-
25-2021)
10-5L-12: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards are intended to ensure that all industries
will provide necessary modern control methods to protect the City from hazards
and nuisances; to set objective quantitative standards for the maximum
tolerated levels of frequently hazardous or annoying emissions; and to protect
any industry from arbitrary exclusion or persecution based solely on the
characteristics of that type of industry's past controlled operation.
   A.   Noise:
      1.   Level: No use shall emit or cause the emission of sound from a
stationary source such that the one hour equivalent sound level (Leq) of
resultant sound measurement at the lot line of the establishment or use exceeds
by six (6) dB or more than one hour equivalent sound level (Leq) caused by
ground transportation as estimated for that point of measurement and that time
of day, pursuant to FHWA-RD-77-108 highway traffic noise prediction model, or
by other techniques at least as accurate as those set out in FHWA-RD-77-108.
The sound level measuring instrumentation shall conform with ANSI Sl.4-1971
type 1, and the measurement procedure shall be compatible with that according
to ANSI Sl.13-1971, with the following adjustments:
         a.   Temporal And Tonal Characteristics Of Sound: If the sound has a
pronounced audible tonal quality such as a whine, screech, buzz or hum, or if
the sound has an audible cyclic variation in sound level such as beating or
other amplitude modulation, five (5) dB shall be added to the measured sound
level to allow for increased subjective response to the sound.
         b.   Quasi-Steady Impulsive Sound: Where the sound is of a repetitive
impulse nature so that a steady reading is obtained using the "slow response"
setting on the sound level meter, then ten (10) dB shall be added to the
measured value to allow for the increased subjective response to the sound. An
adjustment may be made under only one of subsection Ala of this section and
this subsection Alb. In a case where both subsections apply, then this
subsection Alb takes precedence.
      2.   Stationary Source: No use shall emit or cause to permit the emission
of sound of an impulsive nature from a stationary source such that it results
in an impulsive sound level at a point of measurement in excess of eighty (80)
dB or in a one hour equivalent level (Leq) exceeding that one hour equivalent
level (Leq) caused by ground transportation as estimated for that point of
measurement and that time of day, pursuant to FHWA-RD-77-108 or equivalent
method.
   B.   Vibration: No vibration (other than from transportation facilities or
temporary construction work) shall be permitted which is discernable without
instruments at the property line.
   C.   Odors: No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be
permitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable when diluted in the
ratio of one volume of odorous airto four (4) volumes of clean air(l:4) at the
point of greatest concentration. Any process which may involve the creation or
emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system so
that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail.
   D.   Glare: No direct or sky reflected glare, whether from floodlights or
from high temperature processes, such as combustion or welding or otherwise,
shall be permitted to be visible at the property lines. This restriction shall
not apply to signs or lighting ofbuildings or grounds for advertising or
protection otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Fire And Explosion Hazards: All activities involving and all storage of
flammable and explosive materials shall be provided at any point with adequate
safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate
firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in the
industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited at any point.
   F.   Air Pollution: No particulate or gaseous pollutants shall be emitted
into the air in violation of the Utah State Air Conservation Act, its
amendments, or resulting regulations.
   G.   Liquid Or Solid Wastes: No discharges at any point into a public sewer,
private sewage system or stream, or into the ground shall be allowed contrary
to the Utah State Water Pollution Control Act, its amendments, the subsequent
wastewater disposal regulations or the Utah Code of Solid Waste Disposal
regulations. (Ord. 08-03, 2-26-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5L-13: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section A.
   B.   On-street parking shall not be permitted. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE M. COMMERCIAL RECREATION ZONE (C-R)
SECTION:
10-5M-1: Purpose
10-5M-2: Development Over One Acre
10-5M-3: Architectural Site Plan Review
10-5M-4: Permitted Uses
10-5M-5: Conditional Uses
10-5M-6: Landscaping Requirements
10-5M-7: Building Lot Requirements
10-5M-8: Location Of Structures
10-5M-9: Building Coverage Regulations
10-5M-10: Off Street Parking
10-5M-11: Permitted Signs And Lighting
10-5M-12: Performance Standards
10-5M-13: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5M-1: PURPOSE:
To provide a zone that will facilitate and encourage the establishment and
growth of retail commercial areas that support the wide range of recreational/
sporting opportunities in the region. This zone allows for retail sales and
rental of recreational/sporting equipment and the conducting of recreational/
sporting activities for profit. It is also intended to allow other land uses
that support recreational/sporting retail facilities and uses. (Ord. 08-12, 9-
9-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5M-2: DEVELOPMENT OVER ONE ACRE:
Development over one acre must follow the conditional use permit procedure
pursuant to chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 08-12, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06,
5-25-2021)
10-5M-3: ARCHITECTURAL SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All proposed C-R developments shall meet the requirements of chapter 12 of this
title. (Ord. 08-12, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5M-4: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (Ord. 08-12, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2021-06, 5-
25-2021)
10-5M-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 08-12, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 13-11,
5-14-2013; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5M-6: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Landscaping: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the total site
shall be thoroughly landscaped, including an irrigation system adequate to
maintain such landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of chapter
15 of this title. For use of exceptional design and materials, as determined by
the Planning Commission, the landscaping may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of
the total site.
   B.   Buffer Yard Landscaping: A buffer yard shall be required between the C-
R Zone and all residential zones, except where there are legal restrictions on
the residential zoned property that prevent the construction of residences.
   C.   Park Strip Landscaping: Park strip landscaping shall meet the
requirements of chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 18-05, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5M-7: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot width: No minimum requirement, as approved by the Planning
Commission.
   B.   Lot area: No minimum requirement, as approved by the Planning
Commission. (Ord. 08-12, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5M-8: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
No minimum requirements, except no commercial building or structure shall be
located closer than twenty feet (20') to any street or the average of existing
buildings where at least fifty percent (50%) of the frontage is developed.
(Ord. 08-12, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5M-9: BUILDING COVERAGE REGULATIONS:
No building, structure or group of buildings, including accessory buildings,
shall cover more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of the lot. (Ord. 08-12,
9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5M-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
Provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full force
and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use. (Ord.
08-12, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5M-11: PERMITTED SIGNS AND LIGHTING:
Class 4 signs shall be permitted. (Ord. 08-12, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-
25-2021)
10-5M-12: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards are intended to ensure that all uses within
the C-R Zone will provide the necessary control methods to protect the City
from hazards and nuisances:
   A.   General: No land or building devoted to uses authorized in this article
shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable hazards, noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare or
other disturbance. The determination of the existence of these elements shall
be made at the lot line in the case of elements that are objectionable only if
they travel off the site.
   B.   Sound Emission: No use shall emit or cause the emission of sound from a
stationary source such that the one hour equivalent sound level (Leq) caused by
ground transportation as estimated for that point of measurement and at that
time of day is exceeded, pursuant to FHWA-RD-77-108 highway traffic noise
prediction model, or by other techniques at least as accurate. The sound level
measuring instrumentation shall conform with ANSI S1.4-1971 type 1, and the
measurement procedure shall be compatible with that, according to ANSI Sl.13-
1971.
   C.   Odorous Gases: No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter
shall be permitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable atthe
property line. (Ord. 08-12, 9-9-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5M-13: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section A.
   B.   On-street parking shall not be permitted. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE N. COMMERCIAL OVERLAY ZONE (C-O)
(Rep. by. Ord. 19-15, 9-24-2019)
ARTICLE O. BUSINESS COMMERCE ZONE (B-C)
SECTION:
10-5O-1: Purpose
10-5O-2: Development Over One Acre
10-5O-3: Architectural Site Plan Review
10-5O-4: Permitted Uses
10-5O-5: Conditional Uses
10-5O-6: Landscaping Requirements
10-5O-7: Building Lot Requirements
10-5O-8: Location Of Structures
10-5O-9: Hillside Development
10-5O-10: Building Coverage Regulations
10-5O-11: Off Street Parking
10-5O-12: Permitted Signs And Lighting
10-5O-13: Performance Standards
10-5O-14: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5O-1: PURPOSE:
To provide a zone that will act as a buffer between residential uses and higher
commercial or industrial uses. A zone in which job creation and business
commerce can be combined. All uses within this zone shall be reviewed in order
to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and to preserve hill sight views
and maximize safety in developing the upper bench area of South Weber City.
(Ord. 11-04, 3-8-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-2: DEVELOPMENT OVER ONE ACRE:
Business commerce development over one acre must follow the conditional use
permit procedure pursuant to chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 11-04, 3-8-2011;
amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-3: ARCHITECTURAL SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All proposed B-C development shall meet the requirements of chapter 12 of this
title. (Ord. 11-04, 3-8-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-4: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (Ord. 11-04, 3-8-2011; amd. Ord. 16-21, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2021-06, 5-
25-2021)
10-5O-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 11-04, 3-8-2011; amd. Ord. 13-11,
5-14-2013; Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-6: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Landscaping: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the total site
shall be thoroughly landscaped, including an irrigation system adequate to
maintain such landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of chapter
15 of this title. For use of exceptional design and materials, as determined by
the Planning Commission, the landscaping may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of
the total site.
   B.   Buffer Yard Landscaping: A buffer yard shall be required between the B-
C Zone and all residential zones. Buffer yards shall meet the requirements of
chapter 15 of this title.
   C.   Park Strip Landscaping: Park strip landscaping shall meet the
requirements of chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 18-05, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-7: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot width: No minimum requirement, as approved by the Planning
Commission.
   B.   Lot area: No minimum requirement, as approved by the Planning
Commission. (Ord. 11-04, 3-8-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-8: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
No minimum requirements, except no commercial or industrial building or
structure shall be located closer than twenty feet (20') to any street or the
average of existing buildings where at least fifty percent (50%) of the
frontage is developed. (Ord. 11-04, 3-8-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-9: HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Slope Distance: No development is allowed on or within fifty feet (50')
(map distance) of very steep slopes, areas subject to landsliding, and other
high hazard geologic areas. As used herein, an area of very steep slopes must
cover a topographic area at least twenty five feet (25') vertically (upslope or
downslope) and fifty feet (50') horizontally in any direction to be subject to
this prohibition.
   B.   Visually Sensitive Areas: Generally, development may not be placed on
any hillside or ridge top in a manner that causes significant portions of a
structure to extend into the skyline as viewed from public roadways when the
roadway is located below the ground elevation of the structure. Visually
sensitive areas shall be determined at the time of a development application.
   C.   Hillside Development: Development shall minimize the highly visible
placement of homes and other structures on hillsides. Whenever possible,
development shall be sensitively sited in order to encourage effective open
space and the conservation of the natural appearance and aesthetic beauty of
the mountains. When hillside development is permitted, it shall be integrated
into the site, using topography, vegetation and other reasonable techniques, in
a manner that causes it to blend into the hillside. Development near the toe of
the hill, including the transitional area between the hillside and flat meadow
areas, is appropriate. (Ord. 11-04, 3-8-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-10: BUILDING COVERAGE REGULATIONS:
No building, structure or group of buildings, including accessory buildings,
shall cover more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of the lot. (Ord. 11-04,
3-8-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-11: OFF STREET PARKING:
Provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full force
and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use. (Ord.
11-04, 3-8-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-12: PERMITTED SIGNS AND LIGHTING:
Class 4 signs shall be permitted. (Ord. 11-04, 3-8-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-
25-2021)
10-5O-13: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards are intended to ensure that all uses within
the B-C Zone will provide the necessary control methods to protect the City
from hazards and nuisances:
   A.   General: No land or building devoted to uses authorized in this article
shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable hazards, noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare or
other disturbance. The determination of the existence of these elements shall
be made at the lot line in the case of elements that are objectionable only if
they travel off the site.
   B.   Sound Emission: No use shall emit or cause the emission of sound from a
stationary source such that the one hour equivalent sound level (Leq) caused by
ground transportation as estimated for that point of measurement and at that
time of day, pursuant to FHWA-RD-77-108 highway traffic noise prediction model,
or by other techniques at least as accurate. The sound level measuring
instrumentation shall conform with ANSI Sl.4-1971 type 1, and the measurement
procedure shall be compatible with that, according to ANSI Sl.13-1971.
   C.   Odorous Gases: No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter
shall be permitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the
property line.
   D.   Hillside Impacts: No land use or building devoted to uses in this
article shall be positioned in any manner as to create an unsafe or unstable
hillside environment. Uses shall be pulled back from the top of the hillside in
a manner to limit visual impacts along the top of the bluff.
   E.   Design Guidelines: Commercial development shall be consistent with
South Weber City Business Commerce Zone design guidelines. (Ord. 11-04, 3-8-
2011; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5O-14: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section A.
   B.   On-street parking shall not be permitted. (Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE P. RESIDENTIAL PATIO (R-P)
SECTION:
10-5P-1: Purpose
10-5P-2: Permitted Uses
10-5P-3: Conditional Uses
10-5P-4: Building Lot Requirements
10-5P-5: Location Of Structures
10-5P-6: Maximum Structure Height
10-5P-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-5P-8: Permitted Signs
10-5P-9: Special Conditions
10-5P-10: Landscaping Requirements
10-5P-11: Private Rights-Of-Way
10-5P-1: PURPOSE:
To provide for areas in appropriate locations where residential neighborhoods
of moderately high density may be established, maintained and protected. The
regulations of this zone are designed to promote an intensively developed
residential environment in a one building per lot design suitable primarily for
adult living. (Ord. 14-02, 8-12-2014; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5P-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (Ord. 17-16, 11-21-2017; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5P-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 17-16, 11-21-2017; amd. Ord. 2021-
06, 5-25-2021)
10-5P-4: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Density: There shall be no more than 4.0 dwelling units per acre
contained within the boundaries of each phase of every development; except when
previously completed phases of the same development have sufficiently low
density so that the average is still no more than 4.0 dwelling units per acre.
      1.   Areas within a given development that contain land use easements
purchased by the State of Utah for the purpose of protecting the health and
safety of the citizens of Utah and assuring the continued operation of Hill Air
Force Base as an active military base, shall not be utilized in density
calculations.
   B.   Lot Area: There shall be a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet
in each lot on which a single-family dwelling is located. Single-family
dwellings shall each be located on a separate lot.
   C.   Lot Width: Each lot shall have a minimum width of sixty five feet
(65'). (Ord. 17-16, 11-21-2017; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021; Ord. 2022-07, 4-
12-2022)
10-5P-5: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
All buildings and structures shall be locate as provided in chapter 11 of this
title and as follows:
 
Structures            Front Setback          Side Setback          Rear Setback
                                             6 feet minimum for
Dwellings             20 feet from all front each side, except 20  10 feet
                      lines                  feet minimum for side
                                             fronting on a street
Other main buildings  30 feet from all front 20 feet minimum for   30 feet
                      lot lines              each side
                                             Same as for dwellings, except when
                                             the structure is at least 10 feet
                                             behind the main building or 10
                                             feet behind a line extending from
                                             the rear corners of the main
                                             building to the side lot lines
                                             parallel to the rear lot line(s);
Detached accessory    20 feet from all front the side and rear setbacks may be
buildings and garages lot lines              reduced to 1 foot; provided, that
                                             the structure must be at least 20
                                             feet from main buildings on
                                             adjacent lots; and on corner lots
                                             the minimum setback for a side
                                             facing a street is 20 feet and
                                             minimum rear setback adjacent to a
                                             side lot line is 10 feet
 
(Ord. 14-02, 8-12-2014; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5P-6: MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
Main, accessory and temporary buildings and structures are not to exceed twenty
five feet (25'). (Ord. 17-16, 11-21-2017; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5P-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
The provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full
force and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use.
(Ord. 17-16, 11-21-2017; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5P-8: PERMITTED SIGNS:
Class 1 signs shall be permitted. For home occupations, Class 2 signs will be
allowed in addition to Class 1 signs. For public and institutional uses as
allowed by conditional use permit, Class 3 signs will be allowed in addition to
Class 1 signs. (Ord. 14-02, 8-12-2014; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-2021)
10-5P-9: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
Due to the higher residential densities permitted by this article, the
following conditions are required in order to assure a quality livable
environment:
   A.   Minimum And Maximum Area: The minimum area that may be zoned R-P shall
be two (2) acres and the maximum area which may be zoned R-P in any zone
district shall be ten (10) acres. (Ord. 17-16, 11-21-2017; amd. Ord. 2021-06,
5-25-2021)
10-5P-10: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Landscaping: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the total site
shall be thoroughly landscaped, including an irrigation system to maintain such
landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of chapter 15 of this
title. For use of exceptional design and materials, as determined by the
Planning Commission, the landscaping may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the
total site.
   B.   Screening Fence: A fence of at least six feet (6') in height and that
provides a visual screen shall be provided between the R-P Zone and all lower
density residential zones. (Ord. 17-16, 11-21-2017; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 5-25-
2021)
10-5P-11: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section A.
(Ord. 2021-14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE Q. RESIDENTIAL MULTIFAMILY ZONE (R-5)
SECTION:
10-5Q-1: Purpose
10-5Q-2: Architectural Site Plan Review
10-5Q-3: Permitted Uses
10-5Q-4: Conditional Uses
10-5Q-5: Building Lot Requirements
10-5Q-6: Location Of Structures
10-5Q-7: Maximum Structure Height
10-5Q-8: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-5Q-9: Permitted Signs
10-5Q-10: Special Conditions
10-5Q-11: Landscaping Requirements
10-5Q-12: Private Rights-Of-Ways
10-5Q-13: Appendices
10-5Q-1: PURPOSE:
To provide for areas in appropriate locations where neighborhoods of varying
degrees of density may be established, maintained, and protected. The
regulations of this zone are designed to promote an intensively developed
residential environment suitable primarily for adult living. With proper
controls that ensure the integrity of the zone, alternate forms of residential
living ranging from single- family to twelve family dwellings and necessary
public services. (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-2: ARCHITECTURAL SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All dwellings which are designed to be occupied by three (3) or more families
shall receive architectural site plan approval according to the requirements of
chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-3: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this title
and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10 of
this title. (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 10A of this
title and shall have meanings as defined in accordance with Chapter 1, Section
10 of this title. Conditions for approval shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-5: BUILDING LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Density: There shall be no more than five (5) dwelling units per acre
contained within the boundaries of each phase of every development; except when
previously completed phases of the same development have sufficiently low
density so that the average is still five (5) dwelling units per acre or less.
      1.   Areas within a given development that contain land use easements
purchased by the State of Utah for the purpose of protecting the health and
safety of the citizens of Utah and assuring the continued operation of Hill Air
Force Base as an active military base, shall not be utilized in density
calculations.
   B.   Lot Area:
      1.   There shall be a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet in each
lot on which a single-family dwelling is built.
      2.   There is no minimum lot area for other dwelling types, but the
density requirement listed above must be adhered to in all cases.
   C.   Lot Width:
      1.   There shall be a minimum width of sixty-five (65) feet in each lot
on which a single-family dwelling is built.
      2.   There shall be a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet in each lot
on which a townhouse is built.
      3.   Minimum lot widths for all other dwelling types shall be recommended
by the planning commission and approved by the City Council.
   D.   Zero Lot Line:
      1.   To facilitate separate ownership or leasehold of two-family, twin
home, or multifamily dwellings a residential zero lot line setback is permitted
upon recommendation of the planning commission and approval by the City
Council.
      2.   In no case shall a zero-lot line setback be allowed adjacent to a
property line that is not part of the subdivision. (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-6: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
Shared Common Space: Subdivisions with shared common space under single
ownership with multifamily, townhouse, or two-family structures shall orient
main structure setbacks in relation to the street right-of way and other main
structures on the shared property.
All buildings and structures shall be located as provided in chapter 11 of this
title and as follows:
 
Structures            Front Setback    Side Setback           Rear Setback
                                       6 feet minimum for
Dwelling, Single-     20 feet          each side, except 12   10 feet
Family                                 feet minimum for side
                                       fronting on a street
Dwelling, Two-Family,                  12 feet minimum for
Twin Home, Townhouse,                  each side that is an
Multifamily (See      25 feet          exterior side wall and 15 feet
Appendix A of this                     20 feet minimum for
chapter)                               side fronting on a
                                       street.
Other main buildings  30 feet from all 20 feet minimum for    30 feet
                      front lot lines  each side
 
 
Structures            Front Setback              Side Setback
                                                 Same as for dwellings,
                                                 except when the structure is
                                                 at least 10 feet behind the
                                                 main building or 10 feet
                                                 behind a line extending from
                                                 the rear corners of the main
                                                 building to the side lot
                                                 lines parallel to the rear
                                                 lot line(s); the side and
Detached accessory    30 feet from all front lot rear setbacks may be reduced
buildings and garages lines                      to 1 foot; provided, that
                                                 the structure must be at
                                                 least 20 feet from main
                                                 buildings on adjacent lots;
                                                 and on corner lots the
                                                 minimum setback for a side
                                                 facing a street is 20 feet
                                                 and minimum rear setback
                                                 adjacent to a side lot line
                                                 is 10 feet
 
(Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-7: MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
Main, accessory, and temporary buildings and structures are not to exceed
thirty-five feet (35'). (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
The provisions of chapter 8 of this title shall apply and shall be in full
force and effect in this zone, except in the case of a bona fide temporary use.
(Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-9: PERMITTED SIGNS:
Class 1 signs shall be permitted. For home occupations, Class 2 signs will be
allowed in addition to Class 1 signs. For public and institutional uses as
allowed by conditional use permit, Class 3 signs will be allowed in addition to
Class 1 signs. (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-10: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
Due to the higher residential densities permitted by this article, the
following conditions are required in order to assure a quality livable
environment:
   A.   Minimum And Maximum Area: The minimum area that may be zoned R-5 shall
be two (2) acres and the maximum area which may be zoned R-5 in any zone
district shall be nine point five (9.5) acres.
   B.   Open Space: Multifamily dwellings shall provide usable functional open
space for outdoor leisure in the following amounts:
      1.   Eight hundred (800) square feet per unit for one- and two- family
dwellings;
      2.   Six hundred (600) square feet per unit for three- and four- family
dwellings; and
      3.   An additional four hundred (400) square feet per dwelling unit for
each additional unit over four (4).
   C.   Outdoor Storage Space: Three-family, four-family, and multi- family
dwellings shall provide enclosed outside storage space of at least thirty (30)
square feet for each dwelling unit.
10-5Q-11: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Landscaping: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the total site
shall be thoroughly landscaped, including an irrigation system to maintain such
landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of chapter 15 of this
title. For use of exceptional design and materials, as determined by the
Planning Commission, the landscaping may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the
total site.
   B.   Fencing: A six-foot (6') tall solid screening fence shall be required
between the Residential Multifamily (R-5) Zone and all lower density
residential zones. (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-12: PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Private rights-of-way shall be permitted in compliance with
11-4-4 and Public Works Standard Drawings - Private Roadway Street Section A.
   B.   Sidewalk or pedestrian path must be made available on the front façade
of residence and connect to a public right-of-way without having to cross a
road.
      1.   The private rights-of-way must be expanded to include sidewalks,
where required.
   C.   The following utilities (where required) shall be located under the
pavement portion of the private road: culinary water, sewer, storm drain, land
drain, and irrigation.
      1.   The private rights-of-way must be expanded to include all utilities
with the required spacing. (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-5Q-13 APPENDICES:
Appendix A: Dwelling, Two-Family, Twin Home, Townhouse, Multifamily.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f16a5ed618c4ec2c872b44142ab358bc7c7f25cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1969.png]
 
(Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
CHAPTER 6
NATURAL RESOURCE EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose And Intent
10-6-2: Definitions
10-6-3: Application To Existing Operations
10-6-4: Permit Required
10-6-5: Application Procedures
10-6-6: Planning Commission Review
10-6-7: Provision Of Surety
10-6-8: Special Regulations
10-6-9: Annual Progress Report
10-6-10: Reclamation
10-6-11: Transfer To Successor Operator
10-6-12: Revocation Or Modification Of Permit
10-6-13: Appeals To City Council
10-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Extraction Essential: The extraction of minerals is essential to the
continued economic well-being of the City and to the needs of society.
   B.   Minerals Required: It is necessary to alter the surface of the earth to
extract minerals required by our society. This should be done in such a way as
to minimize undesirable effects on the surroundings.
   C.   Reclamation: Mined land should be reclaimed so as to prevent conditions
detrimental to the general safety and welfare of all citizens of the City and
to provide for the subsequent use of the lands affected. Reclamation
requirements must be adapted to the diversity of the topographic, chemical,
climatic, biologic, geologic, economic and social conditions of the area where
the mining takes place. (1989 Code § 12-12-001)
10-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
   EXCAVATION: The removal of sand and gravel, clay, soil, granite, flagstone,
slate or shale by excavating, stripping, leveling or other process, together
with all other types of mining operations where material is removed from the
earth. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the removal of sod or
topsoil, provided the operation be not closer than ten feet (10') to any
property line or to a depth in excess of eighteen inches (18") or so to
adversely affect the drainage, stability or vegetation for the area; and to
provide further, that this Chapter shall not apply to ditching and land
leveling for agricultural or recreational uses, or for site preparations for
building a structure. Land leveling for these purposes may include the removal
of mineral resources. Excavations for these purposes may include the removal of
mineral resources. Excavations for these purposes, which exceed two hundred
(200) cubic yards per acre contained in the site or a proportionally equivalent
amount for fractional acreage, shall be considered a conditional use.
   LAND AFFECTED: The surface and subsurface of an area within the incorporated
areas of the City where mining operations are being or will be conducted,
including, but not limited to, on- site private ways, roads, the excavation
site itself, exploration sites, drill sites or working, parking, storage areas;
areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools or other
materials or property which result from or are used in such operation, are
situated.
   MINING OPERATIONS: Those activities conducted on the surface of the land for
the exploration for development of or the extraction of mineral deposits from
its natural occurrences, including surface mining and surface effects of
underground mining, including on site transportation or other primary
processing.
   NATURAL RESOURCES PERMIT: The acceptance of the premining inventory/
analysis, the operations plan and the final reclamation plan as evidenced by
the properly endorsed and designated signature blocks, shall constitute the
issuance of a natural resources permit.
   OFF SITE: The land areas that are outside or beyond the on site land which
is owned or controlled by the operator.
ON SITE: The surface land area within which mining operations are or will be
conducted, which is bounded by continuous property lines dividing the surface
of land ownership, control or right that is invested in the operator. A series
of related properties under the control of a single operator but separated by
small parcels of land controlled by others will be considered a single site
unless excepted by the planning commission.
   OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, receiver,
trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, fiduciary, agent or other
organization or representative of any kind either public or private, owning,
controlling or managing mining operations or proposed mining operations,
including exploring for or developing of a mineral deposit.
   OWNER: Any person, corporation, association, partnership or other legally
deeded organization or representative of any kind, either public or private,
owning, controlling or managing a mineral deposit or the surface of lands
employed in mining operations.
   PUBLIC ROAD: Any road, street, alley, lane, court, place, viaduct, tunnel,
culvert or bridge laid out or erected as such by the public, or dedicated or
abandoned to the public, or made such in an action for the partition of real
property and includes the entire area within the right of way.
   RECLAMATION: Actions performed during and after mining operations to shape,
stabilize, revegetate or otherwise treat the land affected in order to achieve
a safe, stable, ecological condition. The mined lands will be reclaimed to a
usable condition which is readily adaptable to alternate land uses and creates
no danger to public safety. These rehabilitated or reclaimed conditions will be
consistent with the city land use plan in the immediate area. The reclamation
process may extend to affected lands surrounding the mined lands and may
require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction,
stabilization and other measures. (1989 Code § 12-12-003)
10-6-3: APPLICATION TO EXISTING OPERATIONS:
Within one year after the adoption hereof, existing mining operations shall
comply with the provisions set forth herein. (1989 Code § 12-12-014)
10-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
None of the special uses specified or implied authorizing the excavation of
natural materials within the natural resource zone of this land use title shall
be permitted on any property in the city unless authorized under the natural
resources permit issued to the owner and operator of the property by the
planning commission and approved by the city council in accordance with the
application procedures hereinafter set forth. In addition to delineating the
area to which it is applicable, the natural resources permit shall also make
explicit reference to the permitted and special uses authorized and shall
include, where applicable, specific requirements for premining inventory/
analysis and operation plan, plus a final reclamation plan, which includes
plans for simultaneous phasing of excavation and reclamation of the excavated
site. Five (5) copies of the required plans shall be presented to the planning
office for review and distribution. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006)
10-6-5: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
Application for a natural resources permit shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission on forms provided for that purpose.
   A.   General Information: The following information shall be provided: the
name of the mineral property, property owners, lessee, operators, agent of
process, location of mineral property and legal description.
   B.   Pre-Mining Inventory And Analysis: A pre-mining inventory and analysis
both off-site and on-site shall be performed by the applicant, containing the
following information:
      1.   A regional vicinity analysis describing other land uses surrounding
the site, the possible impacts of the proposed excavation on surrounding land
and the methods to be employed to mitigate any potentially negative effects.
      2.   A description of the regional haulage routes to be employed on
public and private roads.
   C.   Pre-Site Inventory And Analysis: The applicant shall conduct a pre-site
inventory and analysis to include:
      1.   A topographic map of the area (at a scale of 1 inch equals 200 feet)
to a maximum contour interval of five feet (5').
      2.   A description of the visual characteristics, with particular concern
given to the use of natural topography and vegetation to shield site operations
from nearby properties, roadways and the general public.
      3.   A soils survey, to include a soils profile.
   D.   Mining Operations Plan: The applicant shall provide a mining operations
plan which describes the following:
      1.   Proposed starting date and the anticipated period of operation.
      2.   Develop an operations development plan on a topographic map (to a
scale of 1 inch equals 200 feet) of the area at least five hundred feet (500')
beyond the proposed excavation, showing the operations listed in the following
subsections D2a through D2g of this Section:
         a.   Stockpiles, milling and processing system.
         b.   Type and kinds of machinery and equipment, waste disposal
systems.
         c.   The water to be used, method of control and disposal systems.
         d.   Wind and air movement patterns with a description of techniques
used to control dust and noise.
         e.   Transportation routes used in the site schedule of proposed
operations and plan showing location of buildings, storage areas, equipment.
         f.   The possible effects of the operation on surrounding environment
and the specific steps taken to mitigate them.
         g.   Any economic effects on the surrounding area and the steps taken
to mitigate them.
   E.   Reclamation Plan: The applicant shall provide a reclamation plan with
the use of maps, imagery and renderings (at a scale of 1 inch equals 200 feet)
extending five hundred feet (500') beyond the legal description of the site
area with a maximum contour interval of five feet (5'), which includes at least
the following:
      1.   A grading plan drawn and certified by a licensed professional
engineer or land surveyor indicating the areas excavated and the proposed
finished grades;
      2.   A description of the methods and plans to be employed for
simultaneous reclamation of the site during and after the mining operations;
      3.   A description of the landscape plan, to include the installation of
topsoil, planting schedule, specifications for plant applications, mulching and
type of irrigation to be used;
      4.   A description of the hydrologic environment of the reclaimed site,
to include a map illustrating the water drainage areas such as lakes, springs,
ponds, streams, wells, pipelines, culverts, ditches, canals;
      5.   A description of all permanent roads and other manmade structures
which are to remain after reclamation;
      6.   Cross sections shall be taken in the excavation site in areas of
greatest material displacement. The number of cross sections required shall be
dependent on the size and topography of the excavation site.
   F.   Authorization Of Permit: All operation and reclamation maps and plans
shall include signature blocks for the owners, City Engineer, Planning
Commission and City Council. Upon obtaining signatures of the above
individuals, a permit shall be authorized. (1989 Code § 12-12-005)
10-6-6: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
   A.   Pre-Application Meeting: The excavator or owner or their representative
shall meet with City staff personnel to review the proposed pre-application
plans for the excavation site. The pre-application plans shall be submitted in
five (5) copies and will consist of the information requested in subsections
10-6-5A and
10-6-5B of this Chapter, plus the following:
      1.   A sketch of the existing site contours, drainage and unusual
geologic conditions;
      2.   Anticipated amount of material to be removed;
      3.   Type and kinds of machinery and equipment to be employed;
      4.   Water to be used in the operation, source and disposal;
      5.   Sketch of the site contours after excavation is complete to include
location of natural drainage channels, vegetation and roadways. (1989 Code §
12-12-006)
   B.   Review Of Pre-Application:
      1.   Within a period of not more than seven (7) days following receipt of
the application, the Planning Commission shall distribute copies of the pre-
application and accompanying plans and statements to other interested County,
City and State agencies as determined by the Planning Commission and shall ask
for comments and recommendations. When the site for which application is being
made adjoins property that is not in a Natural Resource Zone or when the
proposed excavation poses significant impact because of its size or location,
the Planning Commission may call for a public hearing through proper notice as
prescribed by law. (1989 Code § 12-12-006; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   Within forty five (45) days of receipt by the Planning Commission,
the pre-application shall be formally considered through a regularly scheduled
or specially scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission with the excavator or
owner. Following consideration of the excavation proposal, the Planning
Commission shall notify the operator or owner of their findings as to
disapproval or approval with certain conditions.
   C.   Review Of Final Plans: If the pre-application is approved, the
excavator or owner shall then provide the information required by the forms
provided by the Planning Commission and also submit maps, drawings and plans
required by this Chapter in five (5) copies. Within fourteen (14) days
following receipt of the final application, the Planning Commission shall
distribute copies of the final application and accompanying plans and
statements to other interested County, City and State agencies as determined by
the Planning Commission and shall ask for comments and recommendations.
   D.   Public Hearing: Within a period of not more than forty five (45) days
of receipt of the final application, the Planning Commission shall call for a
public hearing through proper notice as prescribed by law to consider said
final application. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
review the application and shall make written recommendations to the City
Council who shall have final approval or disapproval of the application. (1989
Code § 12-12-006)
10-6-7: PROVISION OF SURETY:
   A.   Required Before Operations Begin: After receiving notification that the
application for natural resource permit has been approved, but prior to
commencement of such operation, the operator shall provide surety to the City,
in a form and amount to be determined by the City Engineer in consultation with
the City Council and reviewed by the Planning Commission.
   B.   Amount: In determining the amount of surety to be provided, the City
Engineer shall consider factual information as to the magnitude, type and costs
of approved reclamation activities planned for the land affected and the
nature, extent and duration of operations under the approved notice. The City
Engineer shall fix the amount of the bond reasonably related thereto, to
protect the City and ensure compliance with the requirements with the
excavation permit; however, the amount of the bond shall not exceed one hundred
percent (100%) of the estimated cost of rehabilitating the excavation. The bond
shall be periodically reviewed to ensure that the amount of the bond is capable
of insuring adequate reclamation.
   C.   Form: In determining the form of surety to be provided by the owner,
the City Engineer shall approve a method acceptable to the owner and consistent
with the requirements of this chapter, which may be one or a combination of
corporate surety bond, land, cash or other deposited securities.
   D.   Release: The liability under surety provisions shall continue until
such time as released as to part or in its entirety, by the City Council.
   E.   Forfeiture: If the operator fails or refuses to carry out the necessary
land reclamation as outlined in the approved operation and reclamation plans,
the City may, after notice and hearing, declare any surety filed for this
purpose forfeited, or in case of a corporate bond, file suit against the owner
and his bonding company. The City shall also have the right to file suit
against the defaulting permittee for costs of rehabilitation and reasonable
attorney fees. (1989 Code § 12-12-013)
10-6-8: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Buffer Distances:
      1.   All extractive operations, roads, machinery, equipment and
stockpiles, excluding topsoil used for reclamation and screening and rock
crushing, shall be kept at least one hundred feet (100') horizontal distance
from any other property owner, except as may be reduced by the Planning
Commission for due cause, but in no event should the operation be closer than
forty five feet (45') to the property line.
      2.   All rock crushing operations shall be conducted at least four
hundred feet (400') horizontal distance from any other property owner, except
as may be reduced by the Planning Commission for due cause, but in no event
shall the operation be closer than fifty feet (50') to the property.
      3.   All excavations shall be kept at least one hundred feet (100') from
a public road, except where the Planning Commission determines the excavations
may be moved closer if it will not endanger the users of the road.
   B.   Fencing: Areas of excavation with serious or hazardous conditions shall
be reasonably fenced, except where in the determination of the Planning
Commission other suitable devices may be used.
   C.   Grading: All grading, including specifications for slope stabilization,
shall be done in accordance with the latest reclamation plans, with the
concurrence of the City Engineer.
   D.   Air And Water Quality: All air and water quality related plans and
actions shall be monitored and approved by the Davis County Environmental
Health Division.
   E.   Hours Of Operation: Crushing, screening and hauling, except for the
maintenance and repair of vehicles and equipment, shall be confined to the
hours between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday
through Friday, and Saturday from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M., except for operations required to remain open for public emergency
demands as determined by the City Council. Extended hours may be authorized at
the discretion of the City Council. Such extension shall be accomplished
through an operational agreement.
   F.   Landscaping: Properties containing uses for which a natural resource
excavation permit is required shall be landscaped for purposes of screening
such uses from public streets and abutting properties not in a natural resource
zone. Vegetative materials shall be planted, together with necessary topsoil as
required in chapter 15 of this title.
   G.   Noise And Vibration: All equipment on site and off site utilized in the
extraction and processing of native natural resources shall be operated and
maintained so as to minimize the emanation of noise and vibration from the
premises. Soil berming, landscaping and other techniques should be used to
accomplish the objective of reducing the impact of noise and vibration on
adjacent property.
   H.   Roads: All permanent haul roads within five hundred feet (500') of
public streets or land not in a natural resource zone shall be regularly
surfaced with asphalt or oil, and all roadways shall be regularly watered,
swept or surfaced with a dust palliative.
   I.   Monuments: Monuments or other means of identification shall be placed
and maintained around the perimeter of the excavation site so as to enable
reasonable identification of the property line separating the excavation
property from adjoining landowners.
   J.   Park Strip Landscaping: Park strip landscaping shall meet the
requirements of chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 19-08, 3-12-2019)
10-6-9: ANNUAL PROGRESS REPORT:
At the end of each calendar year, unless waived by the Planning Commission for
due cause, each operator conducting mining operations shall file an operations
and progress report with the Planning Commission. Part of this progress report
may be submitted on United States Department of Interior, Bureau of Mines form
OMB no. 42-RO264. The remainder of this report will summarize activities in
fulfillment of the requirements of simultaneous excavation and reclamation in
confirmation with the reclamation plan previously submitted. (1989 Code § 12-
12-010)
10-6-10: RECLAMATION:
   A.   Objectives: The objectives of excavation reclamation shall be:
      1.   To return the land, concurrently with the mining operation or within
a reasonable amount of time thereafter, to a predetermined condition defined by
the reclamation plan as submitted and approved, compatible with past, present
or probable future local land uses.
      2.   To minimize or prevent present and future on-site or off- site
environmental degradations to the ecologic and hydrologic regimes caused by
mining operations and to meet other pertinent State and Federal regulations
regarding air and water quality standards and health and safety criteria.
      3.   To minimize or prevent present and future hazards to public safety
and welfare.
   B.   Simultaneous Excavation And Reclamation:
      1.   The reclamation or rehabilitation of natural resource sites with a
projected life of more than one year shall be carried out simultaneously with
the excavation of the resource. A few objectives of simultaneous excavation and
reclamation are to prevent shallow, stagnant, small bodies of water, small
unusable remnants of land and eroding, barren slopes all normally associated
with open pit operations, except as providing stormwater detention facilities
as described in a hydrologic report.
      2.   Excavations shall be planned so as to progressively develop the
proposed final land forms by grading and by stockpiling overburdened materials
in areas designated for future landforms or in excavations where the material
will be spread over the pit floor where no future excavation is anticipated.
Such areas are to be seeded and planted immediately after grading is completed
or within appropriate planting seasons, but in any case, the grading and
planting shall be completed within one year. The reclamation plan shall contain
a description of the phased rehabilitation process throughout the anticipated
life of the mine.
   C.   Final Reclamation: Final reclamation shall begin immediately for any
site where operations authorized under a natural resources permit have been
abandoned for a period of at least one year, or otherwise terminated. The final
reclamation shall conform to the plan approved (including approved
modifications) in the natural resources permit. All reclamation plans shall
conform at least to the below listed minimum standards and requirements listed
elsewhere in this chapter; provided however, that the Planning Commission may
require more stringent standards where special hazards exist in order to
protect the health, safety or general welfare of the public and to prevent
injury to property or improvements.
      1.   Grading: Slopes, overburdened stockpiles and abandoned soil piles
shall be graded and smoothed so as to control erosion and prevent the creation
of potentially dangerous areas in accordance with the direction of the City
Engineer.
      2.   Water-Filled Areas: All excavations which create standing water or
ponds shall be refilled with inert materials. This requirement shall not apply,
however, to any water-filled excavations scheduled to become an integral part
of the final reclamation plan. The rehabilitation of these areas shall be done
in such a manner that the ground water is not polluted as determined through
consultation with the Davis County Health Department. Fill material shall be
porous to allow for water dispersion unless otherwise specified in the
reclamation plan.
      3.   Landscaping: Unless inconsistent with the final proposed use of the
reclaimed land, the excavated areas and all other disturbed areas shall be
replanted and maintained with trees, shrubs, grasses or other vegetative ground
cover, preferably native to the area, in order to minimize erosion and to
restore the land to a natural appearance, or to an appearance previously
approved by the Planning Commission.
      4.   Removal Of Buildings And Equipment: As soon as excavation and/or
manufacturing has been permanently terminated, all buildings and equipment
(including electrical conduit) used in the administration of the operations,
shall be removed, unless deemed necessary to the approved final use of the
reclaimed site.
      5.   Excavation Closer To Property Lines: In the final year of
excavation, the mining operation may as part of the reclamation project,
excavate closer than forty feet (40') to any property lines, but only upon a
showing of compelling mutual good and the approval of the Planning Commission
and City Council.
   D.   Reclamation Verification: At the conclusion of mining operation and
reclamation of the excavation site, the building and zoning inspector and City
Engineer shall present to the Planning Commission a statement verifying the
permit area has been reclaimed in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and reclamation plans previously submitted in compliance with this
chapter. The Planning Commission shall certify to the City Council that all
requirements of this chapter have been met. (1989 Code § 12-12-012)
10-6-11: TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR OPERATOR:
Whenever an operator succeeds to the interest of another operator by sale,
assignment, lease or other means, the Planning Commission may release the first
operator from his responsibilities under his approved plans as described in
section
10-6-5 of this chapter, including surety, provided the successor assumes all of
the responsibilities of the former operator to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission under the approved operations and reclamation plans and the positing
of surety. Upon satisfactory assumption of such responsibilities by the
successor operator, under conditions approved by the Planning Commission, the
responsibility of the total excavation site shall be transferred to the
successor operator. (1989 Code § 12-12-008)
10-6-12: REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF PERMIT:
Any natural resources excavation permit issued shall be subject to revocation
or modification by the Planning Commission, for cause, and in the following
manner:
   A.   Notice Of Failure To Comply: A notice shall be served on the owner or
the permittee by the building and zoning inspector or his representative
specifying the failure to comply with the requirements of the natural resource
zone or with any of the conditions set forth in the natural resources permit or
this chapter, requiring him to appear before the Planning Commission at a
designated date and hour to show cause why said permit should not be revoked or
modified. (1989 Code § 12-12-007)
   B.   Hearing: Upon the date set for hearing, the Planning Commission shall
hear all charges and other testimony relating to the matter under
consideration. The Planning Commission shall then decide to either continue,
revoke, modify or refer to the City Attorney for further action. (1989 Code §
12-12-007; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Modification Of Permit Plans: Modification of the natural resources
permit plans may be initiated either by the Planning Commission or by the
permittee where it is merely sought to effect minor revisions on the approved
grading plan, schedule of proposed operation, proposed reuse plan or landscape
plan. Consideration of such revisions need not require a public hearing;
provided, that in the judgment of the Planning Commission the proposed
revisions would not constitute significant changes; and providing also, that
the permittee has not expressly requested that a public hearing be held. (1989
Code § 12-12-007)
10-6-13: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
Appeals from any decision of the Planning Commission with respect to a natural
resources excavation permit may be directed to the City Council within thirty
(30) days and in the manner prescribed for in this title. Upon the hearing of
such appeal, the City Council may, by motion, affirm, reverse, or modify in
whole or in part, any determination of the Planning Commission. (1989 Code §
12-12-009)
CHAPTER 7
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
10-7-1: Purpose
10-7-2: Authority
10-7-3: Initiation
10-7-4: Standards
10-7-5: Application Requirements
10-7-6: Conditional Use Application Requirements
10-7-7: Approval Standards For A Conditional Use Application
10-7-8: Reasonable Conditions For A Conditional Use Authorized
10-7-9: Required Findings For Approval Or Denial Of A Conditional Use
Application
10-7-10: Effect Of Approval Of A Conditional Use Application
10-7-11: Appeals
10-7-12: Revocation Or Modification Of A Conditional Use Approval
10-7-13: Conditional Use Approval Amendment
10-7-14: Expiration Of A Conditional Use Approval
10-7-15: Decision Document
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of a conditional use application is to request land uses that,
because of the unique characteristics or potential impact of the land use on
the City, surrounding neighbors, or adjacent land uses, may not be compatible
in some areas or may be compatible only if certain conditions are required that
mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts. This chapter identifies and
provides the procedures for the review, approval, and appeal of conditional use
applications.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-2: AUTHORITY:
With the exception of applications to allow a short-term rental, the Planning
Commission is hereby authorized to review and to render a decision for all
conditional use applications in residential zones. The Planning Commission
shall review and make a recommendation to the City Council on all conditional
use applications in non-residential zones and for short-term rentals. The City
Council is hereby authorized to make the final review and to render a decision
for all conditional use applications in non-residential zones and for short-
term rentals, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-3: INITIATION:
All requests to establish a conditional use, as identified in the Land Use
Matrix, shall be made on an application form provided by the city. A property
owner or an agent of the property owner may present a conditional use
application for review and decision. A lessee of the property owner may present
a conditional use application for review and decision only if such application
is accompanied by a property owner affidavit of authorization.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-4: STANDARDS:
The Planning Commission or City Council shall approve an application for a
conditional use if the proposed use complies with the requirements of the
underlying zone(s) and reasonable conditions are proposed, or can be imposed,
to mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the proposed use
in accordance with the following standards and conditions:
   A.   Compatibility with or impact to neighboring properties:
      1.   Location Within Zone: The placement of conditional uses only in
specific areas of a zoning district (i.e., along an arterial or collector
street).
      2.   Site Configuration: Size, configuration, and location of the site,
and proposed site plan layout.
      3.   Screening: The screening of yards or other areas as protection from
certain land uses and activities.
      4.   Height: Limitations or controls on the location, height, and
materials of walls, fences, hedges, and screen plantings to ensure harmony with
adjacent development, or to conceal storage areas, utility installations, or
other unsightly development.
      5.   Setbacks: The relocation of proposed or existing structures as
necessary to provide for street widening or street placement within the area
under application, as provided in the General Plan, adequate sight distances
for general safety, groundwater control, or similar issues.
      6.   Density/Intensity/Livability: Modification to allowed population
density and intensity of land use and activities where land capability and/or
vicinity relationships make it appropriate to do so to protect health, safety,
and welfare; and
      The provision of useable open space, public features, and recreational
amenities to serve the uses and activities on the site.
   B.   Safety Of Persons And Property:
      1.   Flooding: Building elevation and grading plans which will prevent or
minimize flood water damage, where property may be subject to flooding.
      2.   Attractive Nuisances: The relocation, covering, or fencing of
irrigation ditches, drainage channels, and other potential attractive nuisances
existing on or adjacent to the property.
      3.   Setbacks: Increased setback distances from lot lines where it is
determined to be necessary to ensure public safety and to ensure compatibility
with the intended characteristics of the zoning district, or where the lot
abuts an arterial or collector street.
      4.   Fault Lines: Appropriate design, construction, and location of
structures, buildings, and facilities in relation to an earthquake fault which
may exist on the property, and limitations and/or restrictions to use and/or
location of use due to special site conditions, including but not limited to,
geologically hazardous areas, flood plains, fault zones, and landslide areas
other than may be required by the sensitive lands overlay development
regulations.
      5.   Signs And Similar Structures: Limitations and control of the number,
location, color, size, height, lighting, and landscaping of signs and
structures in relation to the creation of traffic hazards.
      6.   Loading Zones: Plans for the location, arrangement, and dimensions
of truck loading and unloading facilities.
      7.   Street Features: Construction of curbs, gutters, drainage culverts,
sidewalks, streets, fire hydrants, and street lighting.
   C.   Health And Sanitation:
      1.   Water: A guarantee of sufficient water to serve the intended land
use and a water-delivery system to meet the needs of the proposed use and
development.
      2.   Wastewater: A wastewater disposal system and a solid waste-disposal
system to meet the needs of the proposed use and development.
      3.   Utilities: Construction of water mains, sewer mains, and drainage
facilities serving the proposed use, in sizes necessary to protect existing
utility users in the zoning district and to provide for an orderly development
of land.
      4.   Trash Collection: Provision of appropriate storage and collection
areas for trash and refuse generated by the use and development.
      5.   Snow Removal: Sufficient space on the property to manage and store
snow during the winter season
   D.   Environment:
      1.   Sensitive Areas: Limitations and/or restrictions on the use and/or
location of uses in sensitive areas due to soils capabilities, wildlife, and
plant life.
      2.   Pollution: Processes/designs for the control, elimination, or
prevention of land, water, or air pollution.
      3.   Erosion: The prevention of soil erosion.
      4.   Odors: The control of objectionable odors.
      5.   Noise: The control of objectionable noise; and
      Fencing, screening and landscape treatments and other features designed
to protect adjoining property owners from noise.
      6.   Dust: The prevention of dust or debris.
      7.   Light: No light pollution.
      8.   Nuisance: Measures directed at minimizing or eliminating potential
nuisance factors including, but not limited to noise, vibrations, smoke, dust,
dirt, odors, gases, noxious matter, heat, glare, electromagnetic disturbances,
and radiation.
      9.   Natural Conditions: Measures designed to protect the natural
features of the site, including wetlands and drainage ways, around water
protection, wildlife habitat, historic and archeological site protection, and
other natural site features.
   E.   Traffic, Circulation, And Parking:
      1.   Traffic: The proposed use and development shall not generate enough
traffic to be detrimental to the immediate neighborhood, overload the carrying
capacity for which local streets were designed, shall not reduce the
performance of existing roads from their current level of service, and shall
provide safe site ingress and egress to existing and proposed roads and
streets.
      2.   Circulation: Internal traffic circulation shall not adversely affect
adjacent residential properties. The site shall provide sufficient circulation
to manage loading and unloading, deliveries, and queueing of vehicles without
such activities leaving the site and impacting adjacent roads.
      3.   Parking: Parking facilities shall not adversely affect neighboring
properties, shall be effectively screened from adjacent residential properties.
The relationship between structures and parking shall be complimentary to the
aesthetics of the general area. The location and amount of off-street parking
and loading areas shall be sufficient to serve the proposed use and
development. There shall be sufficient parking to serve the proposed use and
development and to store snow removed from the parking areas during winter
months.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-5: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Applications for conditional use are required to comply with all requirements
of this chapter and this chapter, and includes the requirements for a building
permit, as applicable, and all other applicable requirements. All conditional
use applications shall be determined complete by the City Manager or designee
before they may be considered by the Planning Commission or City Council.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-6: CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
All conditional use applications shall be submitted to the City Manager or
designee. Applications shall be provided in electronic PDF format and as
directed by the City Manager or designee, shall include any of the following
information:
   A.   A completed application form, as provided by the city.
   B.   Title report and survey of the subject property.
   C.   Proposed plans, including a site plan, elevation drawings and building
renderings which display the following information:
      1.   Property boundaries and the location of all existing and proposed
buildings on the subject property and buildings located within three hundred
feet (300') of the subject property.
      2.   Building setbacks, heights, and lot coverage dimensions to
demonstrate compliance with dimensional standards of the site's zoning
district.
      3.   The location of all fences and walls, identifying proposed height,
materials, and colors shall be shown.
      4.   Landscape plan(s) shall be provided, prepared by a registered
landscape architect, identifying all proposed landscape, screening, and
buffering features, plant materials and sizes.
      5.   Proposed vehicular and bicycle parking, loading, and traffic
circulation plan. This plan must consider snow removal and storage during
winter months.
      6.   The location of all existing and proposed roads and streets serving
the property, and including any permits as required by Davis County or the Utah
Department of Transportation.
      7.   All public and private rights-of-way and easements located on, or
adjacent to the property, proposed to be continued, created, relocated, or
abandoned shall be shown.
      8.   The location and dimension of all existing natural property features
including existing vegetation, wetlands, streams, drainage ways, flood plains,
waterbodies, and wildlife habitat areas.
      9.   Existing topography of the property, including the existing grade,
and identifying the proposed finished grade of the site shown.
      10.   The location and dimension of all trails, sidewalks, and biking
facilities.
      11.   All existing and proposed utilities, including culinary water,
secondary water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, power, gas, telephone lines
and facilities, streets and roads with design plans for any new water, sewer
and storm drainage lines and facilities, as applicable, streets and roads,
meeting the design and construction requirements of the city, or other
agencies, as applicable, and prepared by a licensed engineer, at a scale
acceptable to the City. Access to all utilities and points of utilities
connections shall be shown.
      12.   Building plans and drawings shall be provided, as required, to meet
the adopted building code. The exterior elevations of every side of all
proposed buildings and structures shall be provided, clearly showing proposed
building materials and colors proposed for all exterior building facades.
      13.   Lighting plan showing identifying proposed site and building
lighting, type, design, location, intensity, height, and direction of all site
and building lighting. All lighting shall be dark-sky compliant, utilize a full
cut-off design, and be directed downward and away from any adjacent residential
uses.
      14.   The location of all associated mechanical and ancillary equipment
shall be provided, including any screening treatments proposed. The location
and dimensions of all proposed solid waste collection areas and storage areas,
including the proposed method of screening shall be identified.
      15.   An erosion control plan with Information identifying proposed
temporary and permanent erosion control measures.
      16.   Information shall be provided identifying the phases of
construction, a construction schedule, and a list of all permits necessary for
the proposed use(s).
   D.   A narrative, accompanied by necessary tables and other information,
describing the proposed conditional use application, to assist city staff,
Planning Commission, and City Council in reviewing the conditional use
application identifying the following:
      1.   A calculation, identifying all pervious and impervious areas.
      2.   A description of all proposed uses and buildings, including the
total site area and building square footage, by building.
      3.   Projected increase in traffic trips.
      4.   Projected water and sewer demand.
      5.   How the proposed use and accompanying site and building plans comply
with the general plan.
   E.   Proposed materials board displaying all building, sign and fencing
materials and colors.
   F.   If required by staff, the Planning Commission, the City Council, or the
City Engineer, a traffic impact analysis will be required. At a minimum, unless
additional information is required, a traffic impact analysis shall be prepared
by a licensed engineer and include the following information:
      1.   Projected traffic from the proposed development project,
      2.   The area within the general vicinity of the proposed project as
outlined by the City Engineer,
      3.   Potential traffic to be generated by other undeveloped sites within
the established study boundaries, and
      4.   Recommendations of land use and/or appropriate traffic engineering
modifications to mitigate traffic impacts and maintain an acceptable level of
service.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-7: APPROVAL STANDARDS FOR A CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION:
The City shall review the conditional use application and determine if the
application, from the materials presented by the applicant complies with the
following:
   A.   The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan.
   B.   The proposed use is an allowed conditional use within the zoning
district.
   C.   The proposed conditional use and the accompanying site plan complies
with all requirements of the zoning district, as applicable, including minimum
area, front, rear and side-yard setbacks, building and structure height, and
all other requirements applicable in the zoning district.
   D.   Complies with all site plan requirements.
   E.   Complies with all applicable dedication requirements of the city and
provides the necessary infrastructure, as required.
   F.   The proposed conditional use meets and will be conducted in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, all other applicable land use
ordinances, and all applicable federal, state, or local requirements.
   G.   The property on which the conditional use is proposed is of adequate
size to permit the conduct of the proposed conditional use in a manner that
will not be detrimental to adjoining and surrounding properties.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-8: REASONABLE CONDITIONS FOR A CONDITIONAL USE AUTHORIZED:
The City is authorized to impose such reasonable requirements and conditions
with respect to location, construction, maintenance, operation, site planning,
traffic control, hours of operation, and other items for the Conditional Use
deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public
interest. Among other conditions deemed appropriate by the City, these
conditions may include but shall not be limited to:
   A.   Size, configuration, and location of the site, and proposed site plan
layout.
   B.   Proposed site ingress and egress to existing and proposed roads and
streets.
   C.   The provision of public facilities and amenities, including roads and
streets, culinary water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, public safety and fire
protection, and other utilities.
   D.   The location and amount of off-street parking and loading areas.
   E.   Site circulation pattern for vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   F.   Building size and location, building design and exterior building
features.
   G.   The location and design of all site features, including proposed
signage, lighting, and refuse collection.
   H.   The provision of usable open space, public features, and recreational
amenities.
   I.   Fencing, screening and landscape treatments and other features which
are designed to increase the attractiveness of the site and protect adjoining
property owners from noise and visual impacts.
   J.   Measures directed at minimizing or eliminating potential nuisance
factors including, but not limited to noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt,
odors, gases, noxious matter, heat, glare, electromagnetic disturbances, and
radiation.
   K.   Measures designed to protect the natural features of the site,
including wetlands and drainage ways, around water protection, wildlife
habitat, historic and archeological site protection, and other natural site
features.
   L.   The regulation of operating hours for activities affecting normal
schedules and functions.
   M.   Identifying a time for regular review and monitoring, as determined
necessary, to ensure the Conditional Use continues to operate in compliance
with all conditions and requirements of approval.
   N.   Such other conditions determined reasonable and necessary by the
Planning Commission or City Council to allow the operation of the proposed
conditional use, at the proposed location in compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-9: REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF A CONDITIONAL USE
APPLICATION:
   A.   If the Planning Commission or City Council finds that the Conditional
Use Application complies with all the requirements of this chapter, the adopted
Building Codes, and all other applicable Land Use Ordinances, the Conditional
Use Application shall be approved, with or without reasonable conditions
necessary to comply with this chapter, the adopted Building Codes, and all
other applicable Land Use Ordinances. Following the approval of a Conditional
Use Application, with or without conditions, a Building Permit Application may
be reviewed, and a Building Permit issued if such an application is found to
comply with the Building Code, as adopted.
   B.   If the Planning Commission or City Council finds that the Conditional
Use Application does not comply with all the requirements of this chapter, the
adopted Building Codes, and all other applicable Land Use Ordinances, the
Conditional Use Application shall be denied and no Approval, Permit, or License
issued by the city, including a Building Permit.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-10: EFFECT OF APPROVAL OF A CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION:
Approval of a Conditional Use Application by the Planning Commission or City
Council shall authorize the establishment of the approved use, subject to any
use or site plan reasonable conditions. Approval of a Conditional Use
Application shall not be deemed an Approval of any other Application, Permit,
or License.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-11: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Commission or City Council
regarding a Conditional Use Application may appeal the decision, as provided by
Title 10, Chapter 4 of City Code.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-12: REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF A CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL:
   A.   A Conditional Use approved in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked by the same body that made the approval - the Planning
Commission or City Council - if any of the conditions of approval are not met,
or if the permit is used to violate any law or Ordinance.
   B.   The City Manager or designee shall notify the approved Conditional Use
holder by certified mail of any violation, or if a violation exists in any
conditions of approval. If no attempt to correct the violation is made within
ten (10) days after notification, the Conditional Use approval may be revoked
by the Planning Commission or City Council, if the Planning Commission or City
Council finds that one or more of the following circumstances exists:
      1.   The Conditional Use approval was obtained in a fraudulent manner.
      2.   The use for which the approval was granted has now ceased for at
least six (6) consecutive calendar months.
      3.   One (1) or more of the conditions of approval have not been met.
      4.   Additionally, the Planning Commission or City Council, following a
public hearing, may modify the conditions under which the use approval was
originally approved if the Planning Commission or City Council finds that the
use or related development constitutes or is creating a nuisance.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-13: CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL AMENDMENT:
The procedure for amending any Conditional Use Application approval shall be
the same procedure as required to approve the Conditional Use Application.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-14: EXPIRATION OF A CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL:
A Conditional Use Application approval shall expire and shall be invalid if a
building, activity, construction, or occupancy, as authorized by the approval,
is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
approval. If work has not commenced, or a use established within one-hundred
eighty (180) days from date of approval, the approval shall be void and a new
Conditional Use Application required. Upon receipt of a written request
submitted at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of a conditional use
permit approval and showing good cause for the failure to commence work, the
City Manager may extend the expiration period by up to six (6) months.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
10-7-15: DECISION DOCUMENT:
Every decision document granting a conditional use permit shall include the
following, as applicable:
   A.   Heading: A heading containing:
      1.   The name of the issuing authority;
      2.   The title of the document, clearly indicating that it is a decision
document granting a conditional use permit; and
      3.   The date of issuance.
   B.   Project Details: A concise description of the project or activity for
which the conditional use permit is being granted shall be provided. The
description should encompass the following information:
      1.   Location of the project or property;
      2.   Purpose of the proposed conditional use; and
      3.   The scope and scale of the conditional use.
   C.   Background And Purpose: An explanation of the background and purpose of
the conditional use permit, addressing:
      1.   The legal or regulatory basis for granting the conditional use
permit; and
      2.   The criteria and considerations used to evaluate permit
applications.
   D.   Findings: The decision document shall summarize the findings of the
evaluation process, demonstrating that the proposed use meets the necessary
conditions for approval. The findings shall include:
      1.   Reference to specific criteria or standards outlined in municipal
code; and
      2.   Justification for the approval based on the compliance of the
proposed use with the specified criteria.
   E.   Conditions And Limitations: The conditions and limitations imposed on
the conditional use permit. The conditions and limitations shall be:
      1.   Directly related to mitigating potential impacts or ensuring
compliance with regulations; and
      2.   Reasonable and enforceable.
   F.   Duration And Renewal: The decision document shall specify:
      1.   The duration of the conditional use permit, including the start and
end dates; and
      2.   Any requirements or criteria for permit renewal, if applicable.
   G.   Compliance And Monitoring: An outline of the following:
      1.   Requirements for compliance with the conditions specified in the
permit;
      2.   Monitoring or reporting obligations imposed on the permit holder;
and
      3.   Consequences of non-compliance.
   H.   Signatures And Approvals: Spaces for the signatures of the issuing
authority, relevant officials, or decision-making bodies involved in the permit
approval process.
   I.   Attachments: Relevant supporting documents, maps, plans, or reports
shall be annexed to the decision document.
(Ord. 2023-09, 12-12-2023)
ARTICLE A. IN HOME DAYCARE CENTERS AND PRESCHOOLS
SECTION:
10-7A-1: Scope
10-7A-2: Business License Required
10-7A-3: Conditions Required
10-7A-4: Renewal Of Permit
10-7A-1: SCOPE:
In home daycare centers and preschools may be approved as a conditional use in
all Residential and Agricultural Zones in the City. (Ord. 02-7, 5-28-2002)
10-7A-2: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A conditional use permit is required in addition to and before a business
license is issued, and the granting of said permit shall not relieve the
permittee of any licensing requirement of the City, the State or any other
public agency. (Ord. 02-7, 5-28-2002)
10-7A-3: CONDITIONS REQUIRED:
The following conditions shall be imposed upon and observed at all times by the
recipient of a conditional use permit for an in-home daycare center or
preschool:
   A.   Employment Restricted To Family Members: Only family members related by
blood, marriage or adoption to bona fide residents of the dwelling unit may be
employed on the premises by the preschool or daycare. Only one part-time
employee in addition to the bona fide residents may work in connection with the
in-home daycare center or preschool at any time.
   B.   Incidental And Secondary Use: Each in-home daycare center or preschool
use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the
property and shall not physically change the dwelling to the extent that it
would alter the residential character of the dwelling or the residential
atmosphere of the neighborhood in which it is located. An in- home preschool or
daycare shall not unreasonably disturb the neighborhood by reason of color,
design, material, construction, odors, lighting, sounds, noise or vibrations.
   C.   Conducted Within Primary Structure: Each in-home daycare center or
preschool shall be conducted principally within the primary structure on the
premises.
   D.   Signs: Class 2 signs shall be permitted and shall comply with all
regulations of chapter 9 of this title.
   E.   Traffic: Each in-home daycare center or preschool shall generate no
greater vehicular traffic than is commonly associated with the neighborhood in
which it is located. There shall be no heavy trucks, delivery or service
vehicles. The use shall not occupy the garage area required for two (2) parking
spaces.
   F.   Parking: All vehicles of customers and residents shall be parked in
authorized portions of the lot.
   G.   Code Conformance: There shall be complete conformity with Fire,
Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Health Codes and to all County ordinances.
   H.   Special Recommended Conditions: Any special condition made of record in
the conditional use permit to carry out the intent of this chapter shall be
met.
   I.   Annual Premises Inspection: An annual inspection of the premises by the
Fire Department shall be required before the conditional use permit may be
issued or renewed.
   J.   Floor Plan And Site Plan: A floor plan and a site plan showing the
areas within the home and yard to be used for the daycare center or preschool
shall be provided. This may be a simple single-line drawing.
   K.   State Requirements: The business shall comply with all State of Utah
requirements for daycares and preschools. (Ord. 19-13, 5-21-2019)
10-7A-4: RENEWAL OF PERMIT:
Conditional use permits for in-home daycare centers and preschools shall be
valid for one year unless a lesser time is specified, and shall be renewable at
the time the business license is renewed. Conditional use permits may be
renewed by designated City staff without additional review unless otherwise
specified by the approving staff on the permit, provided there have been no
reported violations, complaints or detrimental matters which might require
reconsideration of the permit. If the permit is not renewed, then the applicant
desiring a permit shall follow the same procedure required for an initial
application. (Ord. 19-13, 5-21-2019)
ARTICLE B. SERVICE ACCESSORY USES
SECTION:
10-7B-1: Scope
10-7B-2: Business License Required
10-7B-3: Conditions Required
10-7B-1: SCOPE:
Under controlled conditions, certain occupational and business uses may be
allowed in the A and R-L zones which would not be allowed as home occupations.
(Ord. 2002-4, 3-26-2002)
10-7B-2: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A service accessory conditional use permit is required in addition to and
before a business license is issued and the granting of said permit shall not
relieve the permittee of any licensing requirement of the city, the state or
any other public agency. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
10-7B-3: CONDITIONS REQUIRED:
Neither the planning commission or the city council shall authorize a
conditional use permit unless evidence is presented to establish:
   A.   Incidental Use: That the proposed use of the land is clearly incidental
to the primary function of the uses permitted within the zone and all zone
requirements are met.
   B.   Residence On Premises: That the owner, proprietor or chief executive
officer of the business or corporation will be living on the same premises as
the service accessory use.
   C.   Nonenclosed Areas: In the case of nonenclosed areas:
      1.   Storage; Screening: The storage, repair or welding of any equipment
(motorized or nonmotorized) shall be confined in an area not to exceed one-half
(1/2) acre. A six foot (6') high solid screen fence shall be built around the
perimeter of the storage area. In lieu of a solid screen fence, landscaping
that would grow at least to the height of a six foot (6') fence could be
substituted if such landscaping is permanently sprinkled and maintained.
      2.   Setback: A fifty foot (50') setback of the fence storage area from
any property line must be maintained. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
   D.   Enclosed Building: In the case of an enclosed accessory building,
required setbacks shall conform to the zone regulations for accessory
buildings. However, sufficient distance must be maintained along property lines
so that landscaping can be planted along all exterior walls of the structure.
Such landscaping shall be installed and permanently irrigated as a condition
for a service accessory use permit in all R-L zones. All structures shall be
built of permanent materials and up to code. Exterior finishes must be of a
neutral color. (Ord. 2002-4, 3-26-2002)
   E.   Parking: Storage areas shall not prohibit adequate parking for the
residence.
   F.   Lot Area: All lots on which a service accessory use is located must be
one acre or larger.
   G.   Access: Access to heavy equipment storage areas shall be within one
hundred feet (100') of a collector road.
   H.   Lighting: Storage areas shall not be lit to a greater intensity than
that normally used to illuminate the exterior of houses. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996,
eff. 9-12-1996)
ARTICLE C. TWIN HOMES
SECTION:
10-7C-1: Scope
10-7C-2: Conditions Required
10-7C-3: Building Standards And Special Conditions
10-7C-1: SCOPE:
Twin homes are allowed as an alternative to single-family detached dwellings as
a conditional use in the R-L zone. (Ord. 2002-4, 3-26-2002)
10-7C-2: CONDITIONS REQUIRED:
The planning commission or city council shall not approve a twin home unless
the following conditions are met: (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
   A.   Zone: The dwelling is located in an R-L zone. (Ord. 2002-4, 3-26-2002)
   B.   Lot Area: Each dwelling shall have a minimum lot area attributable to
it of at least one-half (1/2) of the minimum lot area required in the zone for
a single-family dwelling.
   C.   Side Yards: Side yards shall be at least ten feet (10').
   D.   Site Plan: The application shall be accompanied by a site plan showing
buildings, landscaping, parking and any other information required by the
planning commission or the city council. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
10-7C-3: BUILDING STANDARDS AND SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
Dwellings shall meet all of the building codes of the city and must have
separate utility lines, meters and shut off valves for each dwelling; also, a
separate sewer line and water line. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
ARTICLE D. PLANNED DWELLING GROUPS
SECTION:
10-7D-1: Scope
10-7D-2: Lot Area
10-7D-3: Yard Requirements
10-7D-4: Entrance
10-7D-1: SCOPE:
A planned dwelling group may be approved, provided the project conforms to all
of the following conditions and requirements. (Ord. 96-7, 12-10-1996, eff. 1-
10-1997)
10-7D-2: LOT AREA:
The area of the lot on which the planned dwelling group may be erected shall be
at least equal to the aggregate of the lot areas otherwise required in the
zoning district in which it is located for the dwelling type. (Ord. 96-7, 12-
10-1996, eff. 1-10-1997)
10-7D-3: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
No building in a planned dwelling group shall be closer to any lot line than
the front, side or rear yard requirements of the district in which it is
located. Buildings within a planned dwelling group shall be arranged so that
the distances between buildings is the same as the sum of the yards that would
be required if they were on separate lots with the front yard being toward the
front of the building, the rear yard being toward the rear of the building and
the side yards being on the sides of the building. (Ord. 96-7, 12-10-1996, eff.
1-10-1997)
10-7D-4: ENTRANCE:
Every dwelling within a planned dwelling group shall have an entrance within
sixty feet (60') of the parking spaces designated for the use of the occupants
of the dwelling. (Ord. 96-7, 12-10-1996, eff. 1-10-1997)
ARTICLE E. GROUP HOMES
SECTION:
10-7E-1: Required Conditions
10-7E-1: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
A residential facility for handicapped or elderly persons is allowed as a
conditional use in any zone where residential dwellings are allowed. A permit
may be issued to those facilities which meet the following requirements:
   A.   Building, Safety And Health Regulations: The facility meets all City
building, safety and health ordinances applicable to similar dwellings.
   B.   Proper Supervision: The operator of the facility provides assurance
that the residents of the facility will be properly supervised on a twenty four
(24) hour basis.
   C.   Structural Or Landscaping Alteration Unnecessary: The facility is
capable of use as a residential facility for handicapped persons or elderly
persons without structural or landscaping alteration that will change the
structure's character.
   D.   Distance To Another Facility: No such facility may be established or
maintained within three-fourths (3/4) mile of another residential facility for
handicapped or elderly persons.
   E.   Alcohol Or Drug Abuse Treatment: No person being treated for alcoholism
or drug abuse may be placed in a residential facility for handicapped or
elderly persons.
   F.   Violent Persons: No person who is violent may be placed in a
residential facility for handicapped or elderly persons.
   G.   Placement Voluntary: Placement in a residential facility for
handicapped or elderly persons must be on a strictly voluntary basis and not a
part of, or in lieu or, confinement, rehabilitation or treatment in a
correctional facility. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
ARTICLE F. RECREATIONAL (TRAVEL TRAILER) VEHICLE PARK
SECTION:
10-7F-1: Conditions Required
10-7F-2: Lot, Area And Space Requirements
10-7F-3: Access Drives
10-7F-4: Off-Street Parking
10-7F-5: Screening
10-7F-6: Landscaping
10-7F-7: Protective Easements
10-7F-8: Security Precautions
10-7F-1: CONDITIONS REQUIRED:
Under certain controlled conditions, recreational vehicle parks may be allowed
as a conditional use for parking of campers, travel trailers, recreational
vehicles, motor homes and tents. Neither the Planning Commission or the City
Council shall approve a conditional use permit unless evidence is presented to
establish: (Ord. 18-03, 5-22-2018)
   A.   Ownership: That the site is in single ownership or unified control.
   B.   Need Exists: That a need exists for the proposed recreational vehicle
park.
   C.   Plan Conformance: That the development plan is in conformance with the
Comprehensive Plan.
   D.   Exposure From Other Land Uses: That the site will not be exposed from
other land uses to objectionable smoke, noise, odor or other adverse
influences.
   E.   Traffic: That the site has an acceptable relationship to the major
traffic thoroughfare plan and that the site is accessible to recreational
vehicles without causing disruption to residential areas.
   F.   Utility And Drainage Facilities: That the proposed recreational vehicle
park will not overload utility and drainage facilities and that sensitive
environmental areas will not be adversely affected.
   G.   Health And Safety Codes: That all local, County and State Health and
Safety Codes are met (in design and operations stages). (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996,
eff. 9-12-1996)
10-7F-2: LOT, AREA AND SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Area: The area of the lot on which such park is to located
shall be at least five (5) acres.
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   No trailer or service building or structure shall be placed or
permitted within one hundred feet (100') of the road or street upon which the
lot or area fronts, or within seventy five feet (75') of any other boundary
line.
      2.   The Planning Commission or City Council can approve setbacks of less
dimensions than required if in its review of the site plan of the proposed RV
park it finds evidence of special landscape buffering that in its determination
effectively: a) visually screens the park from adjoining land uses; b)
mitigates adverse impact on and from the park; and c) provides for an
attractive park-like setting. In no cases shall the setback distance be less
than three feet (3').
   C.   Maximum Density: The maximum density shall be fifteen (15) recreational
vehicles or tent sites per acre. (Ord. 18-03, 5-22-2018)
   D.   Open Space: A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total area of the
park shall be reserved for the purpose of open space or recreational facilities
(nonbuilding and RV pad space). Parcels of open space shall be sufficient size
and distribution as to be a functional part of the entire development plan.
   E.   Vehicular Spacing:
      1.   Pull-through recreational vehicle sites shall maintain fifteen feet
(15') between vehicle parking in adjoining sites.
      2.   Back-in recreational vehicle sites shall maintain ten feet (10')
between vehicles, to include automobiles parking in adjoining sites.
   F.   Vehicle Setback To Building: Recreational vehicle sites shall be set
back thirty feet (30') from any building. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-
1996)
10-7F-3: ACCESS DRIVES:
All private access drives shall be provided to each space, shall connect with a
public street and shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20') for interior
circulation. Access drives shall be a hard surface or a dust-free material
approved by the Planning Commission and the City Engineer. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-
1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
10-7F-4: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Off-street parking shall be provided with a minimum of one parking space for
every two (2) recreational trailer units. Minimum width access drives shall not
be considered in fulfilling this requirement. Parking spaces shall be of
crushed rock or other suitable hard surface as approved by the Planning
Commission or City Council. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
10-7F-5: SCREENING:
   A.   Laundry Drying Yards: Laundry drying yards shall be screened by an
opaque hedge, wall or fence not less than five feet (5') in height.
   B.   Side And Rear Property Lines: A screening wall, fence or landscaping
strip shall be provided to provide visual screening along the side and rear
property lines when adjacent to a public street. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-
12-1996)
10-7F-6: LANDSCAPING:
All open space and setbacks shall be adequately landscaped to provide a park-
like appearance. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
10-7F-7: PROTECTIVE EASEMENTS:
The Planning Commission shall ensure the protection of and public access to
natural features by requiring protective easements of sufficient size. (Ord.
96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
10-7F-8: SECURITY PRECAUTIONS:
A full-time caretaker shall be required on site to provide twenty four (24)
hour security to park tenants. Such caretaker shall be available on demand to
park tenants. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
ARTICLE G. KENNELS
SECTION:
10-7G-1: Hobby Kennels
10-7G-2: Dog Kennels
10-7G-1: HOBBY KENNELS:
Hobby kennels may be permitted as a conditional use in any R-L, R-LM or R-
M zone; provided, that the following requirements are met and, in the opinion
of the planning commission or city council, it would not be detrimental to the
neighborhood in which it is located: (Ord. 2001-10, 3-27-2001)
   A.   Lot Requirements: The kennel must be located on the same lot as the
residence of the dog owner(s) and said lot must be at least one acre in size.
   B.   Health Codes: The kennel and the dogs kept therein shall meet all
provisions of the state and county health codes and shall be in compliance with
the Davis County animal control ordinance.
   C.   Use Of Dogs: The dogs kept in the kennel are to be used for the showing
of dogs in formally recognized dog shows, the training of dogs for field
trials, obedience, tracking and other purposes or for recreational and sporting
purposes.
   D.   Maximum Number: A maximum of five (5) dogs over one year in age may be
kept, together with one dog up to one year in age and dependent young up to
four (4) months in age.
   E.   Shelter: The applicant shall provide dog runs with shelter to protect
the animals from foul weather and excessive exposure to natural elements. Said
runs shall be designed to prevent the escape of any dog contained therein.
   F.   Distance To Adjacent Residence: The dog runs shall be located a minimum
of one hundred feet (100') from a residence on an adjacent lot.
   G.   Registration Of Dogs: Dogs must be registered with AKC, UKC or Field.
(Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
10-7G-2: DOG KENNELS:
The planning commission or city council may approve a permit only after they
are confident that all of the following conditions will be met:
   A.   Health Codes: The dog kennel shall meet or exceed all applicable local,
county and state health codes as to construction and maintenance of kennels,
runs, shelters and waste disposal systems. In addition, a sign-off of the
proposed kennel by the county health department shall be required before a
permit can be issued.
   B.   Screening; Setbacks: The kennel will not pose a nuisance to neighboring
property owners and may be given special consideration as to screening and
setbacks. In no case shall any kennel be located less than one hundred feet
(100') from any public street or dwelling on adjacent property and not less
than ten feet (10') from any side or rear lot line.
   C.   Secondary Use: In any T-1 zone, a dog kennel shall only be permitted as
a secondary use when a residential dwelling, as a main use, previously exists
prior to the request. (Ord. 96-1, 9-10-1996, eff. 9-12-1996)
ARTICLE H. ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT
SECTION:
10-7H-1: Application; Site Location Master Plan
10-7H-2: Considerations
10-7H-3: Conditions
10-7H-1: APPLICATION; SITE LOCATION MASTER PLAN:
In addition to other application requirements of this Chapter, applications for
electronic communications facilities shall be accompanied by a site location
master plan, identifying existing facilities and the approximate number and
locations of new facilities expected to be constructed within the City for ten
(10) years following the date of the application. (Ord. 96-7, 12-10-1996, eff.
1-10-1997)
10-7H-2: CONSIDERATIONS:
In addition to conditional use standards outlined in this Chapter, the Planning
Commission or City Council shall consider the following:
   A.   Co-Location: Whether co-location of the antenna on other existing
structures in the same vicinity, such as other towers or buildings, has been
sought. (It is the policy of the City that co-location of 2 or more antennas on
a single communications tower be encouraged as the primary option.)
   B.   Location And Design: The location and design of the antenna and tower
in relation to existing vegetation, topography and buildings to obtain best
visual screening.
   C.   Spacing: Whether spacing between towers creates quantifiable
detrimental impacts to adjoining properties. (Ord. 96-7, 12-10-1996, eff. 1-10-
1997)
10-7H-3: CONDITIONS:
No permit shall be issued for electronic communications facilities unless all
of the following conditions have or will be met:
   A.   Building Permit Required: A building permit will be obtained for each
tower and related facilities. Each application for a building permit shall be
accompanied by plans and calculations certified by a licensed professional
engineer that the facility meets the applicable electrical safety, material and
design integrity, seismic safety and wind and snow loading standards.
   B.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings of facilities must comply with
required setback, height and landscaping requirements of the zoning district in
which they are located. All power lines on the lot to the communication
facility shall be underground.
   C.   Fencing: Freestanding facilities shall be surrounded by a fence that is
at least six feet (6') high and constructed of material appropriate to the
location as approved by the City Council.
   D.   Climbing Peg Removal: Climbing pegs shall be removed from the lower
twenty feet (20') of all communications towers.
   E.   Overhanging Or Encroaching: No communication facility shall overhang,
encroach upon or block a public right-of-way or public sidewalk.
   F.   Residential Zones: No monopole or lattice tower may be located within a
residential zone and may not be located less than one and one-half (11/2) times
the height of the tower from any residential zone boundary. This restriction
may be reduced by the approving body, provided demonstrable need can be shown.
   G.   Setbacks: No monopole or lattice tower may be located in any required
landscaped or parking area and shall comply with the setback requirements of
the zone in which it is located.
   H.   Guyed Towers Prohibited: Guyed towers used to support low power radio
communication service are not permitted in any zone. (Ord. 96-7, 12-10-1996,
eff. 1-10-1997)
ARTICLE I. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD)
SECTION:
10-7I-1: Purpose
10-7I-2: Permitted Uses
10-7I-3: Site Plan Requirements
10-7I-4: Conditions Required
10-7I-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the planned unit development (PUD) is to allow diversification
in the relationship of residential uses and structures to their sites and to
permit more flexible development of those sites. It is intended to ensure
substantial compliance with zone regulations and other public health, safety
and general welfare while allowing flexibility of design, encouraging open
space preservation and securing the advantages of large-scale site planning.
Compliance with these regulations in no sense excuses the developer from the
applicable requirements of the subdivision standards 1 . (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-
2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 11 of this Code.
10-7I-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses permitted in a PUD shall be those permitted in the zone in which the
development is located; provided, that for the purposes of this Article,
single-family attached dwellings such as townhouses, row houses and zero lot
line lots shall be considered single-family dwellings and may be permitted in a
zone which allows only single-family dwellings. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000)
10-7I-3: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
The application shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the use or uses,
dimensions and locations of structures, dimensions and locations of areas
reserved for vehicular access and parking, open spaces, architectural drawings
and sketches demonstrating the nature and character of proposed uses and the
physical relationship of uses, information on residential density, open space
area and such information as may be necessary to determine that the provisions
of this Article are met. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000)
10-7I-4: CONDITIONS REQUIRED:
The following conditions and requirements shall be met before any planned unit
development will be approved:
   A.   Area: The minimum land area required for the development of the
combined total of all contiguous phases of a single PUD is five (5) acres.
   B.   Ownership: The development shall be in single, corporate or undivided
interest partnership ownership at the time of application.
   C.   Protection Of Adjacent Properties: The Planning Commission or City
Council shall require such arrangements of structures and open spaces within
the site as necessary to assure that adjacent properties will not be adversely
affected.
   D.   Base Density And Density Bonuses:
      1.   The base density allowed in a PUD is the maximum density allowed in
the zone in which the project is located. Where projects include more than one
zone, the base density will be figured separately for that portion of the
project site in each zone. In these cases, the actual placement of the lots or
dwelling units will not be restricted to that zone in which their density
numbers were calculated.
      2.   A bonus density of ten percent (10%) of the base density may be
added to the project if, in the opinion of the Planning Commission and City
Council, considerable effort has been made to preserve significant open spaces
which are open to the public.
      3.   A bonus density of ten percent (10%) of the base density may be
added to the project if, in the opinion of the Planning Commission and City
Council, the quality of the project is significantly enhanced through the use
of unique architectural and site design and exterior materials, including
brick, stone, stucco or other materials of similar quality, durability and low
maintenance requirements.
   E.   Lot And Yard: Lot area, width and yard requirements shall be determined
by approval of the site plan, however, in no case shall any lot be less than
eight thousand (8,000) square feet in area. Every effort shall be made on the
site plan to cluster dwelling units and consolidate open space into areas
functional for recreation or other approved purposes.
   F.   Open Space: Every PUD shall provide open space equal to at least thirty
percent (30%) of the total site area. The required open space may be a
naturally vegetated area of scenic value or a totally landscaped area. It may
consist of water features, trails, parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities,
agricultural areas and similar areas which promote the preservation of outdoor
experiences and the rural atmosphere of the city. The thirty percent (30%)
required open space shall not consist of jurisdictional wetlands, land within
the AICUZ noise zone 75 Ldn or higher, steep hillsides, rivers and streams, or
other lands which could not be used for residential building sites anyway.
These lands may be included in open space areas but will not be part of the
calculated thirty percent (30%) open space. No streets, driveways or parking
areas may be included as part of the required open space. No area within
building lots may be considered as part of the open space unless it is within a
lot of at least two (2) acres in area, then all except one-half (1/2) acre of
the lot may be considered part of the open space. Any open space not within
lots of two (2) acres or larger shall be accessible to all residents of the
development and their guests.
   G.   Open Space Preservation: Preservation, maintenance and ownership of
required open space within the development shall be accomplished by:
      1.   Dedication of the land to the city as a public park or parkway
system, if so proposed by the developer and accepted by the city; or
      2.   Granting to the city a permanent open space easement on and over the
said private open spaces to guarantee that the open space remains perpetually
in the use for which it was intended, with ownership and maintenance
responsibilities being that of a homeowners' association established with
articles of association and bylaws which are satisfactory to the city;
      3.   Complying with the provisions of the condominium ownership act of
1963, title 57 chapter 8 Utah Code Annotated, as amended, which provides for
the payment of common expenses for the upkeep of common areas and facilities.
   H.    Streets: Streets may be either public or private. They may be required
to be public if they are on the South Weber City Vehicle Transportation Map or
if so determined by the approving body. If the streets are public, then they
shall meet the applicable requirements of the Public Works Standard Drawings.
Private streets shall meet the provisions of the underlying zones.
   I.   Landscaping: Landscaping, including a planting plan, fencing and
screening within the site shall be presented as part of the application and
shall meet the requirements of chapter 15 of this title.
   J.   Drainage: A grading and drainage plan shall be submitted with the
application. (Ord. 2000-9, 7-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2001-6, 2-27-2001; Ord. 2021-
14, 1-11-2022)
ARTICLE J. MODEL HOMES
SECTION:
10-7J-1: Purpose
10-7J-2: Conditions Required
10-7J-1: PURPOSE:
There may also arise the need to construct and occupy a model home with a
temporary real estate sales office for the sale of building lots or residences
within a specific development. It is the purpose of this Article to set forth
conditions under which these uses may occur. (Ord. 98-16, 7-28-1998)
10-7J-2: CONDITIONS REQUIRED:
A conditional use for a model home to be used for a sales office for sale of
real estate within the same development and the construction management office
that the model home resides in may be permitted for a period of one year
provided the following conditions are met:
   A.   Time extensions may be granted by the Planning Commission provided that
a maximum of two (2) extensions of six (6) months each may be granted.
Extensions may only be granted if not more than eighty percent (80%) of the
subdivision is sold.
   B.   Adequate off-street parking is provided for employees working in the
model home, as well as at least two (2) parking spaces for visitors touring the
model home.
   C.   A signage and lighting plan is provided showing size and location of
all signs and associated lights.
   D.   The hours of operation must be noted and approved.
   E.   A model home shall not be used for a general real estate office.
   F.   A business license must be obtained to operate a business in a model
home in the City.
   G.   All infrastructure should be completed as per the Subdivision Ordinance
1  requirements prior to the construction of the model home. (Ord. 98-16, 7-28-
1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 11 of this Code.
ARTICLE K. BUSINESS USES IN RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL ZONES
SECTION:
10-7K-1: Application; Contents
10-7K-2: Verification Of Information
10-7K-3: Conditions Required
10-7K-4: Review Of Compliance
10-7K-1: APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
All businesses which do not conform to the provisions of Article A or B of this
Chapter, operating within a residential or agricultural zone shall have six (6)
months from the effective date of this Article to apply for a conditional use
permit under the provisions herein. Any such business operating within a
residential or agricultural zone which fails to apply for a conditional use
permit within this time shall be deemed to have waived its rights to continue
its business and shall be ordered to cease doing business at the end of the six
(6) month application period. At the end of the six (6) month application
period, any business in a residential or agricultural zone which may have held
status as a nonconforming use under the provisions of this Title shall lose all
rights previously granted under those provisions.
Each business applying for a conditional use permit shall complete an
application on a form to be supplied by the City. At minimum, the business
shall supply the following information:
   A.   Name and address of the business applying for a conditional use.
   B.   Type of business conducted in the residential or agricultural zone.
   C.   Number of employees working at the site in the residential or
agricultural zone.
   D.   Number of employees in and out of the site in the residential or
agricultural zone on a daily basis.
   E.   Number of vehicle trips into and out of the site on a daily basis.
   F.   Number and types of vehicles and equipment normally kept at the site.
   G.   Amounts and types of materials kept at the site.
   H.   The land area (in square feet) occupied by the use.
   I.   The number of buildings on the site in the residential or agricultural
zone.
The application shall be accompanied by an application fee, which shall be set
by resolution of the City Council and shall be in an amount necessary to
reimburse the City for its costs in reviewing and approving the applications.
(Ord. 98-26, 1-12-1999)
10-7K-2: VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION:
The City's Building Inspector shall verify the information contained within the
application of any business operating on a site located in a residential or
agricultural zone with an on- site inspection, as well as taking a photograph,
to ensure that the information contained in the application accurately reflects
the use of the site. (Ord. 98-26, 1-12-1999)
10-7K-3: CONDITIONS REQUIRED:
Neither the Planning Commission nor the City Council shall approve a
conditional use permit for a business operating in a residential or
agricultural zone unless the following conditions are included in the permit:
   A.   The business shall take all necessary steps to prevent the escape of
dust from the site in the residential or agricultural zone.
   B.   The business shall take all necessary steps to prevent excessive noise
and light from emanating from the site in the residential or agricultural zone
so that the business's operations do not become a nuisance affecting the
surrounding uses.
   C.   The business shall be required to landscape its site in the residential
or agricultural zone so that, as much as possible, it is in harmony with the
surrounding uses.
   D.   The planning commission or city council shall set reasonable hours of
operation for the business. These hours of operation shall be set on an
individual basis and shall reflect the needs of the surrounding residential
and/or agricultural uses.
   E.   The business shall agree that no hazardous materials (as defined by
applicable state and federal statutes and regulations) are stored on the site
with the exception of fuels for motor vehicles which shall be stored in sealed
underground tanks or other containers approved for such storage by the state.
Other hazardous materials may not be stored at the site without specific
written permission of the city, which shall not be given until after a public
hearing has been held on the request.
   F.   The planning commission or city council shall include a condition
prohibiting the business from expanding its use on the site within the
residential or agricultural zone beyond the limits set out in the application
and the building inspector's report of the use of the property unless the
expansion is first approved by the city council.
   G.   All businesses operating sites within a residential or agricultural
zone shall be required to have a current business license from the city and
shall keep all other required licenses and permits which may be issued by the
city or any other governmental entity current as a condition of operating the
business within the residential or agricultural zones.
   H.   The planning commission or city council shall set such other conditions
as are reasonably necessary to ensure the safety of persons on the site or on
the surrounding properties and to ensure compatibility with surrounding
properties so far as possible. (Ord. 98-26, 1-12-1999)
10-7K-4: REVIEW OF COMPLIANCE:
The South Weber City manager shall review the business' compliance with
conditions set forth in the conditional use permit at least annually as part of
the business' application for renewal of its business license. If it is found
that the business is not in compliance, then the business shall be brought
before the planning commission for review. (Ord. 11-03, 3-8-2011)
ARTICLE L. TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS AT A MAJOR INTERSECTION
SECTION:
10-7L-1: Purpose
10-7L-2: Conditions Required
10-7L-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish conditions under which two-family
dwellings may be allowed in single-family residential zones where, due to
existing street and traffic conditions, the building of single-family homes may
be less desirable. (Ord. 18-07, 9-25-2018)
10-7L-2: CONDITIONS REQUIRED:
A conditional use for a two-family dwelling in certain single- family
residential zones may be approved if the following conditions are met.
   A.   The lot is adjacent to two (2) roads that form a major intersection as
defined in section
10-1-10 of this title.
   B.   The minimum lot size shall be the minimum lot size for a single-family
residence in the same zone.
   C.   Access to driveway shall be as far from the intersection as practical
and driveway access points for the individual units shall be combined into one
access point where practical as approved by the Planning Commission.
   D.   The driveway(s) are required to access only the major collector.
   E.   The intersections applicable are as follows:
      1.   South Weber Drive and future South Bench Drive.
      2.   South Weber Drive and 1200 E.
      3.   South Weber Drive and 1900 E.
      4.   Deer Run Drive and 2700 E.
   F.   Site plans must be approved by the Planning Commission.
   G.   Driveways must be designed so that vehicles enter and exit in a forward
motion. (Ord. 18-07, 9-25-2018)
CHAPTER 8
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-8-1: Purpose
10-8-2: Off Street Parking
10-8-3: Off Street Loading
10-8-4: Other Access And Parking Related Provisions
10-8-5: Number Of Parking Spaces
10-8-6: Table Of Parking Lot Dimensions
10-8-1: PURPOSE:
To reduce street congestion and traffic hazards in the city by incorporating
adequate, attractively designed facilities for off street parking and loading
as an integral part of every use of land in the city. (1989 Code § 12-14-001)
10-8-2: OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   General: There shall be provided at the time of erection of any main
building or at the time any main building is enlarged or increased in capacity,
minimum off street parking space with adequate provision for ingress and egress
by standard size automobiles in accordance with the requirements herein.
   B.   Size: For the purpose of this section, one parking space shall be
assumed to be one hundred eighty (180) square feet, exclusive of adequate
interior driveways.
   C.   Access: Adequate ingress and egress to all uses shall be provided as
follows. Access shall be by either:
      1.   A maximum of two (2) driveways for each one hundred feet (100') of
frontage on a public street, such driveways to be not over thirty feet (30') in
width, or less than twelve feet (12') for one-way traffic. Provided however,
that in commercial zones, the planning commission may require the said
driveways to be thirty six feet (36') in width; or
      2.   A maximum of one driveway for each one hundred feet (100') of
frontage on a public street, such driveways to be not over fifty feet (50') in
width.
      3.   Access driveways shall not be closer to each other than twelve feet
(12').
      4.   No residential driveway shall be closer than twenty feet (20'),
measured along the property lines to the point of intersection of two (2)
property lines at any corner.
      5.   In a commercial zone, no driveway shall be closer to an intersection
of two (2) streets than forty feet (40'), measured from the corner point of the
property line.
      6.   Height, location, structural specifications, maximum and minimum
curb radii permitted, and minimum roadway approach angles to the center line of
the street are subject to city standards.
   D.   Floor Area Defined: "Floor area" in the case of offices, merchandising
or service types of uses, shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to
be used by tenants or for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients
or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for
display or sales or merchandise. It shall not include areas used principally
for nonpublic purposes, such as storage, incidental repair, processing or
packaging of merchandise.
   E.   Alternatives To On Site Parking: For any new use, structure or building
other than a dwelling, required off street parking which, due to the size or
location cannot be provided on the premises, may be provided on other property
not more than five hundred feet (500') distant from the nearest point of the
parcel, or for a use in a commercial district (C, C-H) not more than six
hundred feet (600') distant.
   F.   Parking Areas, Development And Maintenance: Every parcel of land
hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including a commercial
parking lot and also an automobile, farm equipment or other open-air sales lot,
shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
      1.   Screening: The side of any off-street parking area for more than
five (5) vehicles shall be effectively screened by fencing or landscaping of
acceptable design, such wall or fence shall be not less than four feet (4') nor
more than six feet (6') in height and shall be maintained in good condition
with no advertising thereon.
      2.   Landscaping: Landscaping for off-street parking and loading shall be
incorporated in the landscape plan and shall meet the requirements of chapter
15 of this title.
      3.   Surfacing: Except as provided in subsection 3b of this section, all
off street parking areas shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete pavement,
masonry pavers, or comparable material and shall be graded to dispose of all
surface water. Surfacing may be installed in stages as approved by the planning
commission. All parking and grading plans shall be reviewed and approved by the
city engineer.
         a.   Residential Parking Areas: All new main residential driveways,
approaches, and parking spaces required by this title shall be surfaced with
concrete, asphalt, or other hard surfaced pavement material.
         b.   Gravel or crushed rock may be installed for accessory parking in
a residential zone and must be a minimum of four inches (4") deep, compacted,
placed atop a weed barrier, be maintained completely free of grass and weeds,
and contained within durable borders.
      4.   Parking for public use shall have appropriate bumper guards where
needed as determined by the zoning administrator and shall be so arranged and
marked as to provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading and parking and
storage of vehicles.
      5.   Lighting: Lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area
shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises.
(1989 Code § 12-14-002; amd. Ord. 2001-6, 2-27-2001; Ord. 2002-4, 3-26-2002;
Ord. 2021-15, 12-7-2021)
10-8-3: OFF-STREET LOADING:
   A.   Required: For every building or part thereof having a gross floor area
of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by a
commercial or industrial use, to or from which delivery of materials or
merchandise is regularly made by motor vehicle, there shall be provided and
maintained, on the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading
space, plus one for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or
major fraction thereof. (1989 Code § 12-14-003; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Size: Each loading space shall be not less than fourteen feet (14') in
width, twenty five feet (25') in length and fifteen feet (15') in height.
   C.   Location: Such space may occupy any required yard or court, except that
if it shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to any lot in any R
district, it shall be enclosed by a brick or stone wall or landscaping not less
than six feet (6') in height. (1989 Code § 12-14-003)
10-8-4: OTHER ACCESS AND PARKING-RELATED PROVISIONS:
Driveways, parking areas and off-street storage lanes for automobiles awaiting
entrance to drive-in theaters, banks, restaurants, etc., shall be provided.
(1989 Code § 12-14-004)
10-8-5: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES:
   A.   Required: Except as may be provided elsewhere in this title, there
shall be provided at the time of construction of any building or at any time
any main building is enlarged or increased in capacity, minimum off-street
parking space with adequate provisions for ingress and egress by standard-sized
automobiles. If any land, structure, or use is changed from one use to another
which requires more off- street parking spaces as specified in subsection C of
this section, there shall be provided such additional off-street parking for
the new use as is required by this chapter.
   B.   Parking Lot Characteristics: On each parcel of land developed for
nonresidential uses, lots shall be constructed as follows:
      1.   Surfacing: Each lot shall have an all-weather surfacing material and
be maintained in good condition and kept clear and in an unobstructed and
usable condition at all times. Responsibility for maintenance of the lot shall
rest with the property owner. The lot shall provide adequate access to a street
or alley.
      2.   Grading: Parking lots shall be graded for proper drainage with
surface water diverted in such a way as to keep the parking area free of
accumulated water or ice.
      3.   Lighting: Lots shall be properly illuminated with standards arranged
so as to reflect light away from any adjoining residential buildings.
      4.   Size Of Spaces: Each parking space shall measure at least nine feet
(9') wide by eighteen feet (18') long.
   C.   Multi-family Visitor Parking: Developments with multi-family dwelling
units shall be required to provide visitor parking that is separate and
distinct from the primary dwelling requirements.
   D.   Specific Requirements For Each Land Use: Required off- street parking
shall be provided for each use as listed below. Parking for uses not
specifically listed below shall be provided in the same ratio as the use most
nearly approximating the characteristics of the unlisted use, as determined by
the Planning Commission. Parking shall be provided as follows, with spaces
passed upon one or a combination of uses listed:
USE NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
USE                              NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
Assembly                         1 per 300 gross square feet
Dwelling Unit                    2 per dwelling unit
                                 2 per dwelling unit (this is in addition to
External Accessory Dwelling Unit the number of parking spaces required for the
                                 primary dwelling unit)
Multi-Family Dwelling Visitor    1 per 3 dwelling units
Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit 1 per dwelling unit
Health Club                      1 per 100 gross square feet
Hotel/Motel                      1 per sleeping unit plus
                                 1 per 500 square feet of common area
Industry                         1 per 500 gross square feet
Medical Office                   1 per 200 gross square feet
Office                           1 per 300 gross square feet
Public Building/Space            Determined by specific review of the Planning
                                 Commission
Recreation; Commercial           1 per 500 gross square feet plus
                                 5 per individual outdoor recreation space
Restaurant                       1 per 100 gross square feet
Retail                           1 per 200 gross square feet
School                           1 per 3.5 seats in assembly rooms plus
                                 1 per faculty member
Warehouse                        1 per 500 gross square feet
 
(1989 Code § 12-14-005; amd. Ord. 2021-15, 12-7-2021; Ord. 2022-03, 4-12-2022;
Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-8-6: TABLE OF PARKING LOT DIMENSIONS:
 
Parking Angle  45°60°90°
Parking Angle   45°60°  90°
Offset        A 18' 11'   1'6"
Car space     B 12' 10'   9'
Stall depth   C 16' 18'   18'6"
Stall depth   D 18' 19'   20'
Overhang      E 2'  2'3"  2'9"
Driveway      F 13' 17'6" 25'
Turnaround    G 17' 14'   14'
Extra         H 6'  3'    0
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f16a5ed618c4ec2c872b44142ab358bc7c7f25cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1617.png]
 
(1989 Code § 12-14)
CHAPTER 9
SIGN AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose And Intent
10-9-2: Effect On Chapter
10-9-3: Definitions
10-9-4: General Limitations
10-9-5: Classification Of Signs
10-9-6: Billboards
10-9-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and to authorize the use of signs
that are compatible with their surroundings and to promote short and long term
civic beauty and order by establishing standards and regulations for sign
design, location, size, type, compatibility, safety, and aesthetics.
The intent of this chapter is to regulate design and placement of
identification/communication devices that are built specifically to identify,
inform, and direct patrons to a particular merchant, store, establishment or
service. It is not the intent of this chapter to regulate the content of public
speech nor infringe upon freedom of speech. (Ord. 13-17, 11-12-2013)
10-9-2: EFFECT ON CHAPTER:
The regulations herein set forth shall apply and govern all zones as set forth
in this title. (1989 Code § 12-15-001; amd. Ord. 13-17, 11-12-2013)
10-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined in
addition to the definitions stated in section
10-1-10 of this title as follows:
   CONVERT OR CONVERSION: To change a sign or billboard face from its existing,
nondigital surface to a digitally controlled surface. Convert or conversion
does not include "maintenance" of the sign.
   CURFEW: Between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
the digital billboard face shall be frozen on one message.
   FRONTAGE (SIGNS): The distance between the two (2) side lot lines of a
parcel measured along the street or streets of a corner lot which the parcel is
allowed access. No state or federal highway to which no access is allowed shall
be considered as frontage.
   SIGN: Any device for visual communication to the general public to be viewed
from out of doors, but not including any flag, badge or ensign of any
government or governmental agency.
   SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign which involves motion or rotation of any part by
mechanical or artificial means or displaying flashing or intermittent lights.
   SIGN, AREA: The area of a sign that is used for display purposes, including
the minimum frame and supports. In computing sign area, only one side of back
to back signs covering the same subject shall be computed when signs are
parallel or diverge from a common edge by an angle of not more than forty five
degrees (45°). In relation to signs that do not have a frame or separate
background, sign area shall be computed on the basis of the least rectangle,
triangle or circle large enough to frame the display.
   SIGNS, LIGHTED TYPE: A categorical rating given to a sign according to the
type of illumination that is permitted to have as follows:
      Direct: An illuminated sign, the light source of which is a visible part
of the sign or which projects light upon the sign.
      Indirect: An illuminated sign, the light source of which is not visible
from any angle but which is incorporated in the structure of the sign.
   SIGNS, TYPE: A categorical rating given to a sign according to its type of
written message as follows:
      Advertising: A sign which directs attention to a use, product, commodity
or service, not related to the premises.
      Business: A sign which directs attention to a use conducted, commodity
sold or service performed upon the premises.
      Identification: A sign displayed to indicate the name or nature of
buildings or use, including home occupations, but not commercial or industrial
uses located upon the premises.
      Political: A sign displayed to inform the public of a candidate running
for public office or an issue to be decided in a legal election by public vote.
      Property: A sign related to the property upon which it is located and
offering such property for sale or lease, or advertising completed improvement,
or announcing the name of the builder, owner, designer or developer of the
project, or warning against trespassing.
      Service: A sign which is incidental to a use lawfully occupying the
property upon which the sign is located and which sign is necessary to provide
information to the public, such as direction to parking lot, location of
restrooms, sale of agriculture product produced upon the premises and which may
bear as an incidental part of the sign the name, address or trademark of
persons furnishing such sign to the owner of the premises or such other
pertinent facts.
      Temporary Subdivision: A sign advertising lots in a subdivision displayed
for a specific period of time as indicated by permit, not to exceed two (2)
years or the time when all lots or units are sold, whichever comes first. No
sign permit shall be issued until preliminary plat approval is given by the
planning commission.
   STRUCTURAL TYPE: A categorical rating given to a sign according to its
structure as follows:
      Billboard: Any sign designated or used for the posting of bills or
temporary messages.
      Flat: A sign erected parallel to and attached to or painted on or pasted
on the outside wall of a building and projecting not more than eighteen inches
(18") from such wall.
      Ground: A sign placed upon the ground or supported by a frame or multiple
supports placed in or upon the ground and which has less than four feet (4')
clearance between the sign and the ground.
      Pole: A sign which is attached to or supported by one or more poles, or a
pilaster or similar structure which is supported by the ground, including any
such sign which also rests on or overlaps the roof of a building twelve inches
(12") or less.
      Projecting: A sign attached to a building and extending in whole or in
part more than eighteen inches (18") beyond any wall of the building without
the aid of any other vertical supports, including any such sign that also rests
on or overlaps the roof twelve inches (12") or more.
      Roof: A sign erected partially or wholly on or over the roof of a
building, but not including pole or projecting signs that rest on or overlap a
roof twelve inches (12") or less.
      Temporary: A temporary sign as regulated by this title shall include any
sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth,
canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or any other light materials, with
or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only.
      Window: A sign erected in, attached to, painted on, or pasted on, a
window. (1989 Code § 12-15-002; amd. Ord. 98-1, 1-13-1998; Ord. 99-20, 7-13-
1999; Ord. 13-17, 11-12-2013)
10-9-4: GENERAL LIMITATIONS:
The following provisions affect all signs and classes of signs. No sign shall
be erected, replaced or reconstructed, maintained, enlarged or moved to a new
location unless it complies with all of the following conditions: (1989 Code §
12-15-003; amd. Ord. 13-17, 11-12-2013)
   A.   Permit Required: No advertising, business or temporary subdivision sign
shall be erected, relocated, reconstructed or enlarged without obtaining a
building permit. These signs shall be subject to the appropriate provisions of
the Building Code. (1989 Code § 12-15-003; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 13-17, 11-12-
2013)
   B.   Site Plan: All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by a
site plan drawn to a scale showing the exact size, location and ownership of
record for the site; the exact size of any existing signs and any proposed
signs (including elevation drawings) and the proposed location of the new sign
with relation to buildings and property lines.
   C.   Lights Or Lighted Signs: In any zone, no spotlight, floodlight or any
type of lighted or animated sign shall be installed in any way or continued in
operation which will permit the rays of light to penetrate beyond the property
upon which such light or lighted sign is located in a manner constituting a
nuisance or hazard, and no light may be permitted where the light source is
visible from adjacent property.
   D.   Projection: No part of any sign shall be attached to any building or
other structure or otherwise located in such a way as to project across any
property line.
   E.   Prohibited Lights And Signs On Public Property; Exception:
      1.   No sign or light standard or pole shall be erected on publicly owned
land, inside street rights-of-way or otherwise. No sign, handbill, poster,
advertisement or notice of any kind or sort, whether political or otherwise,
shall be fastened, placed, posted, painted or attached in any way in or upon
any curbstone, lamppost, telephone pole, telegraph pole, electric light or
power pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, rock, sidewalk or street.
      2.   Signs and lights owned and erected by a public agency or its
authorized representative.
   F.   Traffic Hazard: No light, sign or other advertising structure as
regulated by this title shall be erected at the intersection of any street in
such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location where by
reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of or be confused with any authorized traffic signs, signal or device or
which makes use of the words "stop", "look", "drive-in", "danger" or other
words, phrases, symbols, or characters in such manner as to interfere, mislead
or confuse traffic.
   G.   Maintenance: Every sign shall be kept in good condition as to
maintenance and repair. The building and zoning inspector may require
dilapidated and/or unsafe signs to be put in good condition and upon failure of
the owner to do so after thirty (30) days' written notice, the City may order
such signs removed or demolished.
   H.   Clearance: There shall be a minimum clearance of ten feet (10') between
the ground or sidewalk and any part of a projecting sign or pole sign,
excepting where there is less than eighteen inches (18") projection from its
support. Ground signs shall have a maximum clearance of four feet (4').
   I.   Ownership: The identity of the owner of all off premises signs shall be
in plain and public view. (1989 Code § 12-15-003; amd. Ord. 13-17, 11-12-2013)
   J.   Political Signs: Political signs shall be allowed in all zones,
provided they comply with the following regulations:
      1.   They shall comply with the requirements of subsection E of this
section.
      2.   Political signs shall not be erected within one hundred fifty feet
(150') from a building where a polling place is located. (Ord. 13-17, 11-12-
2013)
10-9-5: CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS:
The following classifications of signs shall include all signs permitted in any
zone. If for any reason the classification of any sign is not readily
determinable, the classification shall be determined by the building inspector.
   A.   Class 1: Signs meeting the following specifications and conditions
shall constitute Class 1:
      1.   Sign Type: Identification, property, service and temporary
subdivision.
      2.   Structural Type: Flat, ground, pole and temporary.
      3.   Lighted Type: Direct and indirect lighted.
      4.   Maximum Number And Size:
         a.   Identification and service signs: Two (2) signs not to exceed
three (3) square feet in combined area for parcels up to one-half (1/2) acre in
area, not to exceed ten (10) square feet in combined area for parcels from one-
half (1/2) acre to two (2) acres in area, and not to exceed thirty two (32)
square feet in combined area for parcels greater than two (2) acres.
         b.   Property signs: Nine (9) square feet in combined total area.
         c.   Temporary subdivision signs: Thirty two (32) square feet in
combined total area.
      5.   Location: Anywhere on property.
      6.   Maximum Height: Ten feet (10').
      7.   Special Limitations: No animated signs.
   B.   Class 2: Signs meeting the following specifications and conditions
shall constitute Class 2:
      1.   Sign Type: Business.
      2.   Structural Type: Flat, ground or pole.
      3.   Lighted Type: Direct or indirect lighted.
      4.   Maximum Number And Size: One sign not to exceed three (3) square
feet for home occupations. For service accessory uses, one sign not to exceed
ten (10) square feet, unless the sign is more than five hundred feet (500')
from a public street and is flat and attached to a wall of the business, then
it shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet for each five hundred feet
(500') from a public street.
      5.   Maximum Height: Ten feet (10').
      6.   Special Limitations: No animated signs.
      7.   Location: Anywhere on the property.
   C.   Class 3: Signs meeting the following specifications and conditions
shall constitute Class 3:
      1.   Sign Type: Identification.
      2.   Structural Type: Flat, ground and pole.
      3.   Lighted Type: Direct and indirect lighted.
      4.   Maximum Number And Size: One sign for each street frontage not to
exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
      5.   Location: Anywhere on the property.
      6.   Maximum Height: Ten feet (10'), unless it is a flat sign attached to
or painted on the building, in which case the maximum height shall be the same
as the maximum height of structures allowed in the zone.
      7.   Special Limitations: No animated signs.
   D.   Class 4: Signs meeting the following specifications and conditions
shall constitute Class 4:
      1.   Sign Type: Business, identification, service, property and temporary
subdivision.
      2.   Structural Type: Flat, ground, pole, projecting, temporary and
window.
      3.   Lighted Type: Direct and indirect lighted.
      4.   Maximum Number And Size: No maximum number, but the combined total
area of all signs shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
      5.   Location: Anywhere on the property.
      6.   Maximum Height: Twenty five feet (25'), unless it is a flat sign
attached to or painted on the building in which case the maximum height shall
be the same as the maximum height of structures allowed in the zone.
   E.   Class 5: Signs meeting the following specifications and conditions
shall constitute Class 5:
      1.   Sign Type: Business, identification, political, property, service
and temporary subdivision.
      2.   Structural Type: Flat, ground, pole, projecting, roof, temporary and
window.
      3.   Lighted Type: Direct and indirect lighted.
      4.   Maximum Number And Size: The maximum number and total area allowed
shall be according to the following regulations:
         a.   Flat Signs: There is no maximum on the number of such signs. The
total area of all such signs on the primary or main walls or facades facing the
street shall be limited to ten percent (10%) of the wall or facade to which the
sign is attached. The total area of all such signs on secondary walls or
facades shall be limited to five percent (5%) of the wall or facade area to
which the sign is attached.
         b.   Ground And Pole Signs: One ground or pole sign per street
frontage per business is allowed with a maximum area of sixty (60) square feet
plus one square foot per five (5) linear feet of frontage on the street to
which the sign is oriented. If the sign is on a corner lot and is placed so
that it orients to both streets, then one sign is allowed with a maximum area
of one hundred twenty (120) square feet plus two (2) square feet per ten (10)
linear feet of frontage on both streets. The absolute maximum area of any
ground or pole sign for a single business is three hundred (300) square feet
except as noted in subsection E4c of this section. Where two (2) or more
businesses are located within the same structure or in very close proximity in
a commercial center type arrangement, ground and pole signs are limited to one
sign per commercial center. That sign shall have a maximum area of one hundred
(100) square feet plus ten (10) square feet per business in the commercial
center with an absolute maximum area of three hundred (300) square feet, except
as noted in subsection E4c of this section.
         c.   Pole Signs Within Six Hundred Feet Of Interstate 84 Or Highway
89: Pole signs that are located within six hundred feet (600') of Interstate 84
or Highway 89 and are oriented toward either of those highways shall be allowed
a fifty percent (50%) increase in the sign area specified in subsection E4b of
this section.
         d.   Projecting Signs: One projecting sign per business is allowed
with a maximum area of four (4) square feet per business.
         e.   Temporary Signs: There shall be no maximum number, but the total
area allowed shall be a maximum of five percent (5%) of the area of the primary
wall or facade facing the street for each business. Temporary signs may be
displayed for a maximum period of sixty (60) days.
         f.   Window Signs: Window signs shall be limited to twenty five
percent (25%) of the window area of the primary wall or facade of the building.
      5.   Location: Anywhere on the property, unless otherwise noted in this
chapter.
      6.   Maximum Height: Twenty five feet (25'), unless it is a flat sign
attached to or painted on the building, in which case the maximum height shall
be the same as the maximum height of structures allowed in the zone, or unless
the property on which the business is located is within six hundred feet (600')
of Interstate 84, in which case the permitted height is one hundred feet
(100'), or within six hundred feet (600') of Highway 89 in which case the
maximum height shall be one hundred feet (100').
   F.   Class 6: Signs meeting the following specifications and conditions
shall constitute Class 6:
      1.   Sign Type: Business, identification, political, property and
service.
      2.   Structural Type: Flat, ground, projecting, temporary and window.
      3.   Lighted Type: Direct and indirect lighted.
      4.   Maximum Number And Size: No maximum number, but the combined total
area of all signs shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the total area of the
facade of the main public entry side of the business. Where there are multiple
businesses/uses in the same building or complex of buildings, one additional
sign may be permitted which indicates all businesses or uses within the
building or complex and which is limited to three (3) square feet per business
or use.
      5.   Location: Anywhere on the property.
      6.   Maximum Height: Ten feet (10'), unless it is a flat sign attached to
or painted on the building, in which case the maximum height shall be the same
as the maximum height of structures allowed in the zone.
   G.   Class 7: Signs meeting the following specifications and conditions
shall constitute Class 7:
      1.   Sign Type: All types.
      2.   Structural Type: Flat, ground, pole or projecting.
      3.   Lighted Type: Direct and indirect lighted.
      4.   Maximum Number And Size: No maximum number, but the combined total
area of all signs shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
      5.   Location: Anywhere on the property.
      6.   Maximum Height: Twenty five feet (25'), unless it is a flat sign
attached to or painted on a building, in which case the maximum height shall be
the same as the maximum height of structures allowed in the zone. (Ord. 19-08,
3-12-2019)
10-9-6: BILLBOARDS:
   A.   Permit Required: No billboard shall be erected, relocated,
reconstructed or enlarged without obtaining a building permit. These signs
shall be subject to the appropriate provisions of the Building Code.
   B.   Site Plan: All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by a
site plan drawn to a scale showing the exact size, location and ownership of
record for the site; the exact size of any existing signs and any proposed
signs (including elevation drawings) and the proposed location of the new sign
with relation to buildings and property lines.
   C.   Number Of Billboards: The number of billboards allowed in the City
shall be limited to the number of billboards that have received a legal South
Weber City permit as of the time of adoption of this chapter. The number of
billboards in the City shall never increase. A new billboard shall only be
permitted as replacements or relocations of an existing billboard as permitted
by this title.
   D.   Permitted And Prohibited Locations: Billboards shall be permitted in
the following areas:
      1.   I-84 Corridor: Billboards shall be permitted in any Nonresidential
Zoning District along the I-84 corridor, within three hundred feet (300') of
the I-84 centerline, measured to the nearest support column or pole.
      2.   Highway 89 Corridor: Billboards shall be permitted in any
Nonresidential Zoning District along the Highway 89 corridor, within three
hundred feet (300') of the highway centerline, measured to the billboard pole.
   E.   Removal Of Billboards; Demolition Permit Required: Prior to the removal
of any billboard in South Weber City the following requirements must be met:
      1.   Permit Required: Billboards may be removed by the billboard owner
only after obtaining a demolition permit from South Weber City. Owners that do
not obtain the appropriate demolition permit shall forfeit the right to
reconstruct, relocate, build or convert any billboard that is removed without a
permit.
      2.   Application: Application shall be made by obtaining a demolition
permit provided by the City building official.
   F.   Relocation Of Billboards; Building Permit Required:
      1.   The owner of a billboard may relocate a billboard from any
conforming or nonconforming site to a conforming, approved location only after
a permit is obtained as set forth in this title and must comply with other
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Billboards moved to an approved location shall conform with all sign
requirements of the new location.
      3.   Billboards in nonconforming locations shall not be permitted to
convert or enlarge the sign face.
      4.   Owners relocating billboards from a conforming or nonconforming
location to a conforming location shall install the relocated billboard within
twenty four (24) months of the issuance of a demolition permit, with not more
than two (2) extensions of up to one year each granted by the building
official. If the billboard is not installed within the maximum allowed time
frame, then the ability to relocate said billboard is forfeited.
   G.   Maintenance Of Billboards:
      1.   Each billboard shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and good
condition; including the replacement of defective parts, painting, cleaning,
removal of old or dilapidated advertisements and other acts required for the
maintenance of said sign.
      2.   For any structural changes to an existing billboard, a building
permit shall be required.
   H.   Height, Size, Spacing, And Setbacks: All billboards within South Weber
City shall adhere to the following requirements for height, size, spacing and
setbacks:
      1.   Billboard Height: Billboards shall not exceed a height of sixty five
feet (65') above the highest point of the grade of the highway toward which the
billboard is oriented at a point perpendicular to the billboard.
      2.   Billboard Size: Billboards are limited to six hundred seventy two
(672) square feet for each face.
Billboards (digital and nondigital) are allowed up to two (2) faces that are on
opposite sides of the billboard.
      3.   Billboard Spacing: Spacing of billboards shall follow current State
code.
      4.   Billboard Setbacks:
         a.   No billboard shall be closer than five feet (5') to a front
property line, or right-of-way line measured to the closest edge of the
billboard.
   I.   Digital Billboards: In addition to the following requirements, digital
billboards shall adhere to the same size, height, spacing, setbacks and
locations as all other standard billboards:
      1.   Video animation shall be prohibited including text, image or graphic
scrolling and animated advertisement transitions;
      2.   Digital billboard advertisements shall have a minimum dwell time of
eight (8) seconds and a maximum rotation time of one- fourth (0.25) second;
      3.   Digital billboard advertisements shall not blink, flash, pulse,
twinkle or similar, or be lit by any outside light source;
      4.   Digital billboards that are three hundred feet (300') or closer to
any legally occupied dwelling may be required to adhere to a curfew as required
below:
         a.   If a billboard is within three hundred feet (300') of a legally
occupied dwelling and is within a one hundred twenty degree (120°) radius area
measured from the center point of the digital billboard face then this
billboard face shall adhere to the curfew; or
         b.   If a billboard is within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a
legally occupied dwelling and is within a thirty degree (30°) radius area
measured from the center point of the digital billboard face and beginning at
the one hundred twenty degree (120°) line then this billboard face shall adhere
to the curfew;
         c.   The curfew shall be lifted in the event of the need for emergency
messages.
      5.   All digital billboards shall be equipped with an automatic dimmer
control or other mechanism that automatically controls the sign's brightness
and display period;
      6.   Digital billboards shall not increase the ambient lighting level
more than three-tenths (0.3) foot-candle when measured by a foot-candle meter,
perpendicular to the digital face, at a distance of three hundred feet (300');
      7.   Digital billboards shall not be larger than six hundred seventy two
(672) square feet;
      8.   After installation, the applicant shall certify that the billboard
has been tested and complies with the motion, dwell time, brightness, rotation
time, and all other requirements herein. The City may request certification of
compliance at any time;
      9.   A building permit shall be required for the conversion of any
billboard face. (Ord. 13-17, 11-12-2013)
CHAPTER 10
   NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND SIGNS
SECTION:
10-10-1: Effect Of Chapter
10-10-2: Continuation
10-10-3: Expansion Or Enlargement
10-10-4: Alterations
10-10-5: Change Of Use
10-10-6: Termination
10-10-1: EFFECT OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter qualify and provide for the continuation of use
of any building structures, land or sign which either existed as a legal use
before the effective date hereof or which was lawfully operated or used
thereafter in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance codified herein,
but which by reason of amendment to this title became a use which is not
permitted in the zone in which it is located. (1989 Code § 12-16-001)
10-10-2: CONTINUATION:
Subject to all limitations herein set forth, the operation of a nonconforming
use and the maintenance of a nonconforming structure or sign may be continued
after the effective date hereof. Following the effective date of any amendment
hereto by which a use, structure or sign becomes nonconforming, the owner of
any land, use, structure or sign may register such nonconforming use, structure
or sign by filing with the building inspector an affidavit setting forth the
time that such use, structure or sign came into existence, the size of the
structure or sign and the size and extent of the nonconforming use, structure
or sign existing on the effective date hereof or applicable amendment. The
building inspector shall preserve said affidavits and on the basis of said
affidavit, certificates of occupancy shall be issued for each nonconforming
use, structure or sign. One copy shall be sent to the owner and one copy shall
be retained by the building inspector. (1989 Code § 12-16-002)
10-10-3: EXPANSION OR ENLARGEMENT:
   A.   Increase Of Land Area: Land area of any nonconforming use shall not be
increased, except to provide open off street parking space or open off street
loading space for the nonconforming use as required in chapter 8 of this title.
   B.   Floor Area Increase In Structures: Floor area in a structure or
structures occupied by any nonconforming use shall not be increased, except in
accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Extension: A nonconforming use may be extended to include the entire
floor area of the existing building in which it is conducted at the time the
use became nonconforming, providing no structural alterations are made and a
certificate of occupancy is first obtained. (1989 Code § 12-16-003)
      2.   Accessory Use Purposes: Upon permit by the planning commission, a
detached accessory building may be erected to provide garage or other shelter
for the protection of equipment and other property used in connection with the
nonconforming use; provided however, that such increase in floor area would not
permit the enlargement of the main function of the nonconforming use at that
time or any time thereafter, and such addition conforms to the regulations of
the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-14-2006)
      3.   Sanitation Or Safety When Required: Any nonconforming structure or
structures housing a nonconforming use or portion thereof may be enlarged to
the extent such facilities for sanitation or safety are required in writing by
the proper authorities. (1989 Code § 12-16-003)
10-10-4: ALTERATIONS:
   A.   Unsafe Structures: Any nonconforming structure or structures housing a
nonconforming use or portion thereof may be restored to a safe condition as
required by the proper authority, in writing.
   B.   Unhealthful Conditions: Any structure or portion thereof declared to be
in need of repair or alteration to provide needed healthful and sanitary
conditions may be altered to the extent that such facilities required by the
proper authority are provided. (1989 Code § 12-16-004)
10-10-5: CHANGE OF USE:
Except by permit of the planning commission as provided in this title, the
nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be changed except to a
conforming use, but where such change is made to a conforming use, the use
shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. (Ord. 2006-01, 2-
14-2006)
10-10-6: TERMINATION:
   A.   Abandonment: A nonconforming use of a building or a nonconforming use
of land or a nonconforming sign which has been abandoned or discontinued for a
continuous period of one year, shall not thereafter be returned to such
nonconforming use. (1989 Code § 12-16-006)
   B.   Destruction Or Damage: A nonconforming structure or sign or a building
or a structure occupied by a nonconforming use which is damaged or destroyed by
fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God or public enemy
may be restored, and the occupancy of such building, structure or part thereof
which existed at the time of such damage or destruction may be continued or
resumed; provided, that such restoration is started within a period of one year
from the date of destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion; and
provided, that such restoration does not increased the floor space devoted to
the nonconforming use which existed at the time the building became
nonconforming. (1989 Code § 12-16-006; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 11
SUPPLEMENTARY AND QUALIFYING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Effect Of Regulations
10-11-2: Limitations On External Effects Of Uses
10-11-3: Main And Accessory Buildings
10-11-4: Setback And Yard Space Regulations
10-11-5: General And Miscellaneous Provisions
10-11-6: Limitations For Land And Building Uses
10-11-7: Animal Keeping Regulations
10-11-8: Access Roads
10-11-9: Storage Of Combustible Or Flammable Liquid
10-11-10: Conditions For Temporary Office Quarters
10-11-11: Home Occupations
10-11-1: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the zone regulations appearing elsewhere in this title. (1989
Code § 12-17-001)
10-11-2: LIMITATIONS ON EXTERNAL EFFECTS OF USES:
Every use shall be subject to all the requirements stated in this section.
   A.   Emission Or Generation Of Undesirable Effects: Every use shall be so
operated that it does not emit an obnoxious or dangerous degree of fumes, dust,
smoke or other form of air pollution, heat, glare, radiation or noise.
   B.   Outdoor Storage And Waste Disposal:
      1.   Unless otherwise specifically permitted, no highly flammable or
explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk aboveground. Other
outdoor storage facilities for junkyards, fuel, raw materials and products,
except for agricultural products and permitted above grade waste disposal areas
shall be enclosed by a fence or wall at least six feet (6') in height and
impervious to sight, adequate to seal such facilities from adjacent property
and the street unless expressly exempted by this title. Such wall or fence
shall be constructed or maintained in such a way and of such materials as to be
pleasing to the sight from the street.
      2.   No materials or waste shall be deposited upon any property in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off such property by natural causes
or forces. All materials or waste which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive
to rodents or insects, may not be stored outdoors unless put in closed
containers.
      3.   No yard or other open space around an existing building or which is
hereinafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this title shall be used for the storage of junk, building
materials, debris, obsolete vehicles or commercial equipment, and no other land
shall be used for such purposes except as specifically permitted herein.
      4.   Open storage of hay or other agricultural products shall be located
not less than forty feet (40') from a public street, and fifty feet (50') from
any dwelling on adjoining property.
   C.   Enclosure Of Uses: Every use except for agriculture, parks and
playgrounds, unless expressly exempted in the regulations for the zone in which
it is located or which is clearly understood in the context as a use which
cannot be enclosed, shall be operated in its entirety within a completely
enclosed structure. Any use described in subsection B of this section, exempted
from being enclosed as provided herein, shall be fenced as provided therein
unless similarly exempted. (1989 Code § 12-17-002)
10-11-3: MAIN AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Building Permits: No building permit for any main building may be
issued or such building erected on any lot having frontage on a dedicated, but
unopened or undeveloped street, until and unless such street is rough graded to
a grade approved by the city.
   B.   Effect Of Official Map: Whenever an official map has been recorded in
the office of the city recorder proposing to widen an existing street, the map
street line provided by the official map shall be considered as the front line
of a building lot and the setback from the line shall be the same as required
for any front setback. No building or structure shall be erected within a
proposed street shown on the Official Map.
   C.   Building Lot For Buildings Required: Every building excepting those
housing public use, public utilities, commercial or industrial uses in single
ownership and accessory and temporary uses and those used in conjunction with
agriculture, parks and playgrounds or other uses expressly exempted, shall be
erected on separate ground area herein called the "building lot" which shall be
designated, provided and continuously maintained for main buildings and their
accessory buildings, and no accessory building shall be erected on any such
building lot until the main building has been erected thereon, unless both main
and accessory buildings are being erected simultaneously. Except for planned
dwelling groups as specifically authorized in this Title, no more than one
dwelling structure shall occupy any one building lot.
   D.   Accessory To Agriculture And Housing Animals Or Fowl:
      1.   No hay barn, silo, equipment shed or storage building may be located
closer than ten feet (10') to any side or rear lot line and one hundred feet
(100') to any public street or dwellings on adjacent property, except that on
corner lots, such building may be located no closer than fifty feet (50') to
one of the public streets. Greenhouses or other shelters used in connection
with the growing of ornamental plants and flowers may be located as provided
for the location of accessory buildings and structures in the zone regulations.
      2.   All pens, sheds, barns, coops and stables housing animals and fowl
shall be located not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a public
street and one hundred feet (100') from any main buildings on adjacent lots,
except that on corner lots such buildings shall be located not closer than
fifty feet (50') to one of the public streets. These provisions shall not apply
to pastures. (1989 Code § 12-17-003)
   E.   Private Swimming Pool And Tennis Court Location: A private outside
swimming pool or tennis court may be constructed as an accessory use to a main
building within the side or rear yard thereof; provided, that it is set back
from the side and rear lot lines not less than four feet (4') and not less than
thirty feet (30') from any neighbor's dwelling. When an adjacent lot is vacant,
a swimming pool or tennis court must be located at least fifteen feet (15')
from any side lot line of any neighboring lot. Where a swimming pool is
completely enclosed in a building, the location requirements for accessory and
main buildings shall apply. Where any swimming pool is to be located in the
near vicinity of any septic tank or sewage disposal field, the location of the
same shall first be approved by the Davis County Health Department. Swimming
pools shall be completely fenced with a fence suitable for preventing
accidental human entry into the pool area and at least four feet (4') high.
(1989 Code § 12-17-003; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Maximum Coverage: No accessory building or structure or group of such
buildings or structures, including swimming pools, and no parking space in any
residential zone shall cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
required minimum rear yard space. (1989 Code § 12-17-003)
   G.   Maximum Height Limitations; Exceptions: No maximum height regulation as
stated in this Title shall apply to prevent the construction of penthouse or
roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating
fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings, and
fire or parapet walls, towers, steeples, flag poles, chimneys, smoke stacks,
wireless or television masts or similar structures above the stated height
limits; provided, that no space above the height limits shall be allowed for
the purpose of providing additional floor space. (1989 Code § 12-17-003; amd.
1998 Code)
   H.   Additional Height Allowed: Public buildings and churches authorized in
a zone may be erected to any height, provided the building is set back from
each otherwise established setback line at least one foot (1') for each
additional foot of building height above the normal height limit required for
the zone in which the building is erected.
   I.   Minimum Height Of Dwellings: No dwelling shall be erected where more
than twenty five percent (25%) of its main floor area is or will be below the
finished surface grade at the front yard level. No basement houses shall be
permitted.
   J.   Minimum Size Of Dwellings: No detached dwellings shall be erected
within the City which contains less than six hundred (600) square feet of gross
floor area. (1989 Code § 12-17-003)
10-11-4: SETBACK AND YARD SPACE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Encroachments Into Yard Spaces: No encroachments into minimum required
yard spaces other than the following shall be permitted:
      1.   Belt courses, chimneys not more than eight feet (8') wide, sills and
lintels or other ornamental features may project not more than eighteen inches
(18") into the required front, rear and side yard spaces.
      2.   Cornices, eaves and gutters, unwalled porches, terraces and steps
may be projected into any required front, side or rear yard space not more than
five feet (5'). (1989 Code § 12-17-004)
      3.   Fences and signs: As provided in subsections
10-11-5B and C of this chapter. (1989 Code § 12-17-004; amd. 1998 Code)
      4.   Building accessories designed and intended to control light entering
a building and being either a permanent or temporary part of such building may
project three feet (3') into the required yard space; provided, that they are
attached only to the wall of the main building. (1989 Code § 12-17-004)
      5.   Gasoline pump islands, where permitted, shall be set back a minimum
of twelve feet (12'). Pump islands under roofs or canapes must comply with the
building setback requirements.
   B.   Reductions; Conditions: In any C zone which abuts on an R zone, a
setback for buildings shall be required adjacent thereto as set forth in the
zone regulations; provided, that this setback may be waived along any portion
of the common property and zoning boundary, except for a distance of seventy
five feet (75') back from a street line where such street line and zone
boundary intersects where a building of fire resistant construction is erected
and the height at property line does not exceed ten feet (10'), for each one
foot (1') from the boundary line until the ten foot (10') setback is reached.
In no case may the eaves of the roof of such building extend or project over
the property line. (1989 Code § 12-17-004; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Yard Space For One Building Only: No required yard or other open space
around an existing building or which is hereafter provided around any building
for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall be
considered as providing yard or open space for any other building, nor shall
any yard or other open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a
yard or open space on a lot or on a building that is to be erected or
established; acquired by purchase of or other means by making substandard the
side yard or width of any adjacent lot. No space needed to meet the width,
setback, area, parking or other requirements of this title for lot or building
may be sold or leased away from such lot or building.
   D.   Yards Unobstructed; Exceptions: Every part of a required yard shall be
open from the ground to the sky unobstructed, except for the following:
      1.   Accessory buildings and structures in a rear yard as permitted.
      2.   Permitted encroachments into yard space as set forth in subsection A
of this section.
      3.   Fences and objects of natural growth, except as stated in
subsections
10-11-5B and C of this chapter.
   E.   Parking In Front Yard Prohibited: No portion of a front yard as
required in this title, except driveways, shall be used for the parking of
automobiles or other vehicles, unless developed as a public parking area in
conjunction with a permitted commercial use, or as otherwise permitted in
accordance with section
10-8-5 of this title. (1989 Code § 12-17-004)
   F.   Rear Setback Line; Multi-Frontage Lots: In the case of multi-frontage
lots, no building may be located closer than thirty feet (30') from the
frontage designated at the rear lot line, except by permit of the appeal
authority. (1989 Code § 12-17-009; amd. Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013)
10-11-5: GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Water And Sewer Facilities: No building permit shall be issued for main
buildings or other buildings which require culinary water and sanitary sewer
facilities, unless it has been shown feasible and is proposed to connect the
building plumbing system to the city water and sewer systems.
   B.   Fence Height: Except as otherwise required in subsection C of this
section, no fence or wall or similar device in any residential zone may be
constructed or placed in any required yard in excess of six feet (6') in
height. Where a retaining wall is reasonable and necessary and is located on a
line separating lots, such retaining wall may be topped by a fence, wall or
hedge of a maximum of six feet (6'). Fences, walls or similar devices in any
zone other than a residential zone which exceed six feet (6') in height shall
be considered conditional uses and must obtain conditional use approval, either
as part of an overall site approval or as a separate matter, prior to erection.
   C.   Clear View Across Corner Of Property Required: In all zones which
require a front yard, no obstruction to view in excess of two feet (2') in
height above the level of the curb or road side, where no such curb exists,
shall be permitted on any corner lot within a triangle, formed by the street,
property lines and line connecting the between points forty feet (40') from the
intersection of the streets and property lines, except for the following:
      1.   Permitted signs where only the minimum necessary supports are
visible to a height of ten feet (10') above the level of the curb or road side.
      2.   A reasonable number of trees pruned or maintained in such a way as
to provide reasonably unobstructed vision to the driver of automobiles through
such area. (1989 Code § 12-17-005)
   D.   Reduction In Size Of Lots Permitted:
      1.   No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and/or area
requirements for a building lot for the zone in which it is located may be cut
up and placed under separate deed or sold from a larger parcel of land for the
purpose whether immediate or future of building or development as a building
lot. (Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013)
      2.   No lot or parcel of land held under separate ownership at the time
the ordinance codified herein became effective (June 23, 1973) the width, depth
or area of which is less than required by the ordinance codified herein, may be
further reduced in any manner. (1989 Code § 12-17-005)
10-11-6: LIMITATIONS FOR LAND AND BUILDING USES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title setting the permitted uses
and permitted structures, the following use limitations shall apply:
   A.   Use Of Land, Buildings And Structures: No land shall be used or
occupied, no building or structure shall be designed, erected, altered, used or
occupied for use, except for uses specifically permitted on the land upon which
the building or structure is located or erected or use established as permitted
in the regulations for the zone in which said land is located.
   B.   Temporary Use Of Land And Structures: Upon written application showing
clear and demonstrable needs of the use, the planning commission and city
council may issue a building permit and temporary certificate of occupancy for
the use of the land and/or the erection and use of buildings for a temporary
use in any zone not permitting the following uses in that zone; provided, that
any such building permit shall be valid for a period of not to exceed sixty
(60) days and such temporary certificate of occupancy shall be valid for a
period of six (6) months, subject to renewal at the discretion of the city
council for not more than three (3) successive periods thereafter. (1989 Code §
12-17-006)
   C.   Guarantee Of Improvements: All improvements required by this chapter or
by the planning commission shall be guaranteed in a manner which is consistent
with the provisions of title 11, chapter 5 of this code.
   D.   Building Permit Issuance: No building permit for any structure within a
development on a private right of way shall be issued until:
      1.   All required improvements have been installed, inspected and are
operable.
      2.   All easements and rights of way for utilities and access have been
recorded in the office of the Davis County recorder.
      3.   The covenants, conditions and restrictions have been recorded in the
office of the Davis County recorder. (Ord. 13-07, 2-26-2013; amd. Ord. 2021-14,
1-11-2022)
10-11-7: ANIMAL KEEPING REGULATIONS:
   A.   All Animals: All animals shall be regulated by Davis County animal
control.
   B.   Household Pets: Household pets shall be permitted in any zone provided
the number does not exceed the limit as regulated by the current Davis County
code or as defined in this code.
   C.   Chicken Regulations: Any number of hens shall be permitted in the
agricultural (A), agricultural-aircraft hazard (A-10), residential low (R-L),
and residential low-moderate (R-LM) zones, and up to twenty five (25) hens
shall be permitted in the residential moderate (R-M) zone subject to the
following regulations:
      1.   Chicken pens or coops shall be prohibited within ten feet (10') of
the primary structure on the lot and within one foot (1') from side property
line. This regulation applies to mobile chicken coops as well as fixed
structures.
      2.   Chickens must be kept securely enclosed in a yard or pen at all
times.
   D.   Animal Keeping Zones: In any A, A-10 or R-L zone, animals and fowl may
be kept for family use outside the dwelling; provided that the provisions of
subsection
10-11-3D of this chapter are met and the number of animals or fowl do not
exceed the number permitted by the following schedule, except that animals
classified as farm industry in the A or A-10 zone shall have no such
limitations.
   E.   Points Per Acreage: Each full one-half (1/2) acre of property within
the lot, or property within the agricultural (A), agricultural-aircraft hazard
(A-10) or residential low (R-L) zones, shall be eligible to contain or house
animals rating fifty (50) points.
   F.   Assignment Of Points: Points are assigned to animals grouped as
follows:
      1.   Large animals such as horses, cows, llamas, pigs or ostriches,
twenty (20) points each.
      2.   Medium animals, such as sheep or goats, but not including pigs, ten
(10) points each.
      3.   Small animals, such as geese, rabbits, two (2) points each.
   G.   Roosters: Roosters shall only be permitted in the agricultural (A),
agricultural-aircraft hazard (A-10) and residential low (R-L) zones.
   H.   Nuisances: The Davis County animal ordinance shall govern animal
nuisances. (Ord. 12-03, 3-27-2012)
10-11-8: ACCESS ROADS:
Private roads providing access to commercial or industrial property shall not
be permitted to be constructed or used through properties in any R zone. (1989
Code § 12-17-008)
10-11-9: STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE OR FLAMMABLE LIQUID:
The storage of more than one hundred ten (110) gallons of combustible liquid or
more than thirty (30) gallons of a flammable liquid, as they are defined in the
fire code, whether in aboveground or belowground storage tanks, is permitted
only in the A, A-10, C, C-H, T-1 and N-R zones. Where permitted, the storage of
combustible or flammable liquid shall be done in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the building code and the fire code. (Ord. 2002-4, 3-26-2002)
10-11-10: CONDITIONS FOR TEMPORARY OFFICE QUARTERS:
During the development of properties within the city there may arise the need
to establish temporary quarters for on site construction company offices or
real estate sales offices. Mobile construction or sales offices may be allowed
in any zone for a period not to exceed one year provided they meet the
following conditions:
   A.   No construction or sales office will be allowed prior to the final
approval of the development for which the office is needed.
   B.   Mobile offices will comply with setback requirements for the zone in
which it is located.
   C.   Off street parking must be provided for all employees that will work in
the office as well as two (2) spaces for visitors.
   D.   Mobile construction offices will be removed within fourteen (14) days
of substantial completion of the construction project.
   E.   Mobile sales offices for sale of real estate may be allowed within the
development being marketed. They may also be allowed within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the development being marketed provided proof of permission to
locate the office on the subject property is provided.
   F.   Mobile sales offices shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of a
model home completion within the same development for which the mobile office
is needed.
   G.   A business license must be obtained to operate a business in the city
prior to occupying a mobile sales office. The business license is transferable
to a model home taking the place of the mobile office. (Ord. 98-16, 7-28-1998)
10-11-11: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Business License Required: A home occupation permit is required in
addition to and before a business license is issued, and the granting of said
permit shall not relieve the permittee of any licensing requirement of the
city, the state or any other public agency.
   B.   Conditions Required: Each and every one of the following conditions
must be observed at all times by the operator of a home occupation:
      1.   Employment Restricted To Family Members: Only family members related
by blood, marriage or adoption, who are bona fide residents of the dwelling
unit shall be employed on said premises. However, during the calendar year, one
part time employee may work in connection with the home occupation, if approved
by the planning commission.
      2.   Incidental And Secondary Use: The home occupation will be clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential use of the property and will not
physically change the dwelling to the extent that it would alter the
residential character of the dwelling or the residential atmosphere of the
neighborhood in which it is located. Furthermore, it shall not unreasonably
disturb the neighborhood by reason of color, design, material, construction,
odors, lighting, sounds, noise or vibrations.
      3.   Conducted Within Primary Structure; Exception: The home occupation
shall be conducted principally within the primary structure on the premises.
After careful review for fire and safety concerns, home occupations may be
conducted within garages and accessory structures which are typically
associated with residential uses. The home occupation in all cases shall not
exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total livable floor area of the primary
structure, subject to an exception approved by the planning commission for
cause.
      4.   Signs: Class 2 signs shall be permitted advertising home
occupations. They must comply with all regulations of chapter 9 of this title.
      5.   Inventory And Supplies: Inventory and supplies for the home
occupation shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the permitted home
occupation area.
      6.   Vehicles: Maintenance and service vehicles related to home
occupations may be kept or parked in the open; provided, that the number does
not exceed one motorized vehicle and one trailer or other nonmotorized vehicle,
and provided the total sign area for the home occupation, including any sign
area on the vehicle, does not exceed the area allowed by chapter 9 of this
title. Vehicles which do not meet those requirements must be kept in a garage
or screened outdoor area.
      7.   Traffic: The home occupation shall generate no greater vehicular
traffic than that commonly associated with the neighborhood in which it is
located (i.e., heavy trucks, delivery or service vehicles, etc.). The home
occupation shall not occupy the area in the garage required for two (2) parking
spaces.
      8.   Parking: All vehicles of customers or residents must be parked in
authorized portions of the lot upon which the home occupation is located.
      9.   Code Conformance: There shall be complete conformity with fire,
building, plumbing, electrical and health codes and to all state and county
ordinances.
      10.   Hazards: The home occupation shall not create a hazard by using
flammable, explosives or other dangerous materials or by keeping, raising or
storing animals which are capable of inflicting harm or discomfort or
endangering the health and safety of any person or property.
      11.   Demand For Services: The home occupation shall not create a demand
for city or utility services or community facilities in excess of those usually
and customarily provided for residential uses.
      12.   Electrical Or Plumbing Equipment: The home occupation shall not
involve the installation in the dwelling of special plumbing or electrical
equipment which cannot be used with the electrical or plumbing service
customarily used in a dwelling.
      13.   Special Recommended Conditions: Any special condition recommended
by the building inspector and/or the fire chief and made of record in the home
occupation permit that they deem necessary to carry out the intent of this
chapter shall be met.
   C.   Renewal Of Permit: All home occupation permits shall be good for one
year unless a lesser time is specified and shall be renewable at the time the
business license is renewed. Permits may be automatically renewed by the
planning commission or city council or their designated agent without
additional review, unless otherwise specified by the approving body on the
permit; and provided there have been no reported violations, complaints or
detrimental matters which might require reconsideration of the permit. If the
permit is not renewed, then the applicant desiring a permit shall follow the
same procedure required for an initial application. (Ord. 02-7, 5-28-2002)
CHAPTER 12
   ARCHITECTURAL SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION:
10-12-1: Scope And Application
10-12-2: Purpose
10-12-3: Review Process
10-12-4: Provision Of Curb, Gutter And Sidewalks
10-12-1: SCOPE AND APPLICATION:
The provisions of this Chapter shall pertain to all development (new and
additions) in commercial and industrial zones. Regulations of this Chapter
shall be in addition to the conditional use permit procedures (if required).
(1989 Code § 12-18-001)
10-12-2: PURPOSE:
A design review procedure is established in order to satisfy the
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan relating to the visual quality of the
City. Such procedure is intended to assure that the general appearance of
buildings and structures and the improvement of land shall contribute to an
orderly and harmonious appearance and to safe, functionally efficient
development and therefore, to the stability of property values and the general
welfare of the community. (1989 Code § 12-18-002)
10-12-3: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Architectural Drawings And Site Development Plans: When required by
this Title, architectural drawings and/or site development plans shall be
presented, drawn to scale, and shall show any and all of the following: the
building lot and dimensions, building locations, landscaping, existing trees
and shrubbery, off-street parking facilities, vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, location and width of abutting streets, existing and proposed
grades, surface drainage and a north arrow. In addition, the plans shall
include scale drawings of major exterior elevations and proposed exterior color
scheme.
   B.   Review And Approval By Planning Commission: The Planning Commission
shall determine if the proposed architectural and development plans submitted
are consistent with this Chapter and with the purpose and objectives of this
Title.
   C.   Considerations In Review Of Application: The Planning Commission and
the Zoning Administrator shall consider the following matters, and others when
applicable, in their review of proposals, and may refer the plans to one or
more expert consultants if the Planning Commission deems it necessary:
      1.   Traffic Safety And Congestion: Considerations relating to traffic
safety and traffic congestion:
         a.   The effect of the site development plan on traffic conditions on
abutting streets.
         b.   The layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions
of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives and walkways.
         c.   The arrangement and accuracy of off-street parking facilities to
prevent traffic congestion and compliance with the provisions of Chapter 8 of
this Title.
         d.   The location, arrangement and dimension of truck loading and
unloading facilities.
         e.   The circulation patterns within the boundaries of the
development.
         f.   The surfacing and lighting of off-street parking facilities.
      2.   Outdoor Advertising: Considerations relating to outdoor advertising.
Compliance with the provisions of Chapter 9 of this Title.
      3.   Landscaping: Considerations relating to landscaping:
         a.   The location, height and materials of walls, fences, hedges and
screen plantings to ensure harmony with adjacent development or to conceal
storage areas, utility installations or other unsightly development.
         b.   The placement of ground covers, shrubs and trees.
         c.   The unnecessary destruction of existing healthy trees.
         d.   A layout plan for a sprinkling system.
      4.   Design Approval; Conditions: The Planning Commission or the Zoning
Administrator, when authorized, shall decide all applications for design
review. Design approval may include such conditions consistent with the
considerations of this Chapter as the Planning Commission or Zoning
Administrator deem reasonable and necessary under the circumstances to carry
out the intent of this Chapter.
      5.   Notification Of Approval Or Denial: Upon the granting of design
approval, the secretary of the Planning Commission shall prepare and mail or
deliver to the applicant a formal statement thereof, stating the fact of the
grant and any conditions attached thereto, or the fact of denial and the reason
therefore. (1989 Code § 12-18-003)
10-12-4: PROVISION OF CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALKS:
The applicant for site plan approval for multiple dwellings, commercial or
industrial structures and all other business, public and semi-public buildings
requiring motor vehicle access shall provide high-back curb, gutter and
sidewalks along the entire street frontage of the property of any City road or
street, except for entrances to the property, at which places the applicant
shall provide curb cuts or private street entrances. (1989 Code § 12-18-004)
CHAPTER 13
INDUSTRIAL PARKS; SPECIAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Scope And Application
10-13-2: Purpose
10-13-3: Development Requirements
10-13-4: Landscaping
10-13-5: Adverse Conditions Prohibited
10-13-6: Measurement Location
10-13-7: Industrial Performance Standards
10-13-8: Performance Standards Review
10-13-9: Ruling By Planning Commission
10-13-10: Continued Compliance
10-13-11: Investigation
10-13-1: SCOPE AND APPLICATION:
The provisions and special regulations of this chapter will apply to all
proposed industrial development within an L-I, T-1 or N-R zone. The provisions
of this chapter will be in addition to the requirements outlined in the L-I, T-
1 and N-R zones or any other requirements imposed by a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 08-06, 3-25-2008)
10-13-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the industrial park is to provide for a park like healthful
operation environment for industry, from the protection of industry for the
encroachment of uses adverse to the operation and expansion of such industry,
and to protect industries within the district from the adverse effect of other
incompatible industries. These regulations are intended also to reduce the
impact of industries on surrounding nonindustrial land uses; to lessen traffic
congestion; to protect the health and safety of the residents or workers in the
area and within the city in general. (Ord. 08-06, 3-25-2008)
10-13-3: DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Land Area: The minimum land area required for development of an
industrial park within the provisions of this section is five (5) acres.
   B.   Ownership: The development shall be in single or corporate ownership at
the time of application or the subject of an application filed jointly by all
owners of the property.
   C.   Minimum Lot Area: There is no minimum lot area. Lot sizes shall be as
required by the planning commission for site plan approval or conditional use
approval, whichever is appropriate for the proposed land use. Lots may be
established by metes and bounds descriptions after approval of a preliminary
plat and approval and recording of a road dedication plat.
   D.   Minimum Lot Width: Each lot shall have a minimum lot width as approved
by site plan or conditional use permit except within the N-R zone where the
minimum lot width shall be three hundred feet (300') with a minimum street
frontage of seventy feet (70'). No lot shall face directly onto any public
street or highway that abuts the industrial park site.
   E.   Location To Residential Boundary: No main or accessory building shall
be located within fifty feet (50') of the boundary of a residential zone.
   F.   Geotechnical Recommendations: The developer shall have a geotechnical
analysis done on the site by a geotechnical engineer. The report resulting from
that analysis shall make recommendations on proper construction methods for the
site as well as make recommendations on road construction standards based on an
assumption that there will be frequent heavy truck traffic in the industrial
park. Recommendations of the geotechnical report shall be followed both in
development of the industrial park as well as individual lots within the
industrial park.
   G.   Street Overlay: Due to the uncertainty of individual lot locations at
the time of city approval, it is likely that it will become necessary to
introduce street pavement cuts when individual lots are developed to provide
utility connections. In addition to constructing roads according to the
geotechnical recommendations, the developer shall be responsible for
resurfacing all public streets that have been cut to provide utility
connections to lots within the development within four (4) years of recordation
of the street dedication plat. The resurfacing shall consist of milling one and
one-half inches (11/2") of asphalt off the street and overlaying a new two inch
(2") layer of asphalt. The cost of resurfacing all streets in the development
shall be established by the developer's engineer and verified by the city
engineer. The funds required to perform the resurfacing shall be deposited with
the city in an escrow account established for that purpose. If after the
resurfacing is performed there are escrow funds left, they shall be refunded to
the developer of the industrial park. (Ord. 08-06, 3-25-2008)
10-13-4: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Required; Site Plan: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the total site
shall be thoroughly landscaped, including an irrigation system adequate to
maintain such landscaping.
Landscaping shall meet the requirements of chapter 15 of this title. Where
appropriate, a performance bond will be required to ensure compliance with
approved site plans.
   B.   Included Landscaping: Landscaping may include, but not be limited to,
planting of grass, shrubs or trees, decorative plazas and fountains.
Landscaping shall be used to the extent possible to screen visually all
buildings and parking areas from abutting land uses. Landscaping shall meet the
requirements of chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 08-06, 3-25-2008)
10-13-5: ADVERSE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED:
No land or building devoted to uses authorized by this chapter shall be used or
occupied in any manner so as to create dangerous, injurious, noxious or
otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazards; noise or vibration;
smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness, glare,
electrical or other disturbance; liquid or solid refuse or waste; or other
substance, condition or element in such a manner or in such an amount as to
affect adversely the surrounding area or adjoining premises. (Ord. 08-06, 3-25-
2008)
10-13-6: MEASUREMENT LOCATION:
The determination of the existence of dangerous and objectionable elements
shall be made at any point; provided however, that the measurements having to
do with noise, vibration, odors or glare shall be taken at the lot line of the
establishment or use. (Ord. 08-06, 3-25-2008)
10-13-7: INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards are intended to ensure that all industries
will provide necessary modern control methods to protect the city from hazards
and nuisances; to set objective quantitative standards for the maximum
tolerated levels of frequently hazardous or annoying emissions; and to protect
any industry from arbitrary exclusion or persecution based solely on the
characteristics of that type of industry's past controlled operation.
   A.   Noise:
      1.   Level: No use shall emit or cause the emission of sound from a
stationary source such that the one hour equivalent sound level (Leq) of
resultant sound measurement at the lot line of the establishment or use exceeds
by six (6) dB or more than one hour equivalent sound level (Leq) caused by
ground transportation as estimated for that point of measurement and that time
of day, pursuant to FHWA-RD-77-108 highway traffic noise prediction model, or
by other techniques at least as accurate as those set out in FHWA-RD-77-108.
The sound level measuring instrumentation shall conform with ANSI S1.4-1971
type 1, and the measurement procedure shall be compatible with that according
to ANSI S1.13-1971, with the following adjustments:
         a.   Temporal And Tonal Characteristics Of Sound: If the sound has a
pronounced audible tonal quality such as a whine, screech, buzz or hum, or if
the sound has an audible cyclic variation in sound level such as beating or
other amplitude modulation, five (5) dB shall be added to the measured sound
level to allow for increased subjective response to the sound.
         b.   Quasi-Steady Impulsive Sound: Where the sound is of a repetitive
impulse nature so that a steady reading is obtained using the "slow response"
setting on the sound level meter, then ten (10) dB shall be added to the
measured value to allow for the increased subjective response to the sound. An
adjustment may be made under only one of subsection A1a of this section and
this subsection A1b. In a case where both subsections apply, then this
subsection A1b takes precedence.
      2.   Stationary Source: No use shall emit or cause to permit the emission
of sound of an impulsive nature from a stationary source such that it results
in an impulsive sound level at a point of measurement in excess of eighty (80)
dB or in a one hour equivalent level (Leq) exceeding that one hour equivalent
level (Leq) caused by ground transportation as estimated for that point of
measurement and that time of day, pursuant to FHWA-RD-77-108 or equivalent
method.
   B.   Vibration: No vibration (other than from transportation facilities or
temporary construction work) shall be permitted which is discernable without
instruments at the property line.
   C.   Odors: No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be
permitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable when diluted in the
ratio of one volume of odorous air to four (4) volumes of clean air (1:4) at
the point of greatest concentration. Any process which may involve the creation
or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system so
that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail.
   D.   Glare: No direct or sky reflected glare, whether from floodlights or
from high temperature processes, such as combustion or welding or otherwise,
shall be permitted to be visible at the property lines. This restriction shall
not apply to signs or lighting of buildings or grounds for advertising or
protection otherwise permitted by the provision of this chapter.
   E.   Fire And Explosion Hazards: All activities involving and all storage of
flammable and explosive materials shall be provided at any point with adequate
safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate
firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in the
industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited at any point.
   F.   Air Pollution: No particulate or gaseous pollutants shall be emitted
into the air in violation of the Utah state air conservation act, its
amendments, or resulting regulations.
   G.   Liquid Or Solid Wastes: No discharges at any point into a public sewer,
private sewage system or stream, or into the ground shall be allowed contrary
to the Utah state water pollution control act, its amendments, the subsequent
wastewater disposal regulations or the Utah code of solid waste disposal
regulations. (Ord. 08-06, 3-25-2008)
10-13-8: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS REVIEW:
In addition to meeting other application requirements for a conditional use
permit, parties seeking a conditional use permit for an industrial use shall
include in the application a description of the proposed machinery, products
and processes to be located at the development. If, in its opinion, the
proposed use may cause an emission of dangerous or objectionable elements, the
planning commission may refer the application for investigation and report to
one or more expert consultants qualified to advise as to whether a proposed use
will conform to the applicable performance standards specified in section
10-13-7 of this chapter. A copy of such report shall be promptly furnished to
the applicant. The cost of such expert report shall be borne by the applicant.
(Ord. 08-06, 3-25-2008)
10-13-9: RULING BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
Within thirty (30) days after the planning commission has received the
aforesaid application or report, if a report was required, or within such
period as agreed to by the applicant, the planning commission shall determine
whether reasonable measures are being employed to assure compliance with the
applicable performance standards. On such basis the planning commission may
authorize or refuse to authorize issuance of a conditional use permit or may
require a modification of the proposed plans, construction specifications,
device or operation, and shall so inform the building inspector. (Ord. 08-06,
3-25-2008)
10-13-10: CONTINUED COMPLIANCE:
Any permit so authorized and taken shall evidence only that reasonable measures
are being taken. It shall not relieve the applicant of the responsibility of
meeting such standards when the plant is actually in operation; and, in case of
a failure to perform in accordance with the standards, whatever additional
devices or modifications in process shall be necessary to achieve full
compliance with the standards shall be the sole responsibility of the
applicant. (Ord. 08-06, 3-25-2008)
10-13-11: INVESTIGATION:
The zoning administrator shall investigate any purported violation of
performance standards and, if necessary for such investigation, may request
that the planning commission employ qualified experts. If, after public hearing
and due notice, the planning commission finds that a violation has existed or
does exist, it shall order the zoning administrator to serve notice that
compliance with the performance standards must be achieved within a specified
period of time or the plant will be shut down. Should the violation of
performance standards threaten the public health, convenience or welfare, the
planning commission may order the offending plant to cease operation until
proper steps are taken to correct the conditions which cause the violation. The
services of any qualified experts employed by the planning commission to advise
in establishing a violation shall be paid by the violator if said violation is
established by the city. (Ord. 08-06, 3-25-2008)
CHAPTER 14
SENSITIVE LANDS DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-14-1: Purpose
10-14-2: Scope And Application
10-14-3: Sensitive Lands Overlay Map
10-14-4: Appeals; Boundaries Of Mapped Hazards
10-14-5: Sensitive Lands Submittal And Approval Process For Building Permits
And Site Plans
10-14-6: Preliminary Subdivision Review And Approval Procedure
10-14-7: Final Approval
10-14-8: Determination Of Average Slope
10-14-9: Density, Lot Size, Width And Characteristics
10-14-10: Road Access And Fire Requirements
10-14-11: Flag Lots
10-14-12: Development Standards
10-14-13: Wildland-Urban Interface
10-14-1: PURPOSE:
The city council of South Weber, Utah, deems that, in order to keep the peace,
health, safety, and welfare and promote the best interest of the inhabitants of
the city of South Weber, these "sensitive lands development regulations" be
created, which shall provide standards, guidelines and criteria, having the
effect of minimizing flooding, fire, erosion, and other natural and manmade
hazards and protect people and property while protecting the natural scenic
character of the sensitive land areas not suitable for development, or suitable
for development only after mitigation of hazards and ensuring the efficient
expenditure of public funds.
The standards, guidelines, and criteria to be achieved by the overlay zone
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   The protection of the public from natural and manmade hazards;
   B.   The minimizing of the threat and consequential damages of fire in
foothill areas by establishing fire protection measures;
   C.   The preservation of natural features, wildlife habitat and open space;
(Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001)
   D.   The preservation of public access to mountain areas and the
preservation of natural drainage channels;
   E.   The preservation and enhancement of visual and environmental quality by
use of natural vegetation and the prohibition of excessive excavation,
terracing and removal of natural vegetation; (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
   F.   The establishment of traffic circulation facilities that ensure ingress
and egress for vehicles including emergency vehicles into all developed areas
at any time of the year with minimal cuts, fills, or visible scars;
   G.   The encouragement of a variety of development designs and concepts that
are compatible with the natural terrain of the foothill areas, that will
preserve open space and natural landscape;
   H.   The establishment of land use management criteria that will encourage
protection of natural elements while allowing a harmonious and satisfying
residential environment;
   I.   The encouragement of regard for the view of the foothills, as well as
the view from the foothills; and
   J.   The determination of areas in the city that, due to geologic hazards,
may not be suitable for development, or may require engineering measures to
reduce the hazards to an acceptable level. (Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001)
10-14-2: SCOPE AND APPLICATION:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands in South Weber
City that are so designated as sensitive lands on the sensitive lands overlay
map located in the South Weber general plan or as determined by the city.
   B.   This chapter makes additional provisions to those set forth in title 11
of this code and other chapters of this title. Additional requirements not
covered in this chapter may be required by the city if they determine that it
reasonably appears that there are additional hazards associated with the site.
In the event of conflict between such foregoing designated chapters of this
title, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
   C.   The provisions of these amendments shall have no application to
subdivisions, planned unit developments, or other construction projects, which
have been granted preliminary approval prior to the adoption of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001)
10-14-3: SENSITIVE LANDS OVERLAY MAP:
The South Weber general plan map specifies areas of the city which are
development sensitive for various defined reasons. When these areas
are proposed for development, the applicant must go through the process
outlined in this chapter in conjunction with title 11, "Subdivision
Regulations", of this code. Properties within this overlay may not be suitable
for development or may only be suitable after mitigation of the hazards
associated with the specific site. Development within sensitive lands may have
one or more of (but is not limited to) the following natural and manmade
hazards: slope ten percent (10%) or above, dense brush, faults/fault zones,
high liquefaction potential, debris flow and other sediment laden flows,
flooding, landslides, rockfalls, shallow groundwater, potentially contaminated
grounds, groundwater, and wetlands.
In the event that there are hazards in an area that are not depicted on the
sensitive lands overlay map, studies, as determined by the city and at the
developer's expense, may be required and the process outlined in this chapter
will be followed. The sensitive lands overlay map is located in the map section
of the general plan. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
10-14-4: APPEALS; BOUNDARIES OF MAPPED HAZARDS:
The boundary lines of the sensitive lands overlay and the hazards therein are a
general depiction and should be field verified.
Where there is a conflict between the boundary lines illustrated on the map and
actual field conditions, or where mapped hazards are not present within a
particular area, the dispute shall be settled as follows:
   A.   The applicant shall submit to the city, technical and geologic evidence
by a qualified geotechnical engineer or geologist to support the claim.
   B.   The sketch plan review committee may require additional reviews. These
reviews may be generated by the Utah geologic survey (UGS) or an independent
geologist or geotechnical engineer. The cost for all reviews is the sole
responsibility of the developer.
   C.   If, after additional reviews are made, the sketch plan review committee
agrees with the applicant's engineer and the site is determined to be out of
the sensitive lands overlay area, the applicant may proceed with their
application as outlined in title 11, "Subdivision Regulations", of this code.
(Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
   D.   If, after additional reviews are made, a consensus is not reached by
the sketch plan review committee and the applicant, the item may be appealed to
the city appeal authority.
   E.   The applicant shall pay any costs incurred for any review considered
necessary by the sketch plan review committee, other than costs relating to the
city's geological hazards ordinance, the costs for which are equally shared by
the applicant and the city. (Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013)
10-14-5: SENSITIVE LANDS SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL PROCESS FOR BUILDING PERMITS
AND SITE PLANS:
Each step should be followed in the order outlined.
   A.   A meeting may be requested to determine the feasibility of the
development and review the sensitive lands overlay map from the general plan to
determine if the site is in the sensitive lands area and if it is, what hazards
are associated with the site. If the site is outside of the sensitive lands
area, the process outlined in title 11, "Subdivision Regulations", of this code
will be followed. If it is subsequently determined that the site is within the
sensitive lands area or the site has geologic hazards that are not shown on the
map the review process will be pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   All building permits on single lots, which are in the sensitive lands'
areas, will follow the outline through this section up to subsection D of this
section after which the building permit may be issued administratively after it
is determined that the lot can be developed in accordance with the intent of
this chapter.
      If the only hazard associated with the site is high liquefaction, then
the applicant must submit a soils report with recommendations for control of
subsurface water as well as footing and foundation design after which the
proposal will follow the process outlined in title 11 of this code.
   C.   All applications required in this section shall first be submitted for
review by the City Planner or designee and the City Engineer or designee. The
following items are required to be submitted with the application for site
plan:
      1.   Location of the proposal, with identification of abutting streets;
      2.   A plan showing the average "slope" (as defined in section 10-14-8 of
this chapter) of the proposed site broken down into homogenous slope zones,
generally with no more than a five percent (5%) difference in slope within each
slope zone and with each zone no smaller than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet;
      3.   The number of lots;
      4.   The location and size of proposed lots;
      5.   Location, width, and grade of all proposed streets or hard surfaced
areas, and radius of any cul-de-sac;
      6.   Soil/geologic report that addresses all items in the scope of work
as approved by the committee and, if applicable, recommendations by a qualified
geotechnical engineer. Reports shall be site specific and identify all geologic
hazards, whether on or off site, if it affects the particular property
including the following hazard(s):
         a.   Flood history and potential; proximity to known canals, lakes,
streams, and alluvial fan flooding;
         b.   Definition of any zones of deformation with respect to active
faults and recommended setbacks therefrom;
         c.   Evidence for other mass movement of soil and rock (landslides,
debris flows, rockfalls);
         d.   Evaluation of the site for global and local instabilities;
         e.   Identification of anomalies of the terrain or characteristics of
the geological materials which would have any potential impact upon the use of
site;
         f.   Determination of characteristics including any contamination that
may be present in the groundwater or soil;
         g.   The report shall contain written recommendations for construction
of structures and avoidance or mitigation of the hazards;
         h.   Report on soil characteristics. Data regarding the nature,
distribution, and strength of soils within the project area. The soil report
shall include a unified classification of all soils with an estimate of
susceptibility to erosion, plasticity index, liquid limit, shrink-swell
potential, and general suitability for development;
         i.   Estimate of the likely highest level of the water table
considering the long-term effects of development and irrigation.
   D.   After the application is received, the geologic and soil report will be
reviewed by the City Planner or designee and the City Engineer or designee and,
if geologic hazards exist, other geotechnical advisors which may include the
Utah geologic survey (UGS). If after review, the committee concurs with the
geologic and soil report submitted by the applicant, the item will be forwarded
to the planning commission for review for preliminary plan or site plan
approval. If the submitted information does not provide sufficient data for
recommendation of approval, the City may require additional studies to be
performed.
   A determination by the City Planner or designee and the City Engineer or
designee that the site plan cannot be developed may be appealed by the
applicant to the appeal authority by filing of a written notice of appeal
within thirty (30) days of the action.
(Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013; amd. Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
10-14-6: PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
The following provisions shall be required in addition to those required by
title 11 of this code:
   A.   A protective easement may be required to be granted to the city for
protection and preservation of sensitive lands;
   B.   Indication of existing and proposed contours;
   C.   Indication of the present and proposed slope for each graded area;
   D.   Location and identification (by species) of existing vegetation, an
indication of vegetation proposed for removal, and a revegetation proposal;
   E.   Existing and proposed drainage patterns;
   F.   Location and depth of all proposed fills and cuts;
   G.   Description of the methods to be employed to achieve stabilization and
compaction. This requirement may be satisfied if it was required at conceptual
or annexation approval as part of the slope stabilization proposal;
   H.   Location and capacities of proposed drainage, structures, and erosion
control measures;
   I.   Computation of runoff for storm events before and after development
(storm data requirements given by the city engineer); and
   J.   Location of existing buildings or structures on the site and location
of existing buildings and structures on adjacent properties which are within
one hundred feet (100') of the site, or which may be affected by any proposed
grading or construction. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
10-14-7: FINAL APPROVAL:
The following provisions shall be required in addition to title 11 of this
code:
   A.   If a project has proceeded forward with geologic/hydrologic or
engineering recommendations the city may require that a qualified geotechnical
engineer be on site, at the cost of the developer, for all phases of
construction. Letters stating that all required improvements have been
installed as required shall be filed with the city within five (5) working days
of completing the improvements.
   B.   Restrictive covenants may be required to be submitted that contain the
following:
      1.   A complete description of the geologic condition of the subject
property, including references to all relevant reports.
      2.   Any restrictions regarding structures, grading, retaining,
vegetation, etc. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
10-14-8: DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE SLOPE:
Average slope of an area shall be determined by the use of computer software or
by using the following formula:
   S = (I x L x 0.00229) / A
 
S =      Average percent slope of the area
A =      Size of the area in acres (horizontal projection)
L =      Summation of the length of all contour lines in feet
I =      Contour interval in feet
0.00229  is a factor that converts square feet to acres
 
(Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
10-14-9: DENSITY, LOT SIZE, WIDTH AND CHARACTERISTICS:
   A.   Single-Family Dwelling Units:
      1.   Maximum Density: The maximum density with respect to lots upon which
single-family dwelling units are located in subdivisions or otherwise shall be
determined by reference to the following table:
 
Average Slope Of Development Site Maximum Density      Minimum Lot Width
0 – 15 percent                  As permitted in zone As permitted in zone
15.1 – 20 percent               Zone density x 0.75  100 feet
20.1 – 30 percent               Zone density x 0.5   100 feet
30.1 percent +                    Not permitted         
 
(Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001)
      2.   Maximum Impervious Material Coverage: The maximum impervious
material coverage that shall be allowed on lots upon which single-family
dwelling units are located shall be forty percent (40%) of the total lot area,
or five thousand (5,000) square feet, whichever is less. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-
2009)
      3.   Usable Area: Single-family dwelling structures shall be located only
upon areas constituting usable land and which area shall be fully contiguous
and shall be at least five thousand (5,000) square feet in space, and shall
have a minimum dimension, either length or width, of fifty feet (50').
      4.   Lot And Access Design: Single-family dwelling structures shall not
be located farther than two hundred feet (200') from the nearest public street.
(Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001)
10-14-10: ROAD ACCESS AND FIRE REQUIREMENTS:
Every structure which lies farther than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a
public street to the nearest point on the structure shall be accessible to fire
department apparatus by way of an access road having all weather drivable and
maintainable surface with not less than twenty feet (20') of unobstructed width
and thirteen feet six inches (13'6") of vertical clearance with adequate
turning radius capable of supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus. Dead
end access roads in excess of one hundred fifty feet (150') in length shall be
provided with approved provisions for a fifty foot (50') radius turnaround for
the turning around of fire department apparatus.
   A.   Road Width: The required width of an access road shall not be
obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. Where no space is
provided for parking along access roads, said road shall be kept unobstructed.
      1.   Property owners shall be required to identify and mark fire lanes as
required by the fire chief.
      2.   Where access roads are adjacent to required fire hydrants, such
access roads, within twenty feet (20') either direction of the fire hydrant,
shall be a minimum of twenty six feet (26') in width.
      3.   The access road shall be extended to within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of any
building.
      4.   An approved access walkway leading from fire apparatus access roads
to exterior openings shall be provided when required by the fire chief.
      5.   The maximum grade for access roads of greater than one hundred feet
(100') shall be eight percent (8%); however, grades up to twelve percent (12%)
are allowable with approval of the fire chief and the city engineer. (Ord.
2001-5, 2-13-2001)
      6.   The owner shall be responsible for establishing the base grade of
the access road before the water system is installed. The owner, or the owner's
agent, shall clear the right of way for the water system and establish the fire
hydrant location and grade, by use of an offset stake, for review by the public
works department. The owner or the owner's agent shall then install the water
system and set the fire hydrant to the grade established by South Weber City.
If there are any changes to the access road or right of way areas which do not
allow for a minimum of sixty inches (60") cover over the water line, the owner
shall be responsible for all expenses associated with the relocation or
adjustment to the water system. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
      7.   The access road shall be maintained by the property owner or the
property owner's agent in good condition and repair, and with adequate snow
removal so as to provide free uninhibited access at all times by emergency and
service vehicles.
      8.   A turnaround shall be provided at the end of the access road in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the most recently adopted
fire code.
      9.   The minimum turning radii for all turns and/or curves shall be forty
feet (40'). (Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001)
      10.   The property owner shall grant an easement along the length and
full width of the access road, permitting access to emergency and service
vehicles and inspection personnel.
The property owner may be required to grant to the city, a utility easement
extending from the public street to the fire hydrant, and having a minimum
width of twenty feet (20') for the purpose of use, operation, maintenance and
repair of such hydrant and water line and uninhibited access at all times by
emergency and service vehicles. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
   B.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants may be required to be installed by the
fire chief at the expense of the property owner and shall be connected to the
water main to meet fire flow requirements and shall be located in accordance
with the most recently adopted fire code. Fire hydrants shall be located on all
required access roads as required by South Weber City and shall be located
within five feet (5') of the required access road. Where a public water system
is located on private property, a twenty foot (20') wide easement shall be
granted to the city over said water system.
If, in the opinion of the fire chief, fire hydrants are vulnerable to vehicular
damage, appropriate crash posts shall be required. No obstruction including
crash posts shall exist within a three foot (3') working area of each fire
hydrant. Crash posts shall be a four inch (4") cement filled pipe, having a
minimum of three feet (3') in height above grade, with two feet (2') of pipe
below grade set in concrete. Hydrant shutoff valves shall be located as per
South Weber City standards. (Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001)
   C.   Lot Requirements; Improvements: Lots shall not be allowed or approved
where the operating water pressure from the city water system serving the
proposed lot or lots is less than forty (40) pounds per square inch. All water
line installations shall be installed to city specifications, at the expense of
the property owner.
Such other conditions and standards as the governing body or city staff may
deem necessary in the furtherance of the objectives of this code and in
protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-
2009)
10-14-11: FLAG LOTS:
In order to encourage the more efficient use of land, flag or L shaped lots may
be allowed where the sensitive nature of the land is steep hillsides, subject
to the following conditions:
   A.   A flag or L shaped lot shall be comprised of a staff portion contiguous
with the flag portion thereof; (Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001)
   B.   The staff portion of said lot shall front on and be contiguous to a
dedicated public street. The minimum width of the staff portion of a flag lot
shall be thirty feet (30') for one lot and forty feet (40') for two (2) lots
with staff portions adjacent to each other, and maximum length is one hundred
seventy feet (170'); (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
   C.   No building or construction, except for driveways, shall be allowed on
the staff portion of said lot unless the minimum width, for building lots, is
the same or greater than the minimum width as allowed in the zoning district;
   D.   The front side of the flag portion of said lots shall be deemed to be
that side nearest to the dedicated public street upon which the staff portion
fronts;
   E.   The staff portion of said lot shall be deemed to end, and the flag
portion of said lots shall be deemed to commence, at the extension of the front
lot line;
   F.   The square footage located in the flag portion of said lot, which shall
be exclusive of the square footage located in the staff portion of said lot,
shall be the same or greater than the minimum square footage as is required in
this section or based on the underlying zoning, whichever is more restrictive;
   G.   The side and rear yard requirements of the flag portion of said lots
shall be the same as is required in the zoning district;
   H.   The front yard minimum setback requirements for all buildings shall be
thirty feet (30') from the front lot line of the flag portion thereof;
No more than two (2) flag lots can be contiguous to each other. No more than
two (2) lots may share the thirty foot (30') staff portion, frontage
requirement; (Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001)
   I.   No more than two (2) lots may share the forty foot (40') staff portion;
and (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
   J.   The maximum number of flag lots in the development site shall not be
more than ten percent (10%) of the total number of lots within the development
site. (Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001; amd. Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
10-14-12: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Scope: It is intended by this section, that the development standards
and provisions, as set forth herein, shall be required in connection with all
building and construction in the sensitive lands overlay area. These are in
addition to those standards outlined in title 11 of this code.
   B.   Lots: Lots on hillsides, with slopes of ten percent (10%) or more, are
eligible for a twenty foot (20') front yard setback. Building permit applicants
shall submit a plot plan showing the elevations of the lot at all corners.
If it is determined that a ten percent (10%) slope or greater exists on the
property and the twenty foot (20') front yard setback is permitted, the minimum
combined total of the front and rear yard setbacks shall be equal to what is
normally required for the zone in which it is located.
   C.   Usable Area:
      1.   The slope of "usable area", as defined in subsection
10-14-9A3 of this chapter, shall not be greater than thirty percent (30%).
      2.   There shall be no excavation or cuts outside of the usable area.
      3.   All main and accessory buildings shall be built within the "usable
area".
   D.   Faults: No residential structures shall be built on any identified
faults or within their identified or approximated zones of deformation, or on
any areas known to be an active landslide according to geotechnical analysis.
   E.   Drainage And Erosion:
      1.   Lots shall be arranged so as to ensure adequate setbacks from
drainage channels;
      2.   Lots shall be arranged so as to ensure adequate "usable area" is
located outside of the 100-year floodplain. No structures shall be allowed in
the 100-year floodplain. The 100-year floodplain shall be determined using
accepted engineering standards and approved by the city engineer;
      3.   Facilities for the collection of stormwater runoff shall be required
to be constructed on the development site:
         a.   Such facilities shall be the first improvement of facilities
constructed on the development site;
         b.   Such facilities shall be designed in accordance with accepted
engineering standards so as to retain safely and adequately the maximum
expected stormwater runoff for a 100-year storm (minimum), as per the South
Weber City engineering standards, for a sufficient length of time so as to
prevent flooding and erosion during stormwater runoff periods;
         c.   Such facilities shall be designed so as to divert surface water
away from cut surfaces or sloping surfaces of a fill; and
         d.   Streets shall be designed to control and carry excess stormwater
from the 100-year storm out of the development on street surfaces within the
curbed area. Low points on streets shall not be allowed unless adequate
drainage is provided.
   F.   Vegetation And Revegetation:
      1.   All areas on development sites cleared of natural vegetation in the
course of construction of off site improvements shall be replanted with
vegetation, which, when established, shall have characteristics of erosion
control equal to or exceeding the original vegetation;
      2.   New plantings shall be protected with organic cover;
      3.   The use of persons or firms having expertise in the practice of
revegetation (i.e., landscape architects or certified nurserymen) shall be
employed to supervise the planning and installation of revegetation cover;
      4.   Vegetation shall be removed only when absolutely necessary (e.g.,
for the construction of buildings, roads, and filled areas); and
      5.   Vegetation shall be planted in all disturbed areas within three (3)
months of the completion of off site improvements. Such vegetation shall be of
a perennial and low combustibility nature, and shall be sufficient, when
established, to stabilize the soil.
   G.   Grading, Cuts And Fills:
      1.   Exposed unstable surfaces of an excavation or fill shall not have a
ratio steeper than one vertical to two horizontal (1:2);
      2.   All permanent fill shall be located so that settlements, sliding, or
erosions shall not damage or cover streets, curb, gutter, sidewalk;
      3.   All fill and degrees of compaction shall comply with the standards
of the adopted building code then in effect;
      4.   The top or bottom edges of slope caused by an excavation or fill up
to ten (10) vertical feet shall be at least three (3) horizontal feet from the
property line and street right of way lines;
      5.   The maximum vertical height of all cuts or fills shall be ten feet
(10'), except in special circumstances where the city gives specific approval
but shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in any case; and
      6.   All structures, except retaining walls or soil stabilization
improvements, shall have a setback from the crest of the cut or base of the
fill of a minimum distance equal to the depth of the fill or the height of the
cut, unless a structurally sound retaining wall is built for the cut or fill
slope.
      7.   Retaining walls may be constructed with the following provisions:
         a.   Structural retaining walls may be a part of the dwelling unit, if
designed to function in that manner, and approved by the city building
official.
         b.   Structural retaining walls must be designed by an authorized
licensed professional engineer and approved by the city engineer.
         c.   Any wall less than four feet (4') in height (vertical) is
considered "decorative" and not subject to approval by the city.
         d.   Any terracing of retaining walls shall be considered a structural
retaining wall that must be designed by an authorized licensed professional
engineer and approved by the city engineer.
         e.   Rock walls are considered "decorative" and cannot be used as
structural retaining walls.
   H.   Streets And Ways: Streets, roadways, and private accessways shall
follow as nearly as possible the natural terrain. The following additional
standards shall apply:
      1.   At least two (2) ingress and egress routes shall be provided for
each subdivision or condominium project, in the long range development plans of
the development unless it is determined by the planning commission that it is
not feasible due to topography or other constraints. If so determined,
additional development requirements may be imposed in order to mitigate
circumstances of a single access;
      2.   Points of access shall be provided, giving access to all developed,
partially developed, or undeveloped areas for emergency and firefighting
equipment. Driveways located upon each lot extending from a public street shall
have a maximum grade of twelve percent (12%) for a length not to exceed one
hundred fifty feet (150') and a minimum width of ten feet (10');
      3.   Stub streets that are longer than the width or length of any
adjacent single lot or one hundred fifty feet (150'), whichever is less, shall
have an approved temporary turnaround at the end thereof;
      4.   Variations of the street design standard developed to solve special
hillside visual and functional problems may be presented to the planning
commission for consideration. Examples of such variations may be the use of
split roadways to avoid deep cuts, modifications of surface drainage
treatments, or sidewalk design.
   I.   Architectural Design:
      1.   Buildings proposed for construction in the South Weber sensitive
lands overlay zone shall be designed to be visually compatible with the natural
beauty of the foothills and canyon areas. The use of building materials and
colors that will blend harmoniously with the natural setting is required. Such
materials as natural woods, brick (earth tones) and stone are considered to be
most appropriate. Highly reflective glass is considered inappropriate.
      2.   The planning commission shall review the design and specified
exterior materials and colors for all structures other than single-family
dwellings. The building inspector shall review the plans of single-family
dwellings with respect to colors, materials, etc. Building permits for such
structures shall not be granted until building materials and colors have been
approved by the reviewing authority.
   J.   Building Permit Bond: In addition to the performance bond, anything
that is required by this chapter shall be bonded for. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
10-14-13: WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE:
   A.   Administration: The provisions of this section shall apply to the
construction, alteration, movement, repair, maintenance and use of any
building, structure or premises within the urban wildland interface areas in
this jurisdiction.
Buildings or conditions in existence at the time of the adoption of this
section are allowed to have their use or occupancy continued, if such
condition, use or occupancy was legal at the time of the adoption of this
section provided such continued use does not constitute a distinct danger to
life or property.
Buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with
the provisions of this section for new buildings or structures.
      1.   General: The objective of this section is to establish minimum
regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the
safeguarding of life and property. Regulations in this section are intended to
mitigate the risk to life and structures from intrusion of fire from wildland
fire exposures and fire exposures from adjacent structures and to mitigate
structure fires from spreading to wildland fuels.
The development and use of property in wildland-urban interface areas is a
potential threat to life and property from fire and resulting erosion.
Safeguards to prevent the occurrence of fires and to provide adequate fire
protection facilities to control the spread of fire in wildland-urban interface
areas shall be in accordance with this section.
This section shall supplement the jurisdiction's building and fire codes, if
such codes have been adopted, to provide for special regulations to mitigate
the fire and life safety hazards of the wildland-urban interface areas.
         a.   Retroactivity: The provisions of this section shall apply to
conditions arising after the adoption thereof, conditions not legally in
existence at the adoption of this section, to conditions which, in the opinion
of the code official, constitute a distinct hazard to life or property.
         b.   Additions Or Alterations: Additions or alterations may be made to
any building or structure without requiring the existing building or structure
to comply with all of the requirements of this section, provided the addition
or alteration conforms to that required for a new building or structure.
Additions or alterations shall not be made to an existing building or structure
that will cause the existing building or structure to be in violation of any of
the provisions of this section nor shall such additions or alterations cause
the existing building or structure to become unsafe. An unsafe condition shall
be deemed to have been created if an addition or alteration will cause the
existing building or structure to become structurally unsafe or overloaded;
will not provide adequate access in compliance with the provisions of this
section or will obstruct existing exits or access; will create a fire hazard;
will reduce required fire resistance or will otherwise create conditions
dangerous to human life.
            (1)   Exception: Provisions of this section that specifically apply
to existing conditions are retroactive. See appendix A attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
         c.   Maintenance: All buildings, structures, landscape materials,
vegetation, defensible space or other devices or safeguards required by this
section shall be maintained in conformance to the code edition under which
installed. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for
the maintenance of buildings, structures, landscape materials and vegetation.
      2.   Authority Of The Code Official: The code official is hereby
authorized to administer and enforce this section, or designated codes, and all
ordinances of the jurisdiction pertaining to designated wildland-urban
interface areas.
         a.   Interpretations, Rules, And Regulations: The code official shall
have the power to render interpretations of this section and to adopt and
enforce rules and supplemental regulations to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance
to the intent and purpose of this section.
A copy of such rules and regulations shall be filed with the city recorder and
shall be in effect immediately thereafter. Additional copies shall be available
for distribution to the public.
         b.   Liability Of The Code Official: The code official charged with
the enforcement of this section, acting in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties required by this section or other pertinent law or
ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for damages that may
accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or
omission in the discharge of such duties. A suit brought against the code
official or employee because of such act or omission performed by the code
official or employee in the enforcement of any provision of such codes or other
pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this
section or enforced by the code enforcement agency shall be defended by this
jurisdiction until final termination of such proceedings, and any judgment
resulting therefrom shall be assumed by this jurisdiction. The code enforcement
agency or its parent jurisdiction shall not be held as assuming any liability
by reason of the inspections authorized by this section or any permits or
certificates issued under this section.
      3.   Compliance Alternatives:
         a.   Practical Difficulties: When there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out the provisions of this section, the code official is
authorized to grant modifications for individual cases on application in
writing by the owner or a duly authorized representative. The code official
shall first find that a special individual reason makes enforcement of the
strict letter of this section impractical, the modification is in conformance
to the intent and purpose of this section and the modification does not lessen
any fire protection requirements or any degree of structural integrity. The
details of any action granting modifications shall be submitted to the
applicant in writing and entered into the files of the code enforcement agency.
If the code official determines that difficult terrain, danger of erosion or
other unusual circumstances make strict compliance with the vegetation control
provisions of the code detrimental to safety or impractical, enforcement
thereof may be suspended, provided that reasonable alternative measures are
taken.
         b.   Technical Assistance: To determine the acceptability of
technologies, processes, products, facilities, materials and uses attending the
design, operation or use of a building or premises subject to the inspection of
the code official, the code official is authorized to require the owner or the
person in possession or control of the building or premises to provide, without
charge to the jurisdiction, a technical opinion and report. The opinion and
report shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, specialist, laboratory or
fire safety specialty organization acceptable to the code official and the
owner and shall analyze the fire safety of the design, operation or use of the
building or premises, the facilities and appurtenances situated thereon and
fuel management for purposes of establishing fire hazard severity to recommend
necessary changes.
         c.   Alternative Materials Or Methods: The code official, in
concurrence with approval from the building official and fire chief, is
authorized to approve alternative materials or methods, provided that the code
official finds that the proposed design, use or operation satisfactorily
complies with the intent of this section and that the alternative is, for the
purpose intended, at least equivalent to the level of quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety prescribed by this
section. Approvals under the authority herein contained shall be subject to the
approval of the building official whenever the alternate material or method
involves matters regulated by the international building code.
The code official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted
to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. The details of
any action granting approval of an alternate shall be recorded and entered in
the files of the code enforcement agency. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
      4.   Appeals: To determine the suitability of alternative materials and
methods and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of this
section, the South Weber appeal authority shall be the appeal board. The appeal
authority shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its
investigations and shall render decisions and findings in writing to the code
official, with a duplicate copy to the applicant.
         a.   Limitations Of Authority: The appeal authority shall not have
authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this
section and shall not have authority to waive requirements of this section.
(Ord. 13-03, 6-25-2013)
      5.   Permits: When not otherwise provided in the requirements of the
building or fire code, permits are required in accordance with this section.
         a.   Code Official Approval Required: No land use permit or building
permit shall be issued within the wildland-urban interface area unless the code
official first approves such permit. No subdivision may be approved in the
wildland-urban interface area without first obtaining the advice and approval
of the code official.
      6.   Plans And Specifications: Plans, engineering calculations, diagrams
and other data shall be submitted in at least two (2) sets with each
application for a permit. When such plans are not prepared by an architect or
engineer, the code official may require the applicant submitting such plans or
other data to demonstrate that state law does not require that the plans be
prepared by a licensed architect or engineer. The code official may require
plans, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by an
architect or engineer licensed by the state to practice as such even if not
required by state law.
Exception: Submission of plans, calculations, construction inspection
requirements and other data, if it is found that the nature of the work applied
for is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with
this section.
         a.   Information On Plans And Specifications: Plans and specifications
shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper and shall be of sufficient
clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed, and
show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this section and all
relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
         b.   Site Plan: In addition to the requirements for plans in the
international building code, site plans shall include topography, width and
percent of grade of access roads, landscape and vegetation details, locations
of structures or building envelopes, existing or proposed overhead utilities,
and site water supply systems. Site plans shall also include occupancy
classifications of buildings, types of ignition resistant construction of
structures and their appendages and roof classifications according to the
applicable international building code or international fire code.
         c.   Vegetation Management Plans: When utilized by the permit
applicant pursuant to this section, vegetation management plans shall be
prepared and shall be submitted to the code official for review and approval as
part of the plans required for a permit. See appendix B attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
         d.   Fire Protections Plan: When required by the code official, a fire
protection plan shall be prepared and shall be submitted to the code official
for review and approved as a part of the plans required for a land use permit,
building permit or subdivision approval.
         e.   Other Data And Substantiation: When required by the code
official, the plans and specifications shall include classification of fuel
loading, fuel model light, medium or heavy, and substantiating data to verify
classification of fire resistive vegetation.
         f.   Vicinity Plan: In addition to the requirements for site plans,
plans shall include details regarding the vicinity within three hundred feet
(300') of property lines, including other structures, slope, vegetation, fuel
breaks, water supply systems and access roads.
         g.   Retention Of Plans: One set of approved plans, specifications and
computations shall be retained by the code official for a period of not less
than ninety (90) days from date of completion of the work covered therein; and
one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the
applicant, and said set shall be kept on the site of the building, use or work
at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress.
      7.   Inspection And Enforcement:
         a.   Inspection: All construction or work for which a permit is
required by this section shall be subject to inspection by the code official
and all such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for
inspection purposes until approved by the code official. It shall be the duty
of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for
inspection purposes. Neither the code official nor the jurisdiction shall be
liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material
required to allow inspection.
Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval
of a violation of the provisions of this or of other ordinances of the
jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this section or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not
be valid.
A survey of the lot may be required by the code official to verify that the
mitigation features are provided and the building or structure is located in
accordance with the approved plans.
            (1)   Authority To Inspect: The code official shall inspect, as
often as necessary, buildings and premises, including such other hazards or
appliances designated by the code official for the purpose of ascertaining and
causing to be corrected any conditions that could reasonably be expected to
cause fire or contribute to its spread, or any violation of the purpose of this
section and of any other law or standard affecting fire safety.
            (2)   Reinspection: To determine compliance with this section, the
code official may cause a structure to be reinspected. A fee may be assessed
for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which
inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not
made.
Reinspection fees may be assessed when the approved plans are not readily
available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which
inspection is requested or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of
the code official.
To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall pay the reinspection fee as set
forth in the currently adopted fee schedule. When reinspection fees have been
assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the
required fees have been paid.
         b.   Enforcement:
            (1)   Authorization To Issue Corrective Orders And Notices: When
the code official finds any building or premises that are in violation of this
section, the code official is authorized to issue corrective orders and
notices.
            (2)   Service Of Order Notice: Orders and notices authorized or
required by this section shall be given or served on the owner, operator,
occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation either by
verbal notification, personal service, or delivering the same to, and leaving
it with, a person of suitable age and discretion on the premises; or, if no
such person is found on the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of said premises and by mailing a
copy thereof to such person by registered or certified mail to the person's
last known address.
Orders or notices that are given verbally shall be confirmed by service in
writing as herein provided.
         c.   Right Of Entry: Whenever necessary to make an inspection to
enforce any of the provisions of this section, or whenever the code official
has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or on any
premises any condition that makes such building or premises unsafe, the code
official is authorized to enter such building or premises at all reasonable
times to inspect the same or to perform any duty authorized by this section,
provided that if such building or premises is occupied, the code official shall
first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or
premises is unoccupied, the code official shall first make a reasonable effort
to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building
or premises and request entry.
If such entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry. Owners, occupants or any other persons having
charge, care or control of any building or premises, shall, after proper
request is made as herein provided, promptly permit entry therein by the code
official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this
section.
         d.   Compliance With Orders And Notices: Orders and notices issued or
served as provided by this section shall be complied with by the owner,
operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation
to which the corrective order or notice pertains. If the building or premises
is not occupied, such corrective orders or notices shall be complied with by
the owner.
            (1)   Compliance With Tags: A building or premises shall not be
used when in violation of this section as noted on a tag affixed.
            (2)   Removal And Destruction Of Sign And Tags: A sign or tag
posted or affixed by the code official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or
removed without authorization by the code official.
            (3)   Citations: Persons operating or maintaining an occupancy,
premises or vehicle subject to this section who allow hazard to exist or fail
to take immediate action to abate a hazard on such occupancy, premises or
vehicle when ordered or notified to do so by the code official shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
            (4)   Unsafe Conditions: Buildings, structures or premises that
constitute a fire hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in
relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health or public
welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire
hazard, disaster damage or abandonment as specified in this section or any
other ordinance, are unsafe conditions. Unsafe buildings or structures shall
not be used.
Unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated
by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal, pursuant to applicable state
and local laws and codes.
      8.   Certificate Of Completion: No building, structure or premises shall
be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of
a building, structure, premises or portion thereof shall be made until the code
official has issued a certificate of completion therefor as provided herein.
The certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the certificate of
completion indicating that the project is in compliance with this section has
been issued by the code official.
Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of
a violation of the provisions of this section or of other pertinent laws and
ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to
violate or cancel the provisions of this section or other laws or ordinances of
the jurisdiction shall not be valid.
   B.   Definitions:
      1.   Scope: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and
terms shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings stated below.
      2.   Interchangeability: Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter,
and the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
      3.   Terms Defined In Other Code: Where terms are not defined in this
section and are defined in other international codes, such terms shall have the
meanings as described to them as in those codes.
      4.   Terms Not Defined: Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have their ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context implies.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A building or structure used to shelter or support any
material, equipment, chattel or occupancy other than a habitable building.
   APPROVED: Approval by the code official as the result of review,
investigation or tests conducted by the code official or by reason of accepted
principles or tests by national authorities, or technical or scientific
organizations.
   BRUSH, SHORT: Low growing species that reach heights of one to three feet
(3'). Sagebrush, snowberry and rabbit brush are some varieties.
   BRUSH, TALL: Arbor like varieties of brush species and/or short varieties of
broad leaf trees that grow in compact groups or clumps. These groups or clumps
reach heights of four (4) to twenty feet (20'). In Utah, this includes primary
varieties of oak, maples, chokecherry, serviceberry and mahogany, but may also
include other species.
   BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the international building code, or the
building official's duly authorized representative.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION: Written documentation that the project or work
for which a permit was issued has been completed in conformance with
requirements of this section.
   CODE OFFICIAL: The official designated by the city council to interpret and
enforce this section, or the code official's authorized representative. The
code official is the same as the city's fire chief who is appointed by the
mayor with the recommendation of the city council.
   DEFENSIBLE SPACE: An area either natural or manmade, where material capable
of allowing a fire to spread unchecked has been treated, cleared or modified to
slow the rate and intensity of an advancing wildfire and to create an area for
fire suppression operations to occur.
   DRIVEWAY: A vehicular ingress and egress route that serves no more than two
(2) buildings or structures, not including accessory structures, or more than
five (5) dwelling units.
   FIRE AREA: The floor area, in square feet, used to determine the adequate
water supply.
   FIRE CHIEF: The chief officer or the chief officer's authorized
representative of the fire department serving the jurisdiction. The fire chief
is appointed by the mayor at the recommendation of the city council.
   FIRE PROTECTION PLAN: A document prepared for a specific project or
development proposed for the wildland-urban interface area. It describes ways
to minimize and mitigate the fire problems created by the project or
development, with the purpose of reducing impact on the community's fire
protection delivery system.
   FIRE RESISTANCE RATED CONSTRUCTION: The use of materials and systems in the
design and construction of a building or structure to safeguard against the
spread of fire within a building or structure and the spread of fire to or from
buildings or structures to the wildland-urban interface area.
   FIRE WEATHER: Weather conditions favorable to the ignition and rapid spread
of fire. In wildfires, this generally includes high temperatures combined with
strong winds and low humidity.
   FLAME SPREAD RATING: As used herein refers to rating obtained according to
tests conducted as specified by a nationally recognized standard.
   FUEL BREAK: An area, strategically located for fighting anticipated fires,
where the native vegetation has been permanently modified or replaced so that
fires burning into it can be more easily controlled. Fuel breaks divide fire
prone areas into smaller areas for easier fire control and to provide access
for firefighting.
   FUEL, HEAVY: Vegetation consisting of round wood three inches (3") or larger
in diameter. The amount of fuel (vegetation) would be six (6) tons per acre or
greater.
   FUEL, LIGHT: Vegetation consisting of herbaceous and round wood less than
one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter. The amount of fuel (vegetation) would be
one-half (1/2) ton to two (2) tons per acre.
   FUEL LOADING: The oven dry weight of fuels in a given area, usually
expressed in pounds per acre (lb/a). Fuel loading may be referenced to fuel
size or time lag categories, and may include surface fuels or total fuels.
   FUEL, MEDIUM: Vegetation consisting of round wood one-fourth (1/4) to three
inches (3") in diameter. The amount of fuel (vegetation) would be two (2) to
six (6) tons per acre.
   FUEL MODIFICATION: A method of modifying fuel load by reducing the amount of
nonfire resistive vegetation or altering the type of vegetation to reduce the
fuel load.
   FUEL MOSAIC: A fuel modification system that provides for the creation of
islands and irregular boundaries to reduce the visual and ecological impact of
fuel modification.
   GREENBELT: A fuel break designated for a use other than fire protection.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: As defined in the international fire code.
   HEAVY TIMBER CONSTRUCTION: As described in the international building code.
   INSURANCE SERVICES OFFICE (ISO): An agency that recommends fire insurance
rates based on a grading schedule that incorporates evaluation of firefighting
resources and capabilities.
   LEGISLATIVE BODY: The South Weber City council.
   LOG WALL CONSTRUCTION: A type of construction in which exterior walls are
constructed of solid wood members and where the smallest horizontal dimension
of each solid wood member is at least six inches (6").
   MULTILAYERED GLAZED PANELS: Window or door assemblies that consist of two
(2) or more independently glazed panels installed parallel to each other,
having a sealed air gap in between, within a frame designed to fill completely
the window or door opening in which the assembly is intended to be installed.
   NONCOMBUSTIBLE: As applied to building construction material means a
material that, in the form in which it is used, is either one of the following:
      1.   Material of which no part will ignite and burn when subjected to
fire. Any material conforming to ASTM E 136 shall be considered noncombustible
within the meaning of this section.
      2.   Material having a structural base of noncombustible material as
defined in subsection 1 of this definition, with a surfacing material not over
one-eighth inch (1/8") thick, which has a flame spread rating of fifty (50) or
less. Flame spread rating as used herein refers to rating obtained according to
tests conducted as specified in ASTM E 84.
   "Noncombustible" does not apply to surface finish materials. Material
required to be noncombustible for reduced clearances to flues, heating
appliances or other sources of high temperature shall refer to material
conforming to subsection 1 of this definition. No material shall be classed as
noncombustible that is subject to increase in combustibility or flame spread
rating, beyond the limits herein established, through the effects of age,
moisture or other atmospheric condition.
   NONCOMBUSTIBLE ROOF COVERING: One of the following:
      1.   Cement shingles or sheets.
      2.   Exposed concrete slab roof.
      3.   Ferrous or copper shingles or sheet.
      4.   Slate shingles.
      5.   Clay or concrete roofing tile.
      6.   Approved roof covering of noncombustible material.
   SLOPE: The variation of terrain from the horizontal; the number of feet rise
or fall per one hundred feet (100') measured horizontally, expressed as a
percentage.
   STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some manner.
   TREE CROWN: The primary and secondary branches growing out from the main
system, together with twigs and foliage.
   UNENCLOSED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: An accessory structure without a complete
exterior wall system enclosing the area under roof or floor above.
   WILDFIRE: An uncontrolled fire spreading through vegetative fuels, exposing
and possibly consuming structures.
   WILDLAND: An area in which development is essentially nonexistent, except
for roads, railroads, power lines and similar facilities.
   WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE: The line, area or zone where structures or other
human development (including critical infrastructure that if destroyed would
result in hardship to communities) meet or intermingle with undeveloped
wildland or vegetative fuel.
   C.   Wildland-Urban Interface Areas:
      1.   Declaration: The legislative body shall declare the wildland- urban
interface areas within the jurisdiction. The urban-wildland interface areas
shall be based on the maps created in accordance with this section.
      2.   Mapping: In cooperation, the code official and the division of
forestry, fire and state lands (PPSL) wildfire representative will create or
review wildland-urban interface area maps, to be recorded and filed with the
city recorder. These areas shall become effective immediately thereafter.
      3.   Review Of Wildland-Urban Interface Areas: The code official and the
FFSL wildfire representative shall reevaluate and recommend modification to the
wildland-urban interface areas on a three (3) year basis or more frequently as
deemed necessary by the city council.
   D.   Area Requirements: Building and development within wildland- urban
interface areas shall be provided with emergency vehicle access and water
supply in accordance with this section.
      1.   Objective:
         a.   Minimum Requirements: The objective of this subsection is to
establish the minimum requirements for emergency vehicle access and water
supply for buildings and structures located in the wildland-urban interface
areas.
         b.   General Safety Precautions: General safety precautions shall be
in accordance with this section. See appendix A attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
      2.   Applicability:
         a.   Subdivisions:
            (1)   Access: New subdivisions, as determined by this jurisdiction,
shall be provided with fire apparatus access roads in accordance with the
international fire code and access requirements.
            (2)   Water Supply: New subdivisions as determined by this
jurisdiction shall be provided with water supply.
         b.   Individual Structures:
            (1)   Access: Individual structures hereafter constructed or
relocated into or within wildland-urban interface areas shall be provided with
fire apparatus access in accordance with the international fire code. Marking
of fire protection equipment and address markers shall be provided.
            (2)   Water Supply: Individual structures hereafter constructed or
relocated into or within wildland-urban interface areas shall be provided with
a conforming water supply.
            (3)   Exceptions: Structures constructed to meet the requirements
for the class of ignition resistant construction specified in the table at
subsection E4b of this section for a nonconforming water supply. Buildings
containing only private garages, carports, sheds and agricultural buildings
with a floor area of not more than six hundred (600) square feet.
      3.   Access:
         a.   Restricted Access: Where emergency vehicle access is restricted
because of secured access roads or driveways or where immediate access is
necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes, the code official is
authorized to require a key box to be installed in an accessible location. The
key box shall be of a type approved by the code official and shall contain keys
to gain necessary access as required by the code official.
         b.   Driveways: Driveways shall be provided when any portion of an
exterior wall of the first story of a building is located more than one hundred
fifty feet (150') from a fire apparatus access road. Driveways shall provide a
minimum unobstructed width of twelve feet (12') and a minimum unobstructed
height of thirteen feet six inches (13'6"). Driveways in excess of one hundred
fifty feet (150') in length shall be provided with turnarounds. Driveways in
excess of two hundred feet (200') in length and less than twenty feet (20') in
width shall be provided with turnouts in addition to turnarounds.
            A driveway shall not serve in excess of five (5) dwelling units.
Driveway turnarounds shall have inside turning radii of not less than thirty
feet (30') and outside turning radii of not less than forty five feet (45').
Driveways that connect with a road or roads at more than one point may be
considered as having a turnaround if all changes of direction meet the radii
requirements for driveway turnarounds.
            Driveway turnouts shall be an all weather road surface at least ten
feet (10') wide and thirty feet (30') long. Driveway turnouts shall be located
as required by the code official. Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both
entrances to bridges on driveways and private roads. Design loads for bridges
shall be established by the code official.
         c.   Fire Apparatus Access Roads: When required, fire apparatus access
roads shall be all weather roads with a minimum width of twenty feet (20') and
a clear height of thirteen feet six inches (13'6"); shall be designed to
accommodate the loads and turning radii for fire apparatus; and have a gradient
negotiable by the specific fire apparatus normally used at that location within
the jurisdiction. Dead end roads in excess of one hundred fifty feet (150') in
length shall be provided with turnarounds as approved by the code official. An
all weather road surface shall be any surface material acceptable to the code
official that would normally allow the passage of emergency service vehicles to
protect structures and wildlands within the jurisdiction.
         d.   Marking Of Roads: Approved signs or other approved notices shall
be provided and maintained for access roads and driveways to identify such
roads and prohibit the obstruction thereof or both.
            All road identification signs and supports shall be of
noncombustible materials. Signs shall have minimum four inch (4") high
reflective letters with one-half inch (1/2") stroke on a contrasting six inch
(6") high sign. Road identification signage shall be mounted at a height of
seven feet (7') from the road surface to the bottom of the sign.
         e.   Marking Of Fire Protection Equipment: Fire protection equipment
and fire hydrants shall be clearly identified in a manner approved by the code
official to prevent obstruction.
         f.   Address Markers: All buildings shall have a permanently posted
address, which shall be placed at each driveway entrance and be visible from
both directions of travel along the road. In all cases, the address shall be
posted at the beginning of construction and shall be maintained thereafter, and
the address shall be visible and legible from the road on which the address is
located.
            Address signs along one-way roads shall be visible from both the
intended direction of travel and the opposite direction.
            Where multiple addresses are required at a single driveway, they
shall be mounted on a single post, and additional signs shall be posted at
locations where driveways divide.
            Where a roadway provides access solely to a single commercial or
industrial business, the address sign shall be placed at the nearest road
intersection providing access to that site.
         g.   Grade: The gradient for fire apparatus access roads and driveways
shall not exceed the maximum approved by the code official. It will be up to
the code official to ascertain the standard based on local fire equipment grade
not to exceed twelve percent (12%).
      4.   Water Supply: When provided in order to qualify as a conforming
water supply for the purpose of the table in subsection E4b of this section, an
approved water source shall have an adequate water supply for the use of the
fire protection service to protect buildings and structures from exterior fire
sources or to suppress structure fires within the wildland-urban interface area
of the jurisdiction in accordance with this section.
         a.   Water Sources: The point at which a water source is available for
use shall be located not more than one thousand feet (1,000') from the building
and be approved by the code official. The distance shall be measured along an
unobstructed line of travel.
            Water sources shall comply with the following:
            (1)   Manmade water sources shall have a minimum usable water
volume as determined by the adequate water supply needs. This water source
shall be equipped with an approved hydrant. The water level of the water source
shall be maintained by rainfall, water pumped from a well, water hauled by a
tanker, or by seasonal high water of a stream or river. The design,
construction, location, water level maintenance, access, and access maintenance
of manmade water sources shall be approved by the code official.
            (2)   Natural water sources shall have a minimum annual water level
or flow sufficient to meet the adequate water supply needs. This water level or
flow shall not be rendered unusable because of freezing. This water source
shall have an approved draft site with an approved hydrant. Adequate water flow
and rights for access to the water source shall be ensured in a form acceptable
to the code official.
         b.   Draft Sites: Approved draft sites shall be provided at all
natural water sources intended for use as fire protection for compliance with
this section. The design, construction, location, access and access maintenance
of draft sites shall be approved by the code official.
            The pumper access point shall be either an emergency vehicle access
area alongside a conforming access road or an approved driveway no longer than
one hundred fifty feet (150'). Pumper access points and access driveways shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with all codes and ordinances
enforced by this jurisdiction. Pumper access points shall not require the
pumper apparatus to obstruct a road or driveway.
         c.   Hydrants: All hydrants shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with nationally recognized standards. The location and access shall
be approved by the code official.
         d.   Adequate Water Supply: Adequate water supply shall be determined
for purposes of initial attack and flame front control by the local
jurisdiction. NFPA 1142 may be used as a reference.
         e.   Fire Department: The water system required by this section can
only be considered conforming for purposes of determining the level of ignition
resistant construction (see the table in subsection E4b of this section).
         f.   Obstructions: Access to all water sources required by this
section shall be unobstructed at all times. The code official shall not be
deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to water source equipment,
fire protection equipment or hydrants.
         g.   Identification: Water sources, draft sites, hydrants and fire
protection equipment shall be clearly identified in a manner approved by the
code official to identify location and to prevent obstruction by parking and
other obstructions.
         h.   Testing And Maintenance: Water sources, draft sites, hydrants and
other fire protection equipment required by this section shall be subject to
periodic tests as required by the code official. Code official shall establish
a periodic testing schedule. Costs are to be covered by the water provider. All
such equipment installed under the provisions of this section shall be
maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be repaired or
replaced where defective. Additions, repairs, alterations and servicing of such
fire protection equipment and resources shall be in accordance with approved
standards. Mains and appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with NFPA
24. Water tanks for private fire protection shall be installed in accordance
with NFPA 22. The costs are to be covered by the water provider.
         i.   Reliability: The objective of this section is to increase the
reliability of water supplies by reducing the exposure of vegetative fuels to
electrically powered systems.
            (1)   Clearance Of Fuel: Defensible space shall be provided around
water tank structures, water supply pumps and pump houses.
            (2)   Standby Power: Stationary water supply facilities within the
wildland-urban interface area dependent on electrical power supplied by a power
grid to meet adequate water supply demands shall provide functional standby
power systems in accordance with the ICC electrical code to ensure that an
uninterrupted water supply is maintained. The standby power source shall be
capable of providing power for a minimum of two (2) hours.
            (3)   Exceptions: When approved by the code official, a standby
power supply is not required where the primary power service to the stationary
water supply facility is underground or there is an on site generator.
      5.   Fire Protection Plan: The plan is to provide a basis to determine
overall compliance with this section, for determination of ignition resistant
construction (IRC) (see the table in subsection E4b of this section) and for
determining the need for alternative materials and methods.
         a.   General: When required by the code official, a fire protection
plan shall be prepared and approved prior to the first building permit issuance
or subdivision approval.
         b.   Content: The plan shall be based upon a site specific wildfire
risk assessment that includes considerations of location, topography, aspect,
flammable vegetation, climatic conditions and fire history. The plan shall
address water supply, access, building ignition and fire resistance factors,
fire protection systems and equipment, defensible space and vegetation
management.
         c.   Cost: The cost of fire protection plan preparation and review
shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
         d.   Plan Retention: The fire protection plan shall be retained by the
code official.
   E.   Special Building Construction Regulations: Buildings and structures
shall be constructed in accordance with the international building code and
this section. Should there be a conflict between the codes, the most
restrictive regulation is to be followed.
      1.   Exceptions: Accessory structures not exceeding one hundred twenty
(120) square feet in floor area when located at least fifty feet (50') from
buildings containing habitable spaces and agricultural buildings at least fifty
feet (50') from buildings containing habitable spaces.
         a.   Objective: The objective of this section is to establish minimum
standards to locate, design and construct buildings and structures or portions
thereof for the protection of life and property, to resist damage from
wildfires, and to mitigate building and structure fires from spreading to
wildland fuels. The minimum standards set forth in this section vary with the
critical fire weather, slope and fuel type to provide increased protection,
above the requirements set forth in the international building code, from the
various levels of hazards.
      2.   Fire Hazard Safety: The fire hazard severity of building sites for
all buildings hereafter constructed, modified or relocated into wildland-urban
interface areas shall be established in accordance with appendix C attached to
the ordinance codified herein.
The fire hazard severity is allowed to be reduced by implementing a vegetation
management plan.
      3.   Ignition Resistant Construction: Buildings and structures hereafter
constructed, modified or relocated into or within wildland-urban interface
areas shall meet the construction requirements in accordance with the table in
subsection E4b of this section.
      4.   Class 1 Ignition Resistant Construction: Class 1 ignition resistant
construction shall be in accordance with subsection E4K of this section.
         a.   Roof Covering: Roofs shall have a class A roof covering or a
class A roof assembly. For roof coverings where the profile allows a space
between the roof covering and roof decking, the space at the eave ends shall be
fire stopped to preclude entry of flames or embers.
         b.   Table: Ignition resistant constructionA:
 
              FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY
Defensible    Moderate Hazard Water   High Hazard Water       Extreme Hazard Water
SpaceC        SupplyB                 SupplyB                 SupplyB
              ConformingD Non-        ConformingD Non-        ConformingD Non-
                          conformingE             conformingE             conformingE
Nonconforming IR 2        IR 1        IR 1        IR 1        IR 1        Not
                                                  N.C.        N.C.        permitted
Conforming    IR 3        IR 2        IR 2        IR 1        IR 1        IR 1
                                                                          N.C.
1.5 x         Not         IR 3        IR 3        IR 3        IR 2        IR 1
conforming    required
 
Notes:
   A.   Access shall be in accordance with subsection D2 of this section.
   B.   Subdivisions shall have a conforming water supply in accordance with
subsection D2a of this section.
   C.   Conformance based on subsection F of this section.
   D.   Conformance based on subsection D4 of this section.
   E.   A nonconforming water supply is any water system or source that does
not comply with subsection D4 of this section, including situations where there
is no water supply for structure protection or fire suppression.
      IR 1 = Ignition resistant construction in accordance with subsection E4
of this section.
      IR 2 = Ignition resistant construction in accordance with subsection E5
of this section.
      IR 3 = Ignition resistant construction in accordance with subsection E6
of this section.
         c.   Protection Of Eaves: Eaves and soffits shall be protected on the
exposed underside by materials approved for a minimum of one hour fire
resistance rated construction. Fascias are required and must be protected on
the backside by materials approved for a minimum of one hour fire resistance
rated construction or two inch (2") nominal dimension lumber.
         d.   Gutters And Downspouts: Gutters and downspouts shall be
constructed of noncombustible material.
         e.   Exterior Walls: Exterior walls of buildings or structures shall
be constructed with materials approved for a minimum of one hour fire
resistance rated construction on the exterior side or constructed with approved
noncombustible materials.
            (1)   Exception: Heavy timber or log wall construction. Such
material shall extend from the top of the foundation to the underside of the
roof sheathing.
         f.   Unenclosed Under Floor Protection: Buildings or structures shall
have all under floor areas enclosed to the ground with exterior walls.
            (1)   Exception: Complete enclosure may be omitted where the
underside of all exposed floors and all exposed structural columns, beams and
supporting walls are protected as required for exterior one hour fire
resistance rated construction or heavy timber construction.
         g.   Appendages And Projections: Unenclosed accessory structures
attached to buildings with habitable spaces and projections, such as decks,
shall be a minimum of one hour fire resistance rated construction, heavy timber
construction or constructed of approved noncombustible materials.
When the attached structure is located and constructed so that the structure or
any portion thereof projects over a descending slope surface greater than ten
percent (10%), the area below the structure shall have all under floor areas
enclosed to within six inches (6") of the ground, with exterior wall
construction.
         h.   Exterior Glazing: Exterior windows, window walls and glazed
doors, windows within exterior doors, and skylights shall be tempered glass,
multilayered glazed panels, glass block or have a fire protection rating of not
less than twenty (20) minutes.
         i.   Exterior Doors: Exterior doors shall be approved noncombustible
construction, solid core wood not less than one and three-fourths inches (13/
4") thick, or have a fire protection rating of not less than twenty (20)
minutes. Windows within doors and glazed doors shall be in accordance with
subsection E4h of this section.
            (1)   Exception: Vehicle access doors.
         j.   Vents: Attic ventilation openings, foundation or under floor
vents, or other ventilation openings in vertical exterior walls and vents
through roofs shall not exceed one hundred forty four (144) square inches each.
Such vents shall be covered with noncombustible corrosion resistant mesh with
openings not to exceed one-fourth inch (1/4").
            Attic ventilation openings shall not be located in soffits, in eave
overhangs, between rafters at eaves, or in other overhang areas. Gable end and
floor vents shall be located at least ten feet (10') from property lines. Under
floor ventilation openings shall be located as close to grade as practical.
         k.   Detached Accessory Structures: Detached accessory structures
located less than fifty feet (50') from a building containing habitable space
shall have exterior walls constructed with materials approved for a minimum of
one hour fire resistance rated construction, heavy timber, log wall
construction or constructed with approved noncombustible materials on the
exterior side.
            When the detached structure is located and constructed so that the
structure or any portion thereof projects over a descending slope surface
greater than ten percent (10%), the area below the structure shall have all
under floor areas enclosed to within six inches (6") of the ground, with
exterior wall construction in accordance with subsection E4e of this section or
under floor protection in accordance with subsection E4f of this section.
            (1)   Exception: The enclosure may be omitted where the underside
of all exposed floors and all exposed structural columns, beams and supporting
walls are protected as required for exterior one hour fire resistance rated
construction or heavy timber construction. See subsection E4a of this section
for roof requirements.
      5.   Class 2 Ignition Resistant Construction: Class two (2) ignition
resistant construction shall be in accordance with this subsection E5.
         a.   Roof Covering: Roofs shall have at least a class A roof covering,
class B roof assembly or an approved noncombustible roof covering. For roof
coverings where the profile allows a space between the roof covering and roof
decking, the space at the eave ends shall be fire stopped to preclude entry of
flames or embers.
         b.   Protection Of Eaves: Combustible eaves, fascias and soffits shall
be enclosed with solid materials with a minimum thickness of three-fourths inch
(3/4"). No exposed rafter tails shall be permitted unless constructed of heavy
timber materials.
         c.   Gutters And Downspouts: Gutters and downspouts shall be
constructed of noncombustible material.
         d.   Exterior Walls: Exterior walls of buildings or structures shall
be constructed with materials approved for a minimum of one hour fire
resistance rated construction on the exterior side or constructed with approved
noncombustible materials.
            (1)   Exception: Heavy timber or log wall construction. Such
material shall extend from the top of the foundation to the underside of the
roof sheathing.
         e.   Unenclosed Under Floor Protection: Buildings or structures shall
have all under floor areas enclosed to the ground, with exterior walls in
accordance with subsection E5d of this section.
            (1)   Exception: Complete enclosure may be omitted where the
underside of all exposed floors and all exposed structural columns, beams and
supporting walls are protected as required for exterior one hour fire
resistance rated construction or heavy timber construction.
         f.   Appendages And Projections: Unenclosed accessory structures
attached to buildings with habitable spaces and projections, such as decks,
shall be a minimum of one hour fire resistance rated construction, heavy timber
construction or constructed with approved noncombustible materials.
            When the attached structure is located and constructed so that the
structure or any portion thereof projects over a descending slope surface
greater than ten percent (10%), the area below the structure shall have all
under floor areas enclosed to within six inches (6") of the ground, with
exterior wall construction in accordance with subsection E5d of this section.
         g.   Exterior Glazing: Exterior windows, window walls and glazed
doors, windows within exterior doors, and skylights shall be tempered glass,
multilayered glazed panels, glass block or have a fire protection rating of not
less than twenty (20) minutes.
         h.   Exterior Doors: Exterior doors shall be approved noncombustible
construction, solid core wood not less than one and three-fourths inches (13/
4") thick, or have a fire protection rating of not less than twenty (20)
minutes. Windows within doors and glazed doors shall be in accordance with
subsection E5g of this section.
            (1)   Exception: Vehicle access doors.
         i.   Vents: Attic ventilation openings, foundation or under floor
vents or other ventilation openings in vertical exterior walls and vents
through roofs shall not exceed one hundred forty four (144) square inches each.
Such vents shall be covered with noncombustible corrosion resistant mesh with
openings not to exceed one-fourth inch (1/4").
            Attic ventilation openings shall not be located in soffits, in eave
overhangs, between rafters at eaves, or in other overhang areas. Gable end and
dormer vents shall be located at least ten feet (10') from property lines.
Under floor ventilation openings shall be located as close to grade as
practical.
         j.   Detached Accessory Structures: Detached accessory structures
located less than fifty feet (50') from a building containing habitable space
shall have exterior walls constructed with materials approved for a minimum of
one hour fire resistance rated construction, heavy timber, log wall
construction, or constructed with approved noncombustible material on the
exterior side.
            When the detached structure is located and constructed so that the
structure or any portion thereof projects over a descending slope surface
greater than ten percent (10%), the area below the structure shall have all
under floor areas enclosed to within six inches (6") of the ground, with
exterior wall construction in accordance with subsection E5d of this section
for under floor protection in accordance with subsection E5e of this section.
            (1)   Exception: The enclosure may be omitted where the underside
of all exposed floors and all exposed structural columns, beams and supporting
walls are protected as required for exterior one hour fire resistance rated
construction or heavy timber construction.
      6.   Class 3 Ignition Resistant Construction: Class 3 ignition resistant
construction shall be in accordance with this subsection E6.
         a.   Roof Covering: Roofs shall have at least a class A roof covering,
class C roof assembly or an approved noncombustible roof covering. For roof
coverings where the profile allows a space between the roof covering and roof
decking, the space at the eave ends shall be fire stopped to preclude entry of
flames or embers.
         b.   Unenclosed Under Floor Protection: Buildings or structures shall
have all under floor areas enclosed to the ground with exterior walls.
            (1)   Exception: Complete enclosure may be omitted where the
underside of all exposed floors and all exposed structural columns, beams and
supporting walls are protected as required for exterior one hour fire
resistance rated construction or heavy timber construction.
         c.   Vents: Attic ventilation openings, soffit vents, foundation or
under floor vents or other ventilation openings in vertical exterior walls and
vents through roofs shall not exceed one hundred forty four (144) square inches
each. Such vents shall be covered with noncombustible corrosion resistant mesh
with openings not to exceed one-fourth inch (1/4").
      7.   Replacement Or Repair Of Roof Coverings: The roof covering on
buildings or structures in existence prior to the adoption of this section that
are replaced or have twenty five percent (25%) or more replaced in a twelve
(12) month period shall be replaced with a roof covering required for new
construction based on the type of ignition resistant construction specified in
accordance with this subsection E.
   F.   Fire Protection Requirements: The provisions of this subsection
establish general requirements for new and existing buildings, structures and
premises located within wildland-urban interface areas. The objective of this
subsection is to establish minimum requirements to mitigate the risk to life
and property from wildland fire exposures, exposures from adjacent structures
and to mitigate structure fires from spreading to wildland fuels.
      1.   Defensible Space: Provisions of this section are intended to modify
the fuel load in areas adjacent to structures to create a defensible space.
         a.   Fuel Modification: In order to qualify as a conforming defensible
space for individual buildings or structures on a property, fuel modification
shall be provided within a distance from buildings or structures as specified
in the table in subsection F1b of this section. For all other purposes, the
fuel modification distance shall not be less than thirty feet (30') or to the
property line, whichever is less. Distances specified in the table in
subsection F1b of this section shall be measured on a horizontal plane from the
perimeter or projection of the building or structure as shown in the figure in
subsection F1c of this section. Distances specified in the table in subsection
F1b of this section may be modified by the code official because of a site
specific analysis based on local conditions and the fire protection plan.
            Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating or maintaining
buildings or structures requiring defensible spaces are responsible for
modifying or removing nonfire resistive vegetation on the property owned,
leased or controlled by said person.
            Trees are allowed within the defensible space, provided the
horizontal distance between crowns of adjacent trees and overhead electrical
facilities or unmodified fuel is not less than ten feet (10'). Deadwood and
litter shall be regularly removed from trees.
            Where ornamental vegetative fuels or cultivated ground cover, such
as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants are used as ground cover,
they are allowed to be within the designated defensible space, provided they do
not form a means of transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure.
         b.   Table: Required defensible space:
 
Wildland-Urban Interface Area Fuel Modification Distance (Feet)
   Moderate hazard         30
   High hazard             50
   Extreme hazard          100
 
         c.   Figure: Measurements of fuel modification distance:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f16a5ed618c4ec2c872b44142ab358bc7c7f25cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1619.png]
 
         d.   Community Fuel Modification Zones: Fuel modification zones to
protect new communities shall be provided when required by the code official in
order to reduce fuel loads adjacent to communities and structures.
            (1)   Land Ownership: Fuel modification zone land used to protect a
community shall be under the control of an association or other common
ownership instrument for the life of the community to be protected.
            (2)   Fuel Modification Zone Plans: Fuel modification zone plans
shall be approved prior to fuel modification work and shall be placed on a site
grading plan shown in plan view. An elevation plan shall also be provided to
indicate the length of the fuel modification zone on the slope. Fuel
modification zone plans shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
               (A)   Plan showing existing vegetation.
               (B)   Photographs showing natural conditions prior to work being
performed.
               (C)   Grading plan showing location of proposed buildings and
structures, and setbacks from top of slope to all buildings or structures.
      2.   Maintenance Of Defensible Space: Defensible spaces required shall be
maintained annually, or as necessary.
         a.   Modified Area: Nonfire resistive vegetation or growth shall be
kept clear of buildings or structures, in accordance with subsection F1 of this
section, in such a manner as to provide a clear area for fire suppression
operations.
         b.   Responsibility: Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating
or maintaining buildings or structures are responsible for maintenance of
defensible spaces. Maintenance of the defensible space shall include modifying
or removing nonfire resistive vegetation and keeping leaves, needles and other
dead vegetative material regularly removed from roofs of buildings and
structures.
         c.   Trees: Individual trees and/or small clumps of trees or brush
crowns, extending to within ten feet (10') of any structure, shall be pruned to
maintain a minimum horizontal clearance of ten feet (10'). Tree crowns within
the defensible space shall be pruned to remove limbs located less than six feet
(6') above the ground surface adjacent to the trees.
            Portions of tree crowns that extend within ten feet (10') of the
outlet of a chimney shall be pruned to maintain a minimum horizontal clearance
of ten feet (10').
            Deadwood and litter shall be regularly removed from trees.
      3.   Spark Arresters: Chimneys serving fireplaces, barbecues,
incinerators or decorative heating appliances in which solid or liquid fuel is
used, shall be provided with a spark arrester. Spark arresters shall be
constructed of woven or welded wire screening of twelve (12) USA standard gauge
wire having openings not exceeding one-half inch (1/2").
         The net free area of the spark arrester shall not be less than four
(4) times the net free area of the outlet of the chimney.
      4.   Liquefied Petroleum Gas Installations: The storage of LP gas and the
installation and maintenance of pertinent equipment shall be in accordance with
the international fire code or, in the absence thereof, recognized standards.
         a.   Location Of Containers: LP gas containers shall be located within
the defensible space in accordance with the international fire code.
      5.   Storage Of Firewood And Combustible Materials: Firewood and
combustible material shall not be stored in unenclosed spaces beneath buildings
or structures, or on decks or under eaves, canopies or other projections or
overhangs. When required by the code official, storage of firewood and
combustible material stored in the defensible space shall be located a minimum
of thirty feet (30') from structures and separated from the crown of trees by a
minimum horizontal distance of fifteen feet (15').
         Firewood and combustible materials not for consumption on the premises
shall be stored so as to not pose a hazard. (Ord. 09-03, 8-11-2009)
CHAPTER 15
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-15-1: Purpose
10-15-2: General Requirements
10-15-3: Definitions
10-15-4: Applicability Of Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance
10-15-5: Landscape Design Standards
10-15-6: Irrigation Design Standards
10-15-7: Landscapes In New Single-Family Residential Developments
10-15-8: Prohibition On Restrictive Covenants Requiring Uniform Plant Material
Irrigated With Spray Irrigation
10-15-9: Landscapes In Commercial, Industrial, And Institutional Developments
10-15-10: Documentation For Commercial, Industrial, And Institutional Projects
10-15-11: Plan Review, Construction Inspection, And Post-Construction
Monitoring For Commercial, Industrial, And Institutional Projects
10-15-12: Prohibited Watering Practices
10-15-13: Enforcement, Penalty For Violations
10-15-14: Buffer Yard Landscaping
10-15-15: Failure To Comply
10-15-1: PURPOSE:
The City Council has found that it is in the public interest to conserve the
public’s water resources and to promote water efficient landscaping. The
purpose of this ordinance is to protect and enhance the community’s
environmental, economic, recreational, and aesthetic resources by promoting
efficient use of water in the community’s landscapes, reduce water waste and
establish a structure for designing, installing, and maintaining water
efficient landscapes throughout the City. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Required: All land approved for development in the city shall be
constructed as required by city ordinances and the planning commission or city
council. In order to control the potential for adverse conditions resulting
from dust, mud and erosion, land remaining on developed sites that is not
covered with structures or impervious surfaces such as driveways, walks,
courts, landscape features (sculptures, boulders, etc.), shall be landscaped in
accordance with this chapter and when applicable irrigated with an appropriate
system to maintain plants in a healthy, growing condition, compatible with the
general neighborhood appearance.
   B.   Residential Front, Side, And Back Yard Areas: Landscaping shall be
installed in all residential front yards, side yards, and back yards in
residential low-moderate (R-LM), residential moderate (R-M), and residential
multifamily (R-5) zones. Front and side yard landscaping shall be completed
within eighteen (18) months of occupancy. Back yards shall be landscaped within
twenty-four (24) months of occupancy. Landscaping of a residential site shall
include an irrigation system sufficient to maintain the health and beauty of
the landscaping. Residents who fail to abide by these landscaping regulations
are subject to penalties as set forth in section
10-15-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-02, 2-13-2007; amd. Ord. 19-16, 11-26-2019;
Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022; Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
APPLIED WATER:     The portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.
                   An irrigation head that delivers water to the root zone by “flooding” the
BUBBLER:           planted area, usually measured in gallons per minute. Bubblers exhibit a
                   trickle, umbrella, or short stream pattern.
                   A device used in sprinkler heads or pipe to prevent water from draining out of
CHECK VALVE:       the pipe through gravity flow. Used to prevent pollution or contamination or the
                   water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the secondary irrigation
                   system.
DRIP EMITTER:      Drip irrigation fittings that deliver water slowly at the root zone of the
                   plant, usually measured in gallons per hour.
EFFECTIVE          The portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.
PRECIPITATION:
ESTABLISHED        The point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root
LANDSCAPE:         growth into the soil.
ESTABLISHMENT      The first year after installing the plant in the landscape.
PERIOD:
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and
(ET):              transpired by plants during a specified time, expressed in inches per day,
                   month, or year.
GRADING PLAN:      The Grading Plan shows all finish grades, spot elevations as necessary and
                   existing and new contours with the developed landscape area.
GROUND COVER:      Material planted in such a way as to form a continuous cover over the ground
                   that can be maintained at a height not more than twelve (12) inches.
HARDSCAPE:         Patios, decks, and paths. Does not include driveways and sidewalks.
IRRIGATION         All portions of a development site to be improved with plantings and irrigation.
LANDSCAPED AREA:   Natural open space areas shall not be included in the irrigated landscape area.
                   The measurement of the amount of water beneficially applied, divided by the
IRRIGATION         total amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from
EFFICIENCY:        measurements and estimates of irrigation system hardware characteristics and
                   management practices.
                   The irrigation plan shows the components of the irrigation system with water
IRRIGATION PLAN:   meter size, backflow prevention (when outdoor irrigation is supplied with
                   culinary water), precipitation rates, flow rate and operating pressure for each
                   irrigation circuit, and identification of all irrigation equipment.
                   An in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system that includes,
IRRIGATION SYSTEM  but is not limited to, inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution
AUDIT:             uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes
                   overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.
LANDSCAPE          A person who holds a certificate to practice landscape architecture in the state
ARCHITECT:         of Utah. Only a Landscape Architect can legally create commercial landscape
                   plans.
                   A person who may or may not hold professional certificates for landscape design/
LANDSCAPE          architecture and cannot legally create commercial landscape plans. Landscape
DESIGNER:          Designers generally focus on residential design and horticultural needs of home
                   landscapes.
                   A package that is intended to inform and educate water users in the City about
                   water efficient landscapes. This package should include a listing of water
LANDSCAPE          conserving plants, certified landscape designers, landscape architects,
EDUCATION PACKAGE: certified irrigation designers, and certified irrigation contractors.
                   Information regarding the City’s water rates, billing format for water use and
                   commitment to water conservation may also be included.
                   The preparation of a graphic and written criteria, specifications, and detailed
LANDSCAPE PLAN     plans to arrange and modify the effects of natural features such as plantings,
DOCUMENTATION      ground and water forms, circulation, walks and other features to comply with the
PACKAGE:           provisions of this ordinance. The Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall
                   include a project data sheet, a Planting Plan, an Irrigation Plan, and a Grading
                   Plan.
                   A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs, areas
LANDSCAPE ZONE:    with similar microclimate (i.e., slope, exposure, wind, etc.) and soil
                   conditions, and areas that will be similarly irrigated. A landscape zone can be
                   served by one irrigation valve, or a set of valves with the same schedule.
                   Any combination of living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers,
LANDSCAPING:       flowers, or grass; natural features such as rock, stone, or bark chips; and
                   structural features, including but not limited to, fountains, reflecting pools,
                   outdoor artwork, screen walls, fences, or benches.
                   A locally adaptable and environmentally sustainable urban landscape style that
LOCALSCAPES®:     requires less irrigation than traditional Utah landscapes (see
                   www.Localscapes.com).
                   The upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as
MAXIMUM APPLIED    specified in
WATER ALLOWANCE    10-15-6. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, a plant
(MAWA):            adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The Estimated Total Water
                   Use shall not exceed the MAWA.
                   The climate of a very small, restricted area that is different from the
MICROCLIMATE:      surrounding area. These areas include shade areas, sun areas, and areas
                   protected by surrounding structures.
MULCH:             Any material such as rock, bark, wood chips or other materials left loose and
                   applied to the soil.
PARK STRIP:        A typically narrow landscaped area located between the back-of-curb and
                   sidewalk.
                   A reference evapotranspiration factor, also referred to as a crop coefficient
PLANT ADJUSTMENT   which is a value to indicate water needs of various plant types for optimum
FACTOR:            growth or yield. It is a factor to provide acceptable appearance and function of
                   the plant.
                   A Planting Plan shall clearly and accurately identify and locate new and
PLANTING PLAN:     existing trees, shrubs, ground covers, turf areas, driveways, sidewalks,
                   hardscape features, and fences.
POP-UP SPRAY HEAD: A sprinkler head that sprays water through a nozzle in a fixed pattern with no
                   rotation.
PRECIPITATION      The depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches per hour.
RATE:
PRESSURE           A drip irrigation system that compensates for fluctuating water pressure by only
COMPENSATING:      allowing a fixed volume of water through drip emitters.
REHABILITATED      Altering, repairing, or adding to a landscape to make possible a compatible use,
LANDSCAPING:       increase curb appeal, decrease maintenance, etc.
ROTOR SPRAY HEAD:  A sprinkler head that distributes water through a nozzle by the rotation of a
                   gear r mechanical rotor.
RUNOFF:            Irrigation water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape area to which it
                   is applied, and which flows onto other areas.
                   An automatic timing device used to remotely control valves in the operation of
SMART AUTOMATIC    an irrigation system using the internet to connect to a real time weather source
IRRIGATION         or soil moisture sensor. Smart Automatic Irrigation Controllers schedule
CONTROLLER:        irrigation events using either evapotranspiration or soil moisture data to
                   control when and how long sprinklers or drip systems operate and will vary based
                   on time of year and weather/soil moisture conditions.
                   An area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with
SPECIAL LANDSCAPE  recycled water, water features using recycled water and areas dedicated to
AREA (SLA):        active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides
                   a playing surface.
SPRAY SPRINKLER:   An irrigation head that sprays water through a nozzle.
STREAM SPRINKLER:  An irrigation head that projects water through a gear rotor in single or
                   multiple streams.
TURF:              A surface layer of earth containing grass species with full root structures that
                   are maintained as mowed grass.
                   Shall include, but not necessarily limited to:
                   1.   The use of water for any purpose, including outdoor irrigation, that
                   consumes, or for which is applied substantial excess water beyond the reasonable
WASTE OF WATER:    amount required by the use, whether such excess water is lost due to
                   evaporation, percolation, discharges into the sewer system, or is allowed to run
                   into the gutter or street.
                   2.   Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or
                   other paved areas except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards.
WATER-CONSERVING   A plant that can generally survive with available rainfall once established
PLANT:             although supplemental irrigation may be needed or desirable during spring and
                   summer months. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
 
10-15-4: APPLICABILITY OF WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE:
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all new and rehabilitated
landscaping for public agency projects, private commercial and industrial
development projects, developer-installed landscaping in multi-family and
single-family residential projects. Owner-installed landscaping shall not be
required to apply the provisions of this ordinance but are encouraged to do so.
(Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-5: LANDSCAPE DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Plant Selection.
      1.   Plants shall be well-suited to the microclimate and soil conditions
at the project site. Both native and locally adapted plants are acceptable.
Plants with similar water needs shall be grouped together as much as possible.
      2.   Areas with slopes greater than 25% shall be landscaped with deep-
rooting, water- conserving plants for erosion control and soil stabilization.
      3.   Park strips and other landscaped areas less than eight (8) feet wide
shall be landscaped with water-conserving plants that do not constitute a mass
planting of any type of plant material requiring uniform overhead spray
irrigation.
   B.   Mulch. After completion of all planting, all irrigated non-turf areas
shall be covered with a minimum three (3) inch layer of mulch to retain water,
inhibit weed growth, and moderate soil temperature. Non-porous material shall
not be placed under the mulch.
   C.   Soil Preparation. Soil preparation will be suitable to provide healthy
growing conditions for the plants and to encourage water infiltration and
penetration. Soil preparation shall include scarifying the soil to a minimum
depth of six (6) inches and amending the soil with organic material as per
specific recommendations of the Landscape Designer/Landscape Architect based on
the soil conditions.
   D.   Tree Selection. Tree species shall be selected based on growth
characteristics and site conditions, including available space, overhead
clearance, soil conditions, exposure, and desired color and appearance. Trees
shall be selected as follows:
      1.   Broad canopy trees shall be selected where shade or screening of
tall objects is desired;
      2.   Low-growing trees shall be selected for spaces under utility wires;
      3.   Select trees from which lower branches can be trimmed to maintain a
healthy growth habit where vision clearance and natural surveillance is a
concern;
      4.   Narrow or columnar trees shall be selected where awnings or other
building features limit growth, or where greater visibility is desired between
buildings and the street for natural surveillance;
      5.   Street trees shall be planted within existing and proposed park
strips, and in sidewalk tree wells on streets without park strips. Tree
placement shall provide canopy cover (shade) and avoid conflicts with existing
trees, retaining walls, utilities, lighting, and other obstacles; and
      6.   Trees less than a two-inch caliper shall be double staked until the
trees mature to a two-inch caliper. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-6: IRRIGATION DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Smart Automatic Irrigation Controller. Landscaped areas shall be
provided with a WaterSense labeled smart irrigation controller which
automatically adjusts the frequency and/or duration of irrigation events in
response to changing weather conditions. All controllers shall be equipped with
automatic rain delay or rain shut-off capabilities and shall be setup to
operate in “smart” mode.
   B.   Each valve shall irrigate a landscape with similar site, slope and soil
conditions and plant materials with similar watering needs. Turf and non-turf
areas shall be irrigated on separate valves. Drip emitters and sprinklers shall
be placed on separate valves.
   C.   Drip emitters or a bubbler shall be provided for each tree. Bubblers
shall not exceed 1.5 gallons per minute per device. Bubblers for trees shall be
placed on a separate valve unless specifically exempted by the City due to the
limited number of trees on the project site.
   D.   Drip irrigation or bubblers shall be used to irrigate plants in non-
turf areas. Pop-up spray heads shall be at a minimum of four (4) inches in
height to avoid blockage from lawn foliage.
   E.   Sprinklers shall have matched precipitation rates with each control
valve circuit.
   F.   Sprinkler heads shall be attached to rigid lateral lines with flexible
material (swing joints) to reduce potential for breakage.
   G.   Check valves shall be required where elevation differences cause low-
head drainage. Pressure compensating valves and sprinklers shall be required
where a significant variation in water pressure occurs within the irrigation
system due to elevation differences.
   H.   Filters shall be required on all secondary water service connections.
Filters shall have as a minimum a 30-mesh screen and shall be cleaned and
maintained by the property owner on a regular basis.
   I.   Drip irrigation lines require additional filtration at or after the
zone valve at a minimum of 200 mesh and end flush valves are required as
necessary for drip irrigation lines.
   J.   Valves with spray or stream sprinklers shall be scheduled to operate in
accordance with local water supplier restrictions to reduce water loss from
wind, evaporation, or other environmental conditions not suitable for
irrigation.
   K.   Program valves for multiple repeat cycles where necessary to reduce
runoff, particularly on slopes and soils with slow infiltration rates.
   L.   Meter Installation: Meters shall be specified by the South Weber City
for the particular installation and shall report instantaneous flow in gallons
per minute (GPM) and totalized flow in gallons via encoded register output.
Meters shall be installed in accordance with the South Weber Public Works
Standards Drawings.
   M.   AMR Transmitters: Each meter shall be fitted with an AMR transmitter
with integral connector. AMR Transmitters shall be installed in accordance with
the South Weber Public Works Standards Drawings.
Each new development or rehabilitated landscape that uses primary potable water
for landscape irrigation must provide a water budget calculation to demonstrate
a Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) for the new landscape or development.
For parcels using secondary water, the MAWA is determined by the secondary
water provider based on parcel size and is referred to as an allocation.
The Maximum Applied Water Allowance shall be calculated using the following
equation:
MAWA = (ETo) (0.62)(1.15)[(0.8 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]
MAWA = Maximum Applied Water Allowance (gallons per year)
ETo = Reference Evapotranspiration (inches per year) as calculated from weather
data at the closest available weather station.
0.62 = Conversion Factor (to gallons)
1.15= Delivery Inefficiency Factor (sprinkler system uniformity etc.)
0.8 = ET Adjustment Factor (ETAF), plant factor or crop coefficient (.8
standard for cool season turf)
LA = Landscape Area including SLA (square feet)
0.3 = Additional Water Allowance for SLA
SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet)
ETo values can be obtained directly from the USU Climate Center where a
database of weather data from local stations is collected, analyzed, and
stored. If you cannot find the ET data you need, please contact the City.
Additional details and examples of calculations are found in Appendix A. (Ord.
2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-7: LANDSCAPES IN NEW SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Homebuilders and/or developers subdividing lots and/or constructing new
single-family residential homes shall provide water-efficient landscaping to
prospective home buyers, such as the Localscapes design style when the
landscape is installed by the homebuilder/developer. The water-efficient
landscaping option shall meet the Landscape Design Standards and Irrigation
Design Standards of this ordinance.
   B.   Homebuilders and/or developers who construct model homes for a
designated subdivision shall install water-efficient landscaping, such as the
Localscapes design style. The water-efficient landscaping option shall meet the
Landscape Design Standards and Irrigation Design Standards of this ordinance.
   C.   New Construction homes shall have landscaping and irrigation plans
approved by the City Planning Department prior to issuance of building permits,
for which no variance may be granted, and which meet the aforementioned
requirements.
   D.   Model homes shall include an informational brochure on water-efficient
landscaping or Localscapes. Localscapes brochures can be obtained from the City
Planning Department.
   E.   When buyers or owners are installing their own landscaping on new home
construction, a time frame for landscaping to be completed shall be 18 months
from the time of occupancy to complete the front yard and no more than three
(3) years to complete the total landscape. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-8: PROHIBITION ON RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS REQUIRING UNIFORM PLANT MATERIAL
IRRIGATED WITH SPRAY IRRIGATION:
   A.   Any Homeowners Association governing documents, such as bylaws,
operating rules, covenants, conditions, and restrictions that govern the
operation of a common interest development, are void and unenforceable if they:
      1.   Require the use of any uniform plant material requiring overhead
spray irrigation in landscape areas less than 8 feet wide or require any
uniform plant material requiring overhead spray irrigation in other areas that
exceed 40% of the landscaped area; or
      2.   Prohibit, or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting,
the use of water-conserving plants as a group; or
      3.   Have the effect of prohibiting or restricting compliance with this
ordinance or other water conservation measures. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-9: LANDSCAPES IN COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS:
Commercial, industrial, and institutional landscapes shall meet the Landscape
Design Standards and Irrigation Design Standards of this ordinance, and the
turf area shall not exceed 15% of the total landscaped area, outside of active
recreation areas. Landscaping in park strips shall not be used when calculating
the total landscaping area. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-10: DOCUMENTATION FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL PROJECTS:
Landscape Plan Documentation Package. A copy of a Landscape Plan Documentation
Package shall be submitted to and approved by the City prior to the issue of
any permit. A copy of the approved Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall
be provided to the property owner or site manager and to the local retail water
purveyor. The Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall be prepared by a
registered landscape architect and shall consist of the following items:
   A.   Project Data Sheet. The Project Data Sheet shall contain the following:
      1.   Project name and address;
      2.   Applicant or applicant agent’s name, address, phone number, and
email address;
      3.   Landscape architect’s name, address, phone number, and email
address; and
      4.   Landscape contractor’s name, address, phone number and email
address, if available at this time.
   B.   Planting Plan. A detailed planting plan shall be drawn at a scale that
clearly identifies the following:
      1.   Location of all plant materials, a legend with botanical and common
names, and size of plant materials;
      2.   Property lines and street names;
      3.   Existing and proposed buildings, walls, fences, utilities, paved
areas and other site improvements;
      4.   Existing trees and plant materials to be removed or retained;
      5.   Scale: graphic and written;
      6.   Date of Design;
      7.   Designation of a landscape zone, and
      8.   Details and specifications for tree staking, soil preparation, and
other planting work.
   C.   Irrigation Plan. A detailed irrigation plan shall be drawn at the same
scale as the planting plan and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Layout of the irrigation system and a legend summarizing the type
and size of all components of the system, including manufacturer name and model
numbers;
      2.   Static water pressure in pounds per square inch (psi) at the point
of connection to the public water supply;
      3.   Flow rate in gallons per minute and design operating pressure in psi
for each valve and precipitation rate in inches per hour for each valve with
sprinklers, and
      4.   Installation details for irrigation components.
   D.   Grading Plan. A Grading Plan shall be drawn at the same scale as the
Planting Plan and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Property lines and street names, existing and proposed buildings,
walls, fences, utilities, paved areas, and other site improvements, and
      2.   Existing and finished contour lines and spot elevations as necessary
for the proposed site improvements. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-11: PLAN REVIEW, CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION, AND POST-CONSTRUCTION
MONITORING FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL PROJECTS:
   A.   As part of the Building Permit approval process, a copy of the
Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall be submitted to the City for review
and approval before construction begins.
   B.   All installers and designers shall meet state and local license,
insurance, and bonding requirements, and be able to show proof of such.
   C.   During construction, site inspection of the landscaping may be
performed by the City Building Inspection Department.
   D.   Following construction and prior to issuing the approval for occupancy,
an inspection shall be scheduled with the Building Inspection Department to
verify compliance with the approved landscape plans. The Certificate of
Substantial Completion shall be completed by the property owner, contractor or
landscape architect and submitted to the City.
   E.   The City reserves the right to perform site inspections at any time
before, during or after the irrigation system and landscape installation, and
to require corrective measures if requirements of this ordinance are not
satisfied. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-12: PROHIBITED WATERING PRACTICES:
Regardless of the age of a development (commercial, industrial, office, or
residential), water shall be properly used. Waste of water is prohibited. (Ord.
2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-13: ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
The Public Works Director, Planning Services Director, Code Enforcement
Officer, and other employees of the Public Works Department are authorized to
enforce all provisions of this Ordinance. (Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-14: BUFFER YARD LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Intent: The intent of these requirements is to increase the
compatibility of adjacent land uses and foster compatibility among different
land uses by minimizing the harmful effects of noise, dust and other debris,
motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions, and other
objectionable activities or impacts conducted or created by an adjoining or
nearby use.
   B.   Requirements: The following illustration graphically indicates the
specifications of a buffer yard. The type and quantity of plant materials
required by a buffer yard are specified in this section. Only those plant
materials capable of fulfilling the intended function shall satisfy the
requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Satisfaction Of Requirements: Any existing plant material which
otherwise satisfies the requirements of this section may be counted toward
satisfying all such requirements.
   D.   Placement: The exact placement of required plants and structures shall
be the decision of each user except that evergreen (or conifers) shall be
planted in clusters rather than singly in order to maximize their chances of
survival.
   E.   Waived: Any provision contained in this chapter may, with just cause,
be waived by the City Council with the advice of the Planning Commission.
Buffer Yard
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f16a5ed618c4ec2c872b44142ab358bc7c7f25cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1816.png]
 
   •    Masonry wall shall be at or near property line.
   •   There shall be 1 tree with mature height of at least 25' for every 20'
of length of buffer yard or fraction thereof.
   •   Ground plane shall be landscaped with shrubs, ground covers, flowers, or
decorative mulch. (Ord. 18-05, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
10-15-15: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Owners/operators of commercial property not landscaped or maintained as
required may have their business licenses revoked. Owners of residential
property not landscaped or maintained in accordance with this chapter are
subject to prosecution for a Class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction, subject
to penalties including a fine in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
and fifty dollars ($50.00) each day that the area to be landscaped remains
uncorrected or unabated. (Ord. 07-02, 2-13-2007; amd. Ord. 2022-04, 2-22-2022)
CHAPTER 16
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION
SECTION:
10-16-1: Short Title And Purpose
10-16-2: Definitions
10-16-3: Establishment Of Drinking Water Source Protection Zones
10-16-4: Prohibited Uses
10-16-5: Administration/Policies And Procedures
10-16-1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
   A.   This chapter shall be known as the DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION
ORDINANCE.
   B.   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the provision of a safe and
sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of drinking
water source protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are
the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and
regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such
zones. (Ord. 10-04, 3-23-2010)
10-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given in this section:
   ABANDONED WELL: A well whose purpose and use has been permanently
discontinued or a well that is in a state of disrepair and its intended purpose
cannot reasonably be achieved. A well can be abandoned only after being
properly sealed according to the requirements of the state of Utah
administrative rules for water well drillers, R655-4-12.
   ALLOWED USES: A use, activity or practice of which does not create a risk of
contamination in the specified zone significant enough to require the
implementation of regulatory requirement and best management practices and,
therefore, the use is allowed.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES: A practice or combination of practices determined
to be the most effective practicable means of conducting a land use activity to
minimize the potential for becoming a pollution source (including
technological, economic and institutional considerations).
   COLLECTION AREA: The area surrounding a groundwater source which is
underlain by collection pipes, tile, tunnels, infiltration boxes or other
groundwater collection devices.
   DESIGN STANDARD: Established state or national standards for the design,
construction, placement or maintenance of a potential contamination source to
prevent discharges to the groundwater. See also definition of Secondary
Containment.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE: A waste with properties that make it dangerous or
potentially harmful to human health or the environment.
   LAND MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES: Land use and nonland use controls which include,
but are not limited to, the following: land ordinance, site plan reviews,
design and operating standards, source prohibitions, optional purchase of
property and development rights, public education programs, groundwater
monitoring, household hazardous waste collection programs, water conservation
programs, memoranda of understanding, written contracts and agreements, and so
forth.
   POLLUTION SOURCE: Point source discharge of contaminants to groundwater or
potential discharges of the liquid forms of "extremely hazardous substances"
which are stored in containers in excess of "applicable threshold planning
quantities" as specified in SARA title III. Examples of possible pollution
sources include, but are not limited to, the following: storage facilities that
store the liquid forms of extremely hazardous substances, septic tanks, drain
fields, class V underground injection wells, landfills, open dumps, landfilling
of sludge and septage, manure piles, salt piles, pit privies and animal feeding
operations with more than ten (10) animal units. The following clarify the
definition of pollution source:
   A.   Animal Feeding Operation: A lot or facility where the following
conditions are met: animals have been or will be stabled or confined and fed or
maintained for a total of forty five (45) days or more in any twelve (12) month
period and crops, vegetation forage growth or postharvest residues are not
sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility.
Two (2) or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are considered
to be a single feeding operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a
common area or if they use a common system for the disposal of wastes.
   B.   Animal Unit: A unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation
calculated by adding the following numbers: the number of slaughter and feeder
cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus the number of mature dairy cattle multiplied by
1.4, plus the number of swine weighing over fifty five (55) pounds multiplied
by 0.4 plus the number of sheep multiplied by 0.1, plus the number of horses
multiplied by 2.0.
   C.   Extremely Hazardous Substances: Those substances which are identified
in the section 302(EHS) column of the "title III list of lists - consolidated
list of chemicals subject to reporting under SARA title III" (EPA 560/4-91-
011).
   POTENTIAL CONTAMINATION SOURCE: Any facility or site which employs an
activity or procedure which may potentially contaminate groundwater. A
pollution source is also a potential contamination source.
   PROHIBITED USE: A use, activity or practice which creates a substantial risk
or contamination in the specified zone. The use is not permitted.
   REGULATORY AGENCY: Any governmental agency (local, state, and/or federal)
with jurisdiction over "hazardous waste" as defined herein.
   RESTRICTED: The nature of the use, or some element of the use, represents a
"potential contamination source". The use may be permitted only after review
and approval by the land use authority. As part of this review, recommendations
from the Davis County health department and other applicable regulatory
agencies shall be considered.
   SARA TITLE III: The superfund amendment and reauthorization act section
found on 40 CFR 300-302, pertaining to emergency response and right to know.
   SANITARY LANDFILL: A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible
wastes or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover
thereon.
   SECONDARY CONTAINMENT: A type of system that is used to provide release
detection prevention, such as trays under containers, floor curbing or other
systems designed to hold materials or liquids that may discharge from
containers holding regulated substance. Examples include a double walled tank,
a double walled integral piping system or a single walled tank or integral
piping system that is protected by an enclosed concrete vault, liner, or an
impervious containment area.
   SEPTIC TANK/DRAIN FIELD SYSTEM: A system which is comprised of a septic tank
and a drain field, which accepts wastewater from buildings or facilities for
surface or subsurface treatment and disposal.
   SOURCE PROTECTION ZONE: The specified surface and subsurface area
surrounding a groundwater source of drinking water supplying a public water
supply, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and
reach such groundwater source. These zones shall have the approval of the state
of Utah, division of drinking water as described in R309-600 source protection:
drinking water source protection for ground-water sources and stated in section
10-16-3 of this chapter.
   UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK: A tank or combination of tanks and underground
pipes and impact valves connected to tanks being used or having been used to
contain regulated substances and which has at least ten percent (10%) of the
total volume of the tank and underground portions of pipes connected to the
tank underground.
   WELLHEAD: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals,
valves and other attachments. (Ord. 10-04, 3-23-2010)
10-16-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONES:
There is hereby established use districts to be known as zones one, two, three,
and four of the drinking water source protection area, identified and described
as follows:
   A.   Zone one is the area within a one hundred foot (100') radius from the
wellhead.
   B.   Zone two is the area within a two hundred fifty (250) day groundwater
time travel to the wellhead, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies
water to the groundwater source, or the groundwater divide, whichever is
closer.
   C.   Zone three (waiver criteria zone) is the area within three (3) year
groundwater time of travel to the wellhead of margin of the collection area,
the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source,
or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer.
   D.   Zone four is the area within fifteen (15) year groundwater time of
travel to the wellhead, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to
the groundwater source, or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer. (Ord.
10-04, 3-23-2010)
10-16-4: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within
drinking water source protection zones, whether or not such use or condition
may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of uses permitted under this
title:
   A.   Zone one: The location of any "pollution source" as defined herein.
   B.   Zone two: The location of a pollution source unless its contaminated
discharges can be controlled with design standards.
   C.   Zones three and four: The location of a potential contamination source
unless it can be controlled through land management strategies. (Ord. 10-04, 3-
23-2010)
10-16-5: ADMINISTRATION/POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
The policies and procedures for administration of any source protection zone
established under this chapter, including, without limitation, those applicable
to nonconforming uses, exception, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same
as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city of South Weber, as
the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. (Ord. 10-04,
3-23-2010)
CHAPTER 17
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
ARTICLE A. SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-17A-1: Purpose
10-17A-2: Definitions
10-17A-3: Design Standards
10-17A-4: Siting Conditions And Property Maintenance
10-17A-5: Land Use Authority Issued Permits
10-17A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum requirements and
regulations for the placement, construction, and modification of small wind
energy systems as defined herein, while promoting the safe, effective, and
efficient use of such systems. (Ord. 13-11, 5-14-2013)
10-17A-2: DEFINITIONS:
   ABANDONED: A wind energy system or project shall be considered abandoned
when, once installed it fails to operate for twelve (12) consecutive months.
Exceptions may be made for catastrophic circumstances such as a natural
disaster or "force majeure".
   HEIGHT: The height of a wind turbine measured from natural grade to the tip
of the rotor blade at its highest point.
   RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY: The maximum rated output of electric power
production equipment. This output is typically specified by the manufacturer
with a "nameplate" on the equipment rated in watts (W) or British thermal units
(Btus). Due to the nature of wind energy systems, watts will be used as the
standard unit in this article.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: Tower mounted or roof mounted windmill systems,
and all equipment, machinery, and structures utilized in connection with the
conversion of wind to electricity. This includes, but is not limited to,
storage equipment, electrical collection and supply equipment, transformers,
service and access roads, and one or more wind turbines that has a rated
nameplate capacity of one hundred (100) kW or less.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A permit provided by the land use authority for
nonconforming small wind energy systems.
   TEMPORARY METEOROLOGICAL TOWER: A temporary tower, housing, and associated
wind measuring equipment used for the purpose of establishing the viability of
wind generated energy by measuring and monitoring wind velocity, direction,
shear, duration, intensity, and regularity. (Ord. 13-11, 5-14-2013)
10-17A-3: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Height: The height of small wind energy systems shall not exceed sixty
feet (60') without prior approval from the land use authority.
   B.   Setbacks: All small wind energy systems, including roof mounted
systems, shall be set back at a distance equal to one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the height of the system from all inhabited structures, overhead
utility lines, and public roads or public rights of way. Applicant must
consider approximate building box of future adjacent homes when constructing a
system in a new subdivision, or where a neighboring inhabited structure is not
present. Wind turbines shall not be permitted in the front yards of single-
family residential properties.
   C.   Setback Waivers: The land use authority designated to approve the
permit shall consider an exception to the minimum setbacks required if the
following criteria are met:
      1.   A signed agreement of consent from abutting property owner(s)
recorded with Davis County recorder's office, and
      2.   The public rights of way and power lines are not impacted by the
location.
   D.   Minimum Blade Height: The minimum height of the lowest extent of a
turbine blade shall be fifteen feet (15') above the ground.
   E.   Color And Finish: The small wind energy system shall be a neutral
nonreflective color applied by the manufacturer that blends with the
environment and complies with federal aviation administration (FAA) standards.
Earth tones, gray, beige, and white are recommended.
   F.   Lighting: Small wind energy systems shall be lighted as required by the
FAA. Spotlights are prohibited, unless required by the FAA. Lighting of the
small wind energy system beyond FAA standards shall be directed downward and
limited to that required for safety and operational purposes.
   G.   Signage And Advertising: Signs and advertising shall be restricted to
reasonable identification of the manufacturer, operator of the small wind
energy system, and utility, and safety signs. Signage standards cannot exceed
the requirements of the zone in which the system resides.
   H.   Access: All access doors, climbing apparatuses, or accessways to towers
and electrical equipment shall remain locked and inaccessible by the public.
   I.   Sound: The small wind energy system and associated equipment shall not
exceed fifty (50) dBA from the nearest inhabited structure. Noise compliance
must be proven by the applicant. (Ord. 13-11, 5-14-2013)
10-17A-4: SITING CONDITIONS AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Land Clearing, Soil Erosion, Wildlife And Habitat Impacts: Clearing of
natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the safe
construction, operation, and maintenance of the small wind energy system and is
otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. Once the
system is operational, any land that has been disturbed and is not necessary
for the functioning of the system shall be reclaimed with natural vegetation
within sixty (60) days, weather permitting. Soil erosion is to be mitigated by
the use of silt fencing, any accumulated product of which can be used in the
site reclamation.
   B.   System Conditions: The applicant shall maintain the small wind energy
system in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
painting, mechanical/electrical repairs, structural repairs, and security
measures. South Weber City may perform an annual inspection of electrical
connections and proper maintenance of the system.
   C.   Removal And Decommissioning Requirements: Any small wind energy system
that has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall be
removed. A small wind energy system shall be considered abandoned when it fails
to operate for twelve (12) consecutive months. Upon a notice of abandonment
issued by the land use authority, the small wind energy system owner will have
sixty (60) days to provide sufficient evidence that the system has not been
abandoned, or the land use authority shall have the authority to enter the
owner's property and remove the system at the owner's expense. Once the system
has been removed the owner is then responsible for land reclamation using the
natural vegetation that was removed or disturbed upon construction of the
project. To the greatest extent possible, the land shall be fully returned to
its natural state within five (5) years of the removal and decommissioning of
the project. Exceptions may be made for catastrophic circumstances such as a
natural disaster or "force majeure".
   D.   Approved Location: Small wind energy systems may be allowed by
conditional use permit application in all zones in South Weber City. Small wind
energy systems may be approved as tower mounted or roof mounted systems. (Ord.
13-11, 5-14-2013)
10-17A-5: LAND USE AUTHORITY ISSUED PERMITS:
   A.   Permits: Small wind energy systems shall be constructed as provided in
this article by first obtaining a conditional use permit. The system in
question must be approved by the Underwriters Laboratories (UL listed). Hill
Air Force Base must be included in the list of notified parties of all wind
energy systems, and provided opportunity to comment on potential negative
impacts the system may have. The system must meet international building code
requirements for wind load and snow load in South Weber, Utah.
   B.   Modifications: Any physical modification to an existing and permitted
small wind energy system that materially increases the size and/or type of wind
turbines or other equipment shall require a conditional use permit modification
under this article. Replacement of an already permitted turbine with a similar
size and height will not require a permit modification, but will require
administrative approval.
   C.   Special Use Permits: A special use permit (SUP) may be granted in the
case where a proposed small wind energy system or project does not satisfy the
standard criteria of the permit set forth under this article. The applicant
must then seek review of the proposed project and petition the land use
authority for a special use permit. This SUP variance from the standard permit
criteria will only be applicable to that specific nonconforming project.
   D.   Expiration: A permit issued pursuant to this article shall expire if:
      1.   The small wind energy system is not installed and functioning within
twelve (12) months from the date the permit is issued; or
      2.   The small wind energy system is abandoned.
   E.   Violations: It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or
operate a small wind energy system that is not in compliance with this article
or with any condition contained in a permit issued pursuant to this article.
Small wind energy systems installed prior to the adoption of this article are
exempt.
   F.   Administration And Enforcement: This article shall be administered and
enforced by the land use authority or designated party therein. The land use
authority, upon prior notice to owner and at reasonable business hours, may
enter any property for which a permit has been issued under this article to
conduct an inspection to determine whether the conditions stated in the permit
have been met.
   G.   Compliance With Laws, Ordinances, And Regulations: The construction and
operation of all such proposed small wind energy systems shall be consistent
with all applicable local, state, and federal requirements, including all
applicable safety, construction, environmental, electrical, communications, and
FAA requirements. If possible, the land shall be returned to its natural state
within five (5) years of the removal and decommissioning of the project. (Ord.
13-11, 5-14-2013)
ARTICLE B. LARGE WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-17B-1: Purpose
10-17B-2: Definitions
10-17B-3: Requirements
10-17B-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this article to promote the safe, effective, and efficient
use of large wind energy systems installed to provide electricity to utilities
and to promote the adoption of renewable energy resources to reduce dependence
on fossil fuel power generation. (Ord. 13-11, 5-14-2013)
10-17B-2: DEFINITIONS:
   LARGE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion system consisting of one
or more wind turbine(s) and tower(s), with associated control or conversion
electronics, which will be used for on site and/or off site consumption of
power with a rated capacity in excess of one hundred (100) kW.
   SHADOW FLICKER: Alternating changes in light intensity caused by the moving
blade of a wind energy system casting shadows on an object, such as a window.
   TOTAL EXTENDED HEIGHT: The distance measured from ground level to the tip of
the blade, extended at its highest point of travel.
   TOWER: The supporting structure on which the turbine is mounted.
   TURBINE: That portion of the wind system that is used to capture the energy
of the wind and transform it into electrical or mechanical energy. The turbine
includes a rotor (blades) and nacelle (generator), and on many wind systems, a
tail.
   WIND MONITORING TOWER AND EQUIPMENT METEOROLOGICAL (MET) TOWER: A tower that
houses or supports wind measuring equipment, such as an anemometer, for the
purpose of measuring and monitoring wind velocity, duration, intensity,
regularity, air temperature and pressure, etc. MET towers are typically
permitted only on a temporary basis (2 to 5 years) to help determine the
viability of a wind energy system project; although more permanent MET towers
may also be considered. (Ord. 13-11, 5-14-2013)
10-17B-3: REQUIREMENTS:
The following standards shall apply to all large wind energy systems:
   A.   Development Agreement: All large wind energy system applications will
be required to sign a development agreement with South Weber City to specify
the standards and conditions that will govern development of the wind energy
system.
   B.   Minimum Parcel Size: A large wind energy system consisting of one tower
must be located on a parcel that is a minimum of five (5) acres in size. An
additional acre of property is required for each additional tower.
   C.   On Site Structures: On site structures may be located up to the
foundation of the tower.
   D.   Set Back From An Occupied Structure: The tower base must be set back a
minimum of eight hundred feet (800') from an occupied structure.
   E.   Distance From Rights Of Way And Property Lines: None; but all tower
bases must be located on leased or owned property. The blade sweep cannot
encroach upon adjoining properties, power lines, or rights of way without
easements providing for their encroachment. The easement must be a recorded
document.
   F.   Setback Waivers: The land use authority designated to approve the
permit shall consider an exception to the minimum setbacks required if the
following criteria are met:
      1.   A signed agreement of consent from abutting property owner(s)
recorded with Davis County recorder's office, and
      2.   The properties, public rights of way and power lines are not
impacted by the location.
   G.   Height: Tower height is not to exceed two hundred seventy feet (270').
Provided that, in all cases, the system shall comply with all applicable
federal aviation administration (FAA) requirements.
   H.   Height Of Blade (Tip At Low Point Of Blade Sweep From Ground): No
closer than fifty feet (50').
   I.   Braking Device: All wind turbine devices shall have braking systems
when winds reach speeds in excess of sixty five (65) miles per hour.
   J.   Sign: One project identification warning sign is permitted containing a
telephone number for emergency calls, no larger than sixteen (16) square feet
in size.
   K.   Color/Finish: White, earth tone or other nonreflective color applied by
the manufacturer.
   L.   Telecommunication Interference: Demonstrate that the potential for
adverse electromagnetic fields and communications interference generated by the
project has been evaluated and determined unlikely, conduct a licensed
microwave search and worst case fresnel zone (WCFZ) analysis, including
consultations with the national telecommunications information administration
(NTIA), interdepartmental radio advisory committee (IRAC) and the national
weather service.
   M.   Notification: Hill Air Force Base must be notified of any large scale
wind system, and provided an opportunity to review plans in order to limit
interference with local flight paths and signal interference.
   N.   Compliance With International Building Code (IBC): Building permit
applications for large wind energy systems shall be accompanied by standard
drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower and wind turbine showing
compliance with the building code and certified by a professional engineer
licensed in the state of Utah shall also be submitted. The system must meet
international building code requirements for wind load and snow load in South
Weber, Utah.
   O.   Compliance With FAA Regulations: Large wind energy systems must comply
with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for
installations close to airports.
   P.   Utility Notification: A letter shall be provided from any
interconnecting utility companies confirming approval for any interconnection.
   Q.   Zoning Districts: Large wind energy systems are permitted only in the
N-R natural resource zoning district.
   R.   Wind Study: A wind or feasibility study must be conducted and recommend
a specific location for the wind turbine. The study must also recommend an
optimal height for the wind turbine and if the location is feasible for a wind
turbine.
   S.   Shadow Flicker: Identify the potential of any shadow flicker effects
from the project and provide sufficient documentation to demonstrate limited
detrimental effects for surrounding property owners.
   T.   Exterior Not Climbable: The tower shall not be climbable from the
exterior.
   U.   Agreement/Easement For Life Of The Project And Final Reclamation: If
the land on which the project is proposed is to be leased, rather than owned,
by the wind development company, all property within the project boundary must
be included in a recorded easement(s), lease(s), or consent agreement(s)
specifying the applicable uses for the duration of the project.
Also describe the decommissioning and final land reclamation plan to be
followed after the anticipated useful life, or abandonment, or termination of
the project, including evidence of an agreement or other commitment (i.e., bond
and/or sinking fund) with affected parties (county, any lessor or property
owner, etc.) that ensures proper final reclamation of the wind energy project,
as well as repairing any road impacts associated with the work. All required
leases, easements, bonds, or other agreements between the wind development
company and the affected parties must be in place prior to commencing
construction, unless specified otherwise by the conditional use permit. (Ord.
13-11, 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 18
SHORT-TERM OR VACATION RENTALS
SECTION:
10-18-1: Purposes
10-18-2: Definitions
10-18-3: Conditional Use Permits Required
10-18-4: Tax
10-18-5: Noise And Occupancy
10-18-6: Parking
10-18-7: Camping
10-18-8: Pets
10-18-9: Signage
10-18-10: Maintenance And Standards
10-18-11: Proximity From Schools
10-18-12: Primary Residence
10-18-13: Number Of Available Permits
10-18-14: Complaints And Violations
10-18-1: PURPOSES:
The purposes of this chapter are to strengthen the City's values of community,
family, and safety by permitting short-term or vacation rentals according to
the standards of this chapter, to protect the integrity and characteristics of
the land use districts, and to require that short-term or vacation rentals be
conducted in a manner that neighbors, under normal conditions, would not be
aware of their existence. (Ord. 19-12, 5-14-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
 
OCCUPANTS:                     The persons renting or residing in a short- term
                               or vacation rental dwelling unit.
                               Dogs, cats, other domesticated animals, and any
PETS:                          other animals that the occupants of a short-term
                               or vacation rental bring onto the premises.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY:             The owners and local representatives of the
                               short-term or vacation rental property.
                               A transient lodging facility in a single-family
                               dwelling unit, in public lodging facilities as
                               part of a planned unit development (PUD), or in
SHORT-TERM OR VACATION RENTAL: an accessory dwelling unit (ADU), occupied by a
                               single group on a temporary basis for less than
                               thirty (30) consecutive days as an alternative
                               to a hotel or motel. (Ord. 19-12, 5-14-2019;
                               amd. Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-2022)
 
10-18-3: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Permits: A conditional use permit shall be required for each unit used
as a short-term or vacation rental, regardless of the zone, type, or primary
use of the property.
   B.   Application For Permit: The application for a conditional use permit
shall be signed by the owner of the property on which the short-term or
vacation rental is located and shall include:
      1.   The owner's daytime and evening phone contact numbers and email
address;
      2.   A designated local responsible party with phone and email contact
information if the short-term or vacation rental is not owner-occupied;
      3.   The number of off-street parking stalls available for occupants;
      4.   A checklist showing compliance with the other requirements of this
chapter; and
      5.   The application fee established in the consolidated fee schedule.
   C.   Review: The Planning Commission shall review the complete application
for a conditional use permit under this chapter and shall approve or deny the
conditional use permit based on the criteria listed in this chapter.
   D.   Applicant Requirements: As a condition of receiving a conditional use
permit and prior to conducting business, the applicant shall:
      1.   Register the business with the State of Utah and obtain a Utah State
Sales Tax identification number;
      2.   Apply for and pay the annual City business license fee, with the
license to be issued after the conditional use permit is granted; and
      3.   Ensure that no more than one short-term or vacation rental agreement
per dwelling unit is in use at any one time.
      4.   Demonstrate property ownership. (Ord. 19-12, 5-14-2019; amd. Ord.
2022-08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-4: TAX:
Each short-term or vacation rental owner shall collect and remit Sales, Resort,
and Transient Room Taxes to the Utah State Tax Commission. (Ord. 19-12, 5-14-
2019; amd. Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-5: NOISE AND OCCUPANCY:
The responsible party shall regulate the occupancy of the short- term or
vacation rental and ensure that:
   A.   Occupants and their pets shall not create noise that by reason of time,
nature, intensity or duration are out of character with noise customarily heard
in the surrounding neighborhood;
   B.   Occupants shall not disturb the peace of surrounding residents by
engaging in outside recreational activities or other similar activities between
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.;
   C.   Occupants and their pets shall not interfere with the privacy of
surrounding residents or trespass onto surrounding properties;
   D.   Occupants shall not engage in disorderly or illegal conduct, including
illegal consumption of drugs or alcohol; and
   E.   The rental complies with Utah Administrative Code Rule R392-502, Public
Lodging Facility Sanitation. (Ord. 19-12, 5-14-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-
2022)
10-18-6: PARKING:
An off-street parking stall shall be provided for each vehicle the occupants
bring to the short-term or vacation rental. There shall be no more occupant
vehicles allowed at any one time than the number of bedrooms available in the
short-term or vacation rental. Vehicles parked at the short-term or vacation
rental shall not block clear sight distances, create a nuisance or hazard,
violate any City laws or winter-restricted parking requirement, or infringe on
other property rights. (Ord. 19-12, 5-14-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-7: CAMPING:
No camp trailers, recreational vehicles, tents, yurts, or any similar non-
permanent structures shall be allowed for short-term or vacation rentals under
the conditional use permit, except those located in a private area licensed by
the City for camping. Camps shall comply with Utah Administrative Code Rule
R392-300, Recreation Camp Sanitation. (Ord. 19-12, 5-14-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-
08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-8: PETS:
Owners or keepers of any pets on short-term or vacation rental properties shall
not allow the animals to create noise that could be considered disturbing, to
run at large, or to create a mess that is not immediately cleaned up by the
owner or keeper. It shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper of any pet to go
upon the private property of any person without the permission of the owner or
person entitled to the possession of such private property. (Ord. 19-12, 5-14-
2019; amd. Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-9: SIGNAGE:
Information shall be displayed in the interior of the dwelling unit listing
twenty-four (24) hours seven (7) days a week contact information and the
regulations addressing noise, parking, pets, trespassing, illegal activity, and
conduct. Exterior signage shall not be allowed. (Ord. 19-12, 5-14-2019; amd.
Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-10: MAINTENANCE AND STANDARDS:
Any property that contains a dwelling which is licensed as a short-term or
vacation rental shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Structures shall be properly maintained and kept in good repair.
   B.   Grounds and landscaped areas shall be properly maintained in order that
the use in no way detracts from the general appearance of the neighborhood or
causes any hazard to the occupants.
   C.   Each habitable space shall meet current Building Codes for size,
egress, and be equipped with smoke and carbon monoxide detectors.
   D.   Garbage shall not be allowed to accumulate on the property and shall be
removed on regularly scheduled pick up days.
   E.   A fire extinguisher shall be accessible.
   F.   A fire exiting route plan shall be posted.
   G.   An annual inspection shall be conducted by the Fire Marshal to ensure
compliance with fire safety provisions and occupancy requirements. (Ord. 19-12,
5-14-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-11: PROXIMITY FROM SCHOOLS:
The location of a short-term rental shall not be nearer than two thousand
(2,000) feet from primary or secondary school. Such distance shall be measured
as a radius originating from the center point of the property of which the
school resides. (Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-12: PRIMARY RESIDENCE:
Single-family homes that operate a short-term rental shall be the primary or
principal place of residence of the property owner, as defined in Utah Code
Annotated, Section 20-a-105.
Applications for a short-term rental shall not be accepted until which time the
owner of the subject property has demonstrated ownership and use of the home as
their primary residence for no less than twelve (12) consecutive months. (Ord.
2022-08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-13: NUMBER OF AVAILABLE PERMITS:
The number of available permits allowed shall not exceed ten (10). Availability
of permits shall be on a first-come-first-served basis according to a process
established by the City Manager. (Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-2022)
10-18-14: COMPLAINTS AND VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Complaints received by the City from any person alleging any violation
of this chapter shall be handled as stated in this section.
   B.   Upon receiving a first complaint, the City shall call or email, and
send a letter or notification to the property owner and responsible party
explaining the nature of the complaint and requiring immediate correction.
   C.   A second complaint will result in the City sending second letter or
notification to the property owner and responsible party, explaining the
complaint and warning that the conditional use permit may be in jeopardy of
being revoked.
   D.   A third complaint will result in written notification from the City to
the property owner and responsible party requiring their attendance at a
Planning Commission meeting to show cause why the conditional use permit should
not be revoked. The show-cause hearing shall be held even if the owner or
responsible party fails to appear.
   E.   Following a show-cause hearing and short of revoking the conditional
use permit, the commission may add any conditions or make any other adjustments
to the permit it deems reasonably necessary.
   F.   Following a show-cause hearing, the Planning Commission may revoke a
conditional use permit issued under this chapter if it finds that:
      1.   The permittee failed to comply repeatedly with any condition set
forth in this chapter or the conditional use permit;
      2.   The permittee engaged in a pattern of unlawful activity; or
      3.   The permittee violated State law or local ordinances.
   G.    Notwithstanding any other remedy in this section, violations of this
Code or State law may be prosecuted as a criminal offense in the Justice Court.
(Ord. 19-12, 5-14-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-08, 5-24-2022)
CHAPTER 19
INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
SECTION:
10-19-1: Purpose
10-19-2: Definitions
10-19-3: Permitted Use - Limitations
10-19-4: Business License Required
10-19-5: Building Permit Required
10-19-6: Standards Of Approval - General
10-19-7: Standards Of Approval - IADU Construction
10-19-8: Standards Of Approval - EADU Construction
10-19-9: Violation
10-19-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the construction and use of internal
and external accessory dwelling units (ADUs); to ensure such uses comply with
all applicable building codes; to promote affordable housing options in South
Weber City; and to protect the character of residential zones. (Ord. 2021-12,
9-14-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions contained in this Chapter shall have such meaning as may be
found in Title 10, Chapter 1, Section 10 of this code. (Ord. 2021-12, 9-14-
2021; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-19-3: PERMITTED USE - LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Accessory Dwelling Units, both Internal and External Accessory Dwelling
Units, (IADU & EADU) shall be permitted in those zones identified in Title 10,
Chapter 1, Section 10-A of this code, also known as the South Weber City land
use matrix.
   B.   Regardless of the location of a proposed ADU, no ADU may be located on
parcels which:
      1.   Are smaller than six thousand (6,000) square feet for IADUs;
      2.   Are smaller than .33 acres for EADUs;
      3.   Do not contain an owner-occupied single-family residence;
      4.   Are serviced by a failing septic tank; or
      5.   Have a recreational vehicle as the primary dwelling unit.
   C.   ADUs shall not be rented for less than a thirty-day period.
   D.   No parcel may contain more than one ADU.
   E.   Ownership of an ADU shall not be subdivided or transferred apart from
its principal dwelling unit.
   F.   External accessory dwelling units may be permitted subject to
additional requirements as outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 2021-12, 9-14-2021;
amd. Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-19-4: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
Prior to leased occupancy of an ADU, the owner of record of any parcel shall
first apply for and obtain a business license from South Weber City. (Ord.
2021-12, 9-14-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-19-5: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
Prior to beginning construction on a new ADU, the owner of record, or their
designee, shall apply for and receive a building permit from South Weber City.
(Ord. 2021-12, 9-14-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-19-6: STANDARDS OF APPROVAL- GENERAL:
ADUs located in South Weber City shall adhere to the following standards:
   A.   Single-family homes with an ADU shall be the primary or principal place
of residence of the property owner, as defined in Utah Code Annotated, Section
20-a-105. The property owner shall provide a signed ownership affidavit
attesting to this fact.
   B.   Either the ADU or the primary dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied and
shall be verified prior to approval.
   C.   Utility Connections:
      1.   EADU: The unit shall have separate utility meters from the primary
dwelling unit.
      2.   IADU: The primary dwelling unit and IADU shall be served by a single
utility meter.
   D.   A separate mailing address shall be created for both IADUs and EADUs.
   E.   No ADU shall be rented to more than one family unit, as defined in
South Weber City Code. (Ord. 2021-12, 9-14-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-19-7: STANDARDS OF APPROVAL - IADU CONSTRUCTION:
Construction of all IADUs shall adhere to the State Construction Code and Title
9 of South Weber City Code. In addition, the following construction guidelines
shall apply:
   A.   In order to qualify as an IADU, a minimum of 15' common wall or floor
space with the primary dwelling unit is required.
   B.   Each IADU shall have cooking, bathing, living, and sleeping areas that
are separate from and in addition to those in the primary dwelling unit.
   C.   One off-street parking space per IADU shall be required, in addition to
any off-street parking provided for the primary dwelling in compliance with
Chapter 8 of this title.
   D.   In the event a garage or carport is converted to an IADU, and such
conversion reduces the number of available off-street parking spaces below the
minimum amount required by 10-8-5, then the eliminated spaces shall be on a
space-per-space basis up to the minimum amount required.
   E.   All IADUs shall have egress windows in any such room as required by the
State Construction Code and Title 9 of South Weber City Code.
   F.   An IADU may be constructed either as an addition to an existing home, a
remodel of a garage, carport, or basement, or as part of new construction.
      1.   Regardless of the manner of construction, all setbacks, height
limits and other similar regulations shall be adhered to.
      2.   Each unit’s entrance shall be distinct from the other and shall be
on separate planes or stories of the primary dwelling unit.
   G.   If an IADU is constructed as an addition to an existing home, to the
greatest extent possible, shall be similar quality construction materials and
design as the primary dwelling unit. (Ord. 2021-12, 9-14-202; amd. Ord. 2023-
18, 2-27-2024)
10-19-8: STANDARDS OF APPROVAL - EADU CONSTRUCTION:
Construction of all EADUs shall adhere to the State Construction Code and Title
9 of South Weber City Code. In addition, the following construction guidelines
shall apply:
   A.   Qualifications: To qualify as an EADU, the building must be separate
from the primary dwelling.
      1.   An EADU may be an existing detached accessory building or new
construction.
      2.   Construction of an EADU is allowed on lots meeting the requirements
of this Chapter that are located in approved zones (Matrix).
   B.   Restrictions: Recreational vehicles shall not be considered an EADU.
   C.   Site Location Restriction: EADU shall be situated in a location other
than the front of the main building on the property.
   D.   Setbacks: All setbacks for EADUs shall comply with the underlying
zoning requirements and the requirements of this Chapter. If the setback
requirements conflict, then the EADU shall comply with the greater setback
requirement.
      1.   EADUs shall be setback no less than 10 feet from the primary
residence, as measured from the furthest protruding structure or fixture from
either the primary residence or the EADU.
   E.   Size and Footprint: EADUs shall have a maximum livable floor area of
1250 square feet and a minimum livable floor area of 400 square feet.
   F.   Lot Coverage: Building coverage, including all structures, shall not
exceed 60% of the total lot area.
   G.   Height Restriction: The height of an EADU shall not exceed the height
measurement of the primary building located on the same parcel. In instances
where the elevation heights of the buildings differ, the height of each
building will be calculated in accordance with the provisions set forth in this
Title.
   H.   Construction Standards: An EADU, to the greatest extent possible, shall
be similar quality construction materials and design as the primary dwelling
unit.
   I.   Living Spaces: Each EADU shall have cooking, bathing, living, and
sleeping areas that are separate from and in addition to those in the primary
dwelling unit.
   J.   Parking: Shall meet the requirements of Chapter 8 of this title.
      1.   In the event a garage or out building is converted to an EADU, and
such conversion reduces the number of available off-street parking spaces below
the minimum amount required by section
10-8-5 , then the eliminated spaces shall be replaced on a space-per-space
basis up to the minimum amount required. (Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
10-19-9: VIOLATION:
Failure to adhere to any of the provisions contained in this Chapter shall
constitute a violation of city code and may result in one or more of the
following:
   A.   Following the procedures outlined in State law, a lien may be filed
with the Davis County recorder until such time as the violation is remedied.
   B.   Prosecution of the property owner.
   C.   Daily fines up to the maximum amount allowed under state law.
   D.   Revocation of a business license until such time as the violations are
remedied.
   E.   Any and all other fines and penalties available under City code or
State law. (Ord. 2021-12, 9-14-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 2-27-2024)
CHAPTER 20
OVERLAY ZONES
SECTION:
10-20-1: Overlay Zones Established
10-20-2: Use Of Overlay Zones
10-20-1: OVERLAY ZONES ESTABLISHED:
The following overlay zones are established for application with base zone:
   A.   SG, Strategic Growth overlay zone, Chapter 10-20A. (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-
2023)
10-20-2: USE OF OVERLAY ZONES:
   A.   Nomenclature: An Overlay Zoning classification is appended to a base
zoning district so that the lands are classified as Base Zoning District-
Overlay District. As an example, property in the Residential Multifamily (R-5)
may be designated with Strategic Growth Overlay to form a zone titled (R5-SG).
(Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
ARTICLE A. STRATEGIC GROWTH OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
10-20A-1: Purpose
10-20A-2: Multifamily Zone
10-20A-3: Standards And Requirements
10-20A-1: PURPOSE:
To provide for areas in strategic locations where neighborhoods of varying
degrees of density may be established, maintained, and protected. The
regulations of this zone are designed to promote an intensively developed
residential environment suitable primarily for adult living providing for more
units per acre while maintaining the integrity of South Weber City’s character.
(Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-20A-2: MULTIFAMILY ZONE:
   A.   Combination With Residential Zone R5: The Strategic Growth Zone shall
be approved only as specified in this Article. The Strategic Growth Zone shall
be used in combination with the R5 Zone designated herein and provisions of the
Strategic Growth Overlay Zone shall become supplementary to the provisions of
the R5 Zone. The SG Zone shall not be applied to a land area as an independent
zone. Property to which the SG Zone has been applied shall be developed only in
conformance with an approved final development plan.
   B.   Designation On Official Zoning Map: The Strategic Growth Zone
designation (SG) shall become a suffix to the R5 Zone with which it is combined
and shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map in parenthesis as "R5 (SG)".
   C.   Minimum Acreage: The minimum land area for a Strategic Growth Zone
shall be five (5) acres. (Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
10-20A-3: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A Strategic Growth Zone established under the provisions of this Article shall
conform to the following standards:
   A.   Density Bonus: Residential density within a planned development may
exceed that permitted by the R5 Zone up to a maximum of sixty percent (60%), at
the discretion of the Planning Commission and subject to concurrence of the
City Council. The Planning Commission must find, however, that any increase in
density will be compensated by increased amenity and improved design which, in
its opinion, are proportional to the density increase which it authorizes.
   B.   Building Locations: With the following exceptions, dwellings and
permitted structures may be located as approved in the final development plans.
Locations and arrangements of buildings on the lot should be accomplished in a
manner that will best utilize the lot area and create an attractive living
environment. The following exceptions shall be considered as minimum
requirements as they apply:
      1.   Garages with entrances facing directly on the street, whether in a
front or side yard, shall be set back at least twenty-five feet (25') from the
property line or right-of-way.
      2.   Setbacks shall be maintained along the peripheral property lines of
the planned development which shall be equal to that required by the zone on
the property immediately adjacent thereto.
      3.   In those instances where a proposed planned development will front
upon one or more existing streets, the setback from the street shall be equal
to that required by the most restrictive zone on property immediately adjacent
along the same street frontage.
   C.   Open Space: Not less than ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the
planned development shall be retained in permanent open space, parks, and
playgrounds for the use of the occupants of the planned developments. Land
proposed to be devoted to vehicular streets or roads, parking, driveways,
required setbacks and slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) shall not
be included in computations of open space, park, or playground area.
   D.   Utilities: All dwelling units shall be served by public sewer and a
public water supply. All utilities within the planned development shall be
placed underground, including telephone, electrical and television cables.
Dwelling units under separate ownership shall have separate utility metering.
   E.   Maximum Height: The maximum height of buildings within a planned
development shall be the same as the permitted by the R5 Zone.
   F.   Design Standards: Architectural site plan review shall be as outlined
in South Weber City Code
10-12-3. Finishes of the exterior of the buildings will be subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   Exterior Finishes. All structures shall use durable materials on
exterior finishes, including brick, stone, Hardie board, architectural metal,
or engineered wood on all facades. Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be used
as an exterior finish. Use of stucco shall be limited to no more than 35% of
the total surface.
      2.   Architectural Variation. Structures shall provide variable
articulation in their design. Articulation shall be required on each side of
the structures.
      3.   Garage Dimensions. Individual garages shall be constructed to
reasonably accommodate two standard vehicles, measured no less than 22 feet in
width and length.
      4.   Roof Style. Roof design shall not include the use of flat roofs.
(Ord. 2023-02, 3-14-2023)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Scope
11-1-4: Definitions - Process Related
11-1-5:    Validity
11-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be entitled as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF SOUTH WEBER CITY,
UTAH, and may be so cited.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
Promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the City in the matter of Subdivisions or matters affected by Subdivisions
through provisions designed to:
   A.   To promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the
residents of the City;
   B.   To ensure the efficient and orderly subdivision and development of land
within the City:
   C.   To prevent the uncontrolled division and development of real property,
which may be done without considering the rights and best interests of
adjoining property owners and the City as a whole:
   D.   To avoid subdivisions and developments that:
      1.   Do not comply with the City general plan or ordinances,
      2.   Cannot be adequately served by existing utilities or public
services,
      3.   May prove to be dangerous or unsafe due to design, natural or man-
made hazards existing prior to or created by the subdivision and development,
      4.   May cause an undue burden on existing traffic or transportation
services, or
      5.   May require the future expenditure of public funds to correct
problems caused by the subdivision and development;
   E.   To provide design standards for public improvements, facilities, and
utilities to provide for reasonable access to public rights-of-way, parks,
trails, or open spaces, to provide for the dedication of land and streets
deemed necessary for the proper development of the subdivision, and to provide
for easements or rights-of-way that are necessary to service the properties
created by the subdivision.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-1-3: SCOPE:
   A.   This Title is designed to inform the Subdivider and public of the
requirements and conditions necessary to obtain approval of a Subdivision.
Because each parcel of real property has unique site/situational
characteristics (whether natural or man-made), there may be some aspects of
subdivision development that cannot easily be articulated. For this reason, it
is not possible to cover every possible contingency. Therefore, the
Administrative Land Use Authority has the authority to impose reasonable
conditions for the subdivision and development in addition to those expressly
required, provided that:
      1.   The conditions are not arbitrary or capricious;
      2.   The conditions do not conflict with any local, state, federal law.
   B.   This Title shall apply to lots or parcels where public rights of way
are dedicated, and public improvements and infrastructure are installed
regardless of whether the land is subdivided.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-1-4: DEFINITIONS - PROCESS RELATED:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY: The appointed board, consisting of the City
Manager and/or City Planner, Public Works Director, City Engineer, two (2)
Council Members as available and assigned by the Mayor, and others as assigned,
are responsible for reviewing applications and land use decisions arising from
subdivision applications. The City Council reserves the right to change the
members of the appointed board at its discretion. The Planning Commission shall
be the Administrative Land Use Authority for the approval of the Preliminary
Plat only. The process is administered and overseen by the City Planner or
designee. The City Council shall be the Administrative Land Use Authority for
the approval of vacating a street, right of way, or easement only.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY REVIEW: The Administrative Land Use Authority
shall complete a review of each completed Application and provide written
comments to the Applicant requesting additional information and/or
modifications to plans. Each request shall be specific and include citations to
ordinances, standards, or specifications.
APPLICANT OR SUBDIVIDER OR DEVELOPER: A person or persons making an application
to create a subdivision.
APPLICANT RESPONSE TO REVIEW: The Applicant shall submit revised plans along
with a written explanation in response to the Administrative Land Use
Authority's review comments identifying and explaining their revisions and
reasons for declining to make revisions (if any). Each explanation shall be
specific and include citations to ordinances, standards, or specifications. If
the Applicant fails to address a review comment in the response, the review
cycle is not complete and subsequent review cycle may not begin until all
comments are addressed.
CITY: South Weber City, Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of South Weber City or any individual or firm
retained or designated by South Weber City as the city engineer for the purpose
of performing engineering duties.
CITY PLANNER: The director of the Community Development department of South
Weber City.
COMPLETE APPLICATION: A Subdivision Application shall be considered complete as
defined in each Application Section.
COUNTY: Davis County, Utah.
DEVELOPMENT, DESIGN, AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS: The Public Works Standards
referred to in this Title and adopted by Title
9-7-1.
GEOLOGICAL HAZARD: The restrictions and requirements of the review cycle do not
apply to the review of subdivision applications affecting property within
identified geological hazard areas (property identified to be within the city's
"Sensitive Lands" - see Title 10-14).
IMPROVEMENTS: All infrastructure improvements, such as water, sewer, storm
drain, land drain, secondary water, curbs, gutters, sidewalk, grading,
streetlights, paving, landscaping, fencing, electric power, natural gas,
communication lines, and all other elements required by this Title and the
Public Works Standards.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The South Weber City Planning Commission.
REVIEW CYCLE: There shall be no more than four (4) total review cycles. A
review cycle shall be considered complete when:
   1.   Complete Application is submitted to the Administrative Land Use
Authority;
   2.   The Administrative Land Use Authority Review is complete;
   3.   The Applicant Response to Review is complete; and
   4.   The Administrative Land Use Authority provides a written statement to
the Applicant stating completion of the review cycle and next required steps
for approval.
REVIEW CYCLE, EXCEPTIONS:
   1.   Additional Review Cycle(s): May be required when a modification or
correction is necessary to protect public health and safety or to enforce state
or federal law when a change or correction is necessitated by the Applicant's
adjustment to a plan set or an update to a phase plan that adjusts
infrastructure needed for the specific development.
   2.   Additional Time For Review: If the Applicant does not submit a revised
plan within twenty (20) business days after the Administrative Land Use
Authority requires a modification or correction, the Administrative Land Use
Authority shall have an additional twenty (20) business days to respond.
   3.   Other Land Use Applications: The Review Cycle as defined in this Title
applies only to single family, townhome, and twin-home land use applications.
Review times and cycles may vary for multifamily, commercial, industrial,
institutional, and other non-residential land use applications.
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLANS: Civil engineering and design plans associated
with required infrastructure and City owned/operated utilities required for a
Subdivision.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE REVIEW: A review to verify that an application for a
Subdivision meets the criteria of the applicable City Ordinance(s). The
Administrative Land Use Authority shall notify the Applicant in writing of the
deficiency in the application and the right to appeal the determination to a
designated Appeal Authority as stated in Title 10-4.
SUBDIVISION PLAN REVIEW: A review of the Applicant's Subdivision improvement
plans and other aspects of the Subdivision application to verify that the
application complies with all ordinances and applicable standards and
specifications, including the current Public Works Standards for Development,
Design, and Construction.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-1-5: VALIDITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Title is, for
any reason held to be invalid, such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion of this Title.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
11-2-1: Final Platting And Recording Required
11-2-2: Work To Be Done By Registered Professional
11-2-3: Approval Procedure
11-2-4: Phasing
11-2-5: Rezone Of Property
11-2-6:    Development Agreements
11-2-7:    Public Hearings
11-2-8:    Application Requirements And Review Process
11-2-1: FINAL PLATTING AND RECORDING REQUIRED:
   A.   Terms: Any division of real property within the City is subject to the
terms of this Title. The division of real property includes the sale, gift,
transfer, conveyances, split, or other division that results in changing the
boundaries or legal descriptions of a given parcel of real property and results
in the creation of a new parcel of real property.
   B.   Unlawful Subdivision: No land which is located wholly or in part in
South Weber City may be subdivided, the plat be filed and recorded in the
County Recorder's Office, nor lots be sold unless such Subdivision has been
created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      1.   Exception: Joining a lot or lots to an existing parcel does not
constitute a Subdivision nor does it require a Subdivision plat amendment.
   C.   Final Plat Approval: Lots shall not be transferred or sold, nor shall a
building permit be issued for a structure thereon, until the final plan of a
Subdivision is approved, and the final plat is recorded in accordance with this
Title and the provisions of state statute, and until the improvements and
infrastructure required in connection with the Subdivision have been
constructed or guaranteed as provided herein.
   D.   Sales of Land Parcels: No person shall sell or exchange or offer to
sell or exchange any parcel of land which is in any part of a Subdivision or a
larger tract of land or offer for a recordation in the County Recorder's
Office, any deed conveying such a parcel of land or any interest therein,
unless such Subdivision has been created pursuant to, and in accordance with,
the provisions of this Title.
   E.   Building Permits: Building permits shall not be issued prior to
approval and recordation of the final plat.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-2-2: WORK TO BE DONE BY REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL:
All plans must be prepared and stamped by licensed and/or certified
professionals in the State of Utah including, but not limited to, architects,
landscape architects, land planners, engineers, surveyors, geotechnical
engineers, transportation engineers or other professionals as deemed necessary
by the City.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-2-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Approval Process: The approval process for a Subdivision shall be in
sequential order consisting of no more than four (4) review cycles:
      1.   Concept Plan (optional);
      2.   Preliminary Plat Review;
      3.   Preliminary Improvement Plan Review;
      4.   Final Plat and Improvement Plan Review.
   B.   Expiration: Each Subdivision application review cycle shall be valid
for a period of not more than one (1) year. At the request of the Subdivider,
the Administrative Land Use Authority may grant up to two (2) six (6) month
extensions if substantial progress has been demonstrated by the Applicant.
Expired applications shall be deemed null and void and require the Subdivider
to start the Subdivision approval process over.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-2-4: PHASING:
Subdivisions may be done in phases. Each phase shall follow the Approval
Procedure as outlined in
11-2-3.
   A.   The Preliminary Plat shall include all ground anticipated to be
subdivided. The phases shall be shown as part of the Preliminary Plat and
submitted with the Preliminary Plat.
   B.   Development shall be organized such that the phases will be contiguous,
and the required improvements and infrastructure will be continuous as deemed
feasible and desirable by the Administrative Land Use Authority.
   C.   Less desirable or expensive aspects of the Subdivision should not be
delayed to the final phases of development.
   D.   The Administrative Land Use Authority may require a pro-rated portion
of the improvements and infrastructure be developed, or guaranteed in escrow,
in earlier phases.
   E.   Where it is prudent to install improvements and infrastructure that
extend into the next phase, such work may be done when it is shown on the plans
and approved accordingly.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-2-5: REZONE OF PROPERTY:
If rezoning the property is required, the Applicant must first obtain rezone
approval as required in City Code, prior to subdividing.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-2-6: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
Any Development Agreement (either administrative or legislative) proposed by
the Applicant, or the City shall be approved prior to subdividing.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-2-7: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
The Planning Commission shall hold public hearings for the general plan, zoning
map changes, and any other Land Use Ordinances, applications, and amendments as
required by Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-103, 10-9a-404, 10-9a-502, 10-9a-503, 10-
9a-602, and 10-9a-608, and as otherwise required. The Planning Commission may
hold public hearings for preliminary plat applications, but such public
hearings are not required.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-2-8: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCESS:
Notwithstanding the specific requirements outlined in this Section for each
Application, all proposed Subdivisions shall show compliance with all
applicable laws and standards. Poorly drawn, incomplete, or illegible drawings
shall be cause for denial. The Administrative Land Use Authority may waive
certain informational and design requirements when they clearly do not apply
and are irrelevant to a proposed Subdivision and shall state such waiver as
part of the review cycle.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 3
CONCEPT PLAN
SECTION:
11-3-1: Concept Plan
11-3-1: CONCEPT PLAN:
   A.   Purpose: An Applicant may request a meeting with the Administrative
Land Use Authority to obtain initial feedback and information prior to making a
formal preliminary application for a Subdivision. This meeting shall be
optional, non-binding, and considered separate from and independent of the
required Subdivision approval review cycles. It is highly recommended that the
Applicant participate in this optional Review Cycle.
   B.   Application Required: To provide a basic framework of the proposed
Subdivision, the Applicant shall submit the required application to the
Administrative Land Use Authority.
   C.   Fees: There are no fees associated with this type of application.
   D.   Time Frame: Within fifteen (15) business days after the receipt of the
completed application, the Applicant shall be placed on the agenda of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Administrative Land Use Authority for
discussion.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 4
PRELIMINARY PLAT AND IMPROVEMENT PLANS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Preliminary Plat And Improvement Plans
11-4-1: PRELIMINARY PLAT AND IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
   A.   Purpose: For the Administrative Land Use Authority to complete an
initial Subdivision Ordinance Review and an initial Subdivision Plan Review.
   B.   Application Required: The Applicant shall submit the required
Preliminary Subdivision Plat Application for review and approval by the
Administrative Land Use Authority.
      1.   Exception: When a proposed Subdivision does not involve the
development of new public infrastructure, an exception may be granted by the
City Engineer to waive, in writing, the need for the review of the Preliminary
Improvement Plans.
   C.   Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete and
begin the first review cycle when the following items are submitted:
      1.   A completed Preliminary Subdivision Plat Application as provided by
the City.
      2.   Additional studies and information as listed on the application form
and as necessary to show feasible compliance with applicable codes and
regulations (see subsection 11-7-1D).
      3.   A signed Owner-Agent Affidavit (if the Owner is being represented by
another party).
      4.   Current Davis County ownership plat depicting property proposed for
subdivision and all contiguous property around land proposed to be subdivided.
      5.   A recent Title Report covering the proposed subdivided property
identifying ownership, easements of record, liens or other encumbrances and
verifies payment of taxes and assessments.
      6.   Will serve letters from all applicable service providers.
      7.   A digital copy of the preliminary plat as outlined in the Public
Works Standards.
      8.   A digital copy of the preliminary improvement plans to include at a
minimum the following:
         a.   Grading and drainage plan.
            (1)   Storm Drain calculations.
            (2)   Low Impact Design (LID) analysis and Water Quality Report.
         b.   Utility plan.
            (1)   Payment of fees as stated in the City's current adopted Fee
Schedule.
   D.   Time Frame:
      1.   Location Is Not Within One Hundred Feet (100') Of Water Conveyance
Facility: Within fifteen (15) business days after the receipt of the completed
application, the Applicant shall receive written comments from the
Administrative Land Use Authority.
         a.   After the Applicant's complete Response is received the Applicant
will be placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning Commission for approval. The Planning Commission shall review the
subdivision for conformance to the general plan and the provisions of this
Title.
         b.   Approval from the Planning Commission shall complete the Review
Cycle.
      2.   Location Is Within One Hundred Feet (100') Of Water Conveyance
Facility: Within twenty (20) calendar days after the receipt of the completed
application, the City shall notify in writing the Water Conveyance Facility
Owner(s) of the Application and request comments related to the following
aspects of the water conveyance facility: access, maintenance, protection,
safety, and any other issues related.
         a.   Within fifteen (15) business days after the twenty (20) calendar
days comment period, whether comments are received from the Water Conveyance
Facility Owner(s) or not, the Applicant shall receive written comments from the
Administrative Land Use Authority. Total time frame shall not exceed forty (40)
calendar days.
         b.   After the Applicant's complete Response is received the Applicant
will be placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning Commission for approval.
         c.   Approval from the Planning Commission shall complete the Review
Cycle.
      3.   Water Conveyance Facility: Shall mean a ditch, canal, flume,
pipeline, or other watercourse used to convey water used for irrigation or
storm water drainage and any related easement for the ditch, canal, flume,
pipeline, or other watercourse. See State Code 73-1-15.5-1b.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 5
FINAL PLAT AND IMPROVEMENT PLANS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Final Plat And Improvement Plans
11-5-1: FINAL PLAT AND IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
   A.   Purpose: For the Administrative Land Use Authority to complete a final
Subdivision Plat and Improvement Plans Review.
   B.   Application Required: The Applicant shall submit the required Final
Subdivision Plat and Improvement Plans Application for review and approval by
the Administrative Land Use Authority.
   C.   Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete and
begin the review cycle when the following items are submitted:
      1.   Completion of all requirements from previous Review Cycle.
      2.   A completed Final Plat and Improvement Plans Application as provided
by the City.
      3.   Additional studies and information as listed on the application form
and as necessary to show feasible compliance with applicable codes and
regulations (see subsection 11-9-1D).
      4.   A signed Owner-Agent Affidavit (if the Owner is being represented by
another party).
      5.   Proof of tax clearance indicating that all taxes, interest, and
penalties owing on the land have been paid.
      6.   Approval letter from secondary water provider(s).
      7.   Written approval from other agencies as applicable (e.g., Army Corps
of Engineers, Utah Department of Transportation, Davis County Surveyor).
      8.   A digital copy of the final plat and improvement plans as revised
and updated from the previous review cycle.
      9.   Plan and profile drawings for all existing and proposed
infrastructure.
      10.   Final covenants, conditions, and restrictions (if applicable) which
shall be recorded with the final plat.
      11.   Final agreements (if applicable) executed by all parties.
      12.   Engineer's Cost Estimate for all improvements and infrastructure
that includes quantities, units, and costs for all improvements and
infrastructure required.
      13.   Payment of fees as stated in the City's current adopted Fee
Schedule.
   D.   Signors Of Plat:
      1.   Mayor (as a non-discretionary and ministerial act for the acceptance
of land and public improvements that may be proposed for dedication to the
City);
      2.   City Recorder (attesting the Mayor's signature);
      3.   City Planner;
      4.   City Engineer;
      5.   City Attorney;
      6.   Each Landowner on record as described on the plat - Owner's
Dedication as shown on the plat and notarized;
      7.   A surveyor who prepares the plat shall certify that the surveyor
holds a license in accordance with State Code Title 58-22 and has completed a
survey of the property, verifying all measurements, or has referenced a record
of survey map of the existing property boundaries shown on the plat, and
verified the locations of the boundaries and has placed monuments as
represented on the plat.
   E.   Review Cycle And Approval: The Administrative Land Use Authority may
complete up to three (3) final review cycles, as deemed necessary. After the
Applicant has responded to either the fourth or final review cycle, and the
Applicant has complied with each modification requested in the Administrative
Land Use Authority's previous review cycle, no additional reviews are required
if the Applicant has not materially changed the plan - other than those changes
in response to the requested modifications or corrections.
   F.   Time Frame: Within twenty (20) business days after the receipt of the
completed application, the Applicant shall receive written comments from the
Administrative Land Use Authority.
      1.   Appeal Of Improvement Plans Approval: If, on the fourth or final
review, the Administrative Land Use Authority fails to respond within the time
frame, the Applicant may make a formal request for a decision to approve or
deny the final revised set of plans.
      Within ten (10) days of this request, the City shall assemble an appeal
panel consisting of one (1) licensed engineer designated by the City, one (1)
licensed engineer designated by the Applicant, and one (1) licensed engineer
agreed upon and designated by the engineers selected by the City and the
Applicant. No member of the panel may have any interest in the application that
is the subject of the appeal.
      The Applicant shall pay fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the appeal
review and the City's fee as stated in the current adopted Consolidated Fee
Schedule.
      The decision by the appeal panel shall be final, subject to a petition
being filed within thirty (30) days of the decision in the District Court.
   G.   Final Plat Approval - Notice Required: Within thirty (30) days after
approving a final plat, the municipality shall submit an electronic copy of the
final approved plat to the Utah Geospatial Resource Center for inclusion in the
unified statewide 911 emergency services database.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 6
IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
SECTION:
11-6-1: General Requirements
11-6-2: Utilities Required
11-6-3: Storm Water
11-6-4: Inspections
11-6-5: Fee In Lieu Of Actual Improvements
11-6-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
All improvements and infrastructure related to a Subdivision shall be installed
according to the requirements of the City Code and the Public Works Standards.
The Subdivider shall be responsible for extending all utilities and
improvements and infrastructure to the Subdivision if they are not already
adjacent to or on the site including curb, gutter, and sidewalk on streets
operated by the Utah Department of Transportation. When the City is to take
ownership of public infrastructure and improvements, the City shall require the
Subdivider to install such improvements in a manner that does not cause
excessive liability or maintenance costs for the City at the convenience or
advantage of the Subdivider.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-6-2: UTILITIES REQUIRED:
The following utilities are required to be provided by the Subdivider to each
lot:
   A.   Culinary Water: The water source shall be provided by South Weber City
unless an alternative permanent source is approved by the City Engineer and the
Davis County Health Department.
   B.   Sewer: The sewer service shall be provided by South Weber City through
gravity collection lines. Public sewer lift stations are generally not
permitted.
      1.   Public sewer lift stations may be granted by exception by the
Administrative Land Use Authority and the City Engineer when a lift station is
deemed clearly preferable to the interest of the City and gravity sewer is not
feasible.
      2.   As determined by the Administrative Land Use Authority and the City
Engineer, some property may not be developed if gravity sewer cannot be
reasonably provided.
   C.   Secondary Water: Secondary water service shall be provided by the Davis
and Weber Counties Canal Company, South Weber Irrigation Company, South Weber
Water Improvement District, Weber Basin Water Conservancy District, or an
alternative permanent source as approved by the City.
   D.   Land Drain: The land drain system must be installed in areas with
shallow groundwater. If basements are eliminated and the geotechnical report
can provide sufficient documentation that groundwater levels (including
historical) are deep enough to eliminate the need for the land drain system,
the Administrative Land Use Authority and the City Engineer may allow this
requirement to be waived.
   E.   Electrical Power: The electrical power will be provided by Rocky
Mountain Power (RMP), or their successors and all installations must follow RMP
Standards.
   F.   Natural Gas: The natural gas service will be provided by Dominion
Energy, or their successors, and all installations must follow Dominion Energy
Standards.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-6-3: STORM WATER:
Storm water plans shall meet the requirements of the Public Works Standards and
the City Code. The City Engineer shall determine the appropriate implementation
strategy for meeting the City's storm water-related standards, using the
current Capital Facilities Plan as a guide; this may include decisions
regarding ownership and access to storm water ponds, and where and how the
water shall flow as part of the City's overall storm water system.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-6-4: INSPECTIONS:
All improvements and infrastructure shall receive inspections by the City
Engineer and/or City Public Works Department as required in the Public Works
Standards and as necessary to verify conformance with the City Code and the
Public Works Standards. Failure to obtain the necessary inspections shall
result in a fine as outlined in this Title. Failure to obtain the necessary
inspections may also necessitate removal and re-installation of the
improvements and infrastructure at the Subdivider's sole cost, as such removal
and re-installation are determined by the City Engineer and/or Public Works
Department.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-6-5: FEE IN LIEU OF ACTUAL IMPROVEMENTS:
Subdivisions adjacent to a rural road or another road where the surrounding
area is lacking public improvements and infrastructure may request the option
to pay a fee in lieu of constructing the required improvements and
infrastructure. The Administrative Land Use Authority and City Engineer may
also require payment of the fee in lieu to make improvements as a part of a
larger future project. An Agreement approving the payment of the fee in lieu
may be approved during the Preliminary Improvement Plans Application phase by
the Administrative Land Use Authority and City Engineer. Fee in lieu Agreements
should only be approved when it is unreasonable or undesirable for the
improvements and infrastructure to be installed with the development. The
Agreement should include:
   A.   A calculation of the cost of the improvements not being installed.
   B.   For areas where the future project date is known, inflation costs at a
maximum of three percent (3%) per year may be used up to the project year. For
areas where the future project date is not known, inflation costs may only be
included at a maximum of three percent (3%) per year for five (5) years.
   C.   For areas where off-site improvements have already been constructed and
excess capacity exists that was paid for by the city, Subdividers may "buy in"
to the existing improvements to meet their requirements. A determination of
available excess capacity and cost will be evaluated by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 7
ENGINEERING AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-7-1: General Requirements
11-7-2: Street Layout And Access
11-7-3: Trails
11-7-4: Fencing
11-7-5: Street Lighting
11-7-6: Easements
11-7-7: Lots And Parcels
11-7-8: Utilities To Be Underground
11-7-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Access: All lots shall be accessed by a fully improved city street and
shall meet the frontage requirements as stated in Title 10, Zoning Regulations.
It shall be the responsibility of the Subdivider to provide proper road access
to the Subdivision as required in the City Code, the Public Works Standards,
and (where applicable) the Utah Department of Transportation. The mere
existence of a public road or right-of-way to the proposed Subdivision does not
mean that adequate access exists. It shall be the Subdivider's responsibility
to construct and dedicate all public roads required by the City to provide
access to the Subdivision.
   B.   Design Standards: All Subdivisions shall comply with the current
adopted design standards set forth in the City Code and in the Public Works
Standards.
   C.   Public Infrastructure And Improvements: The City Engineer shall have
authority to require adjustments to the utility plan associated with a proposed
Subdivision including adjustments to the type, manner, and location of
utilities. Such adjustments to the utility plan may be required to provide
connectivity among developments, provide for public safety, and minimize public
infrastructure maintenance and liability.
   D.   Additional Reports And Studies:
      1.   Geotechnical reports as required by the Public Works Standards and
the City Engineer.
      2.   A traffic study may be required by the City Engineer depending on
his/her judgment regarding the size of the Subdivision, complex traffic
movements involved with the proposal, interaction of streets with State roads,
new traffic patterns, traffic volume in or near the Subdivision, history of
crashes or expected crashes in the area, general safety, or anticipated traffic
delays due to the Subdivision.
      3.   Storm water pollution protection as required by the Public Works
Standards and City Code.
      4.   Wetland delineation and mitigation may be required as determined by
the City Engineer.
   E.   Preservation Of Natural Conditions: The design and development of
Subdivisions shall preserve insofar as possible the natural terrain, natural
drainage, existing topsoil, and trees as determined by the Administrative Land
Use Authority for the Preliminary Subdivision Applications.
   F.   Hazards: Land subject to hazardous conditions such as slides, mud
flows, rock falls, faults, snow avalanches, possible mine subsidence, shallow
water table, open quarries, floods, and polluted or non-potable water supply
shall not be subdivided until complete mitigation of the hazards has been
properly identified and included in the Subdivision Improvement Plans (see also
Title 10-14).
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-7-2: STREET LAYOUT AND ACCESS:
   A.   General: All streets shall conform, as much as practicable, to the
adopted General Plan, Transportation Master Plan, and the Public Works
Standards.
   B.   Approval: Overall street layout and access shall be reviewed and
approved as part of the Preliminary Subdivision Applications. The
Administrative Land Use Authority shall have authority to require stub roads,
additional access into the development, and adjustments to the street layout,
street cross-section, and right of way widths. Such adjustments to the
Subdivision plan may be required to provide connectivity among developments,
provide for public safety and emergency access, minimize public infrastructure
maintenance and liability, and align with the General Plan and adopted
transportation plans.
   C.   Required Ingress/Egress Access:
      1.   Developments where the number of residential building units exceeds
thirty (30) along a single street shall have a minimum of two (2) ingress/
egress routes which are two (2) fully improved City rights-of-way. Thirty (30)
residential units shall include all proposed residential units and all existing
single-family buildings and lots, empty building lots, and each apartment unit
located along a single road up to and including the nearest intersection with
two (2) existing means of ingress/egress.
      2.   A development that extends more than one thousand eight hundred feet
(1,800') from a connecting street must provide a second ingress/egress.
   D.   Exceptions: The Administrative Land Use Authority for the Preliminary
Subdivision Applications may waive these access requirements for more than
thirty (30) residential units with one point of improved ingress/egress when
unique topographic circumstances or "landlocked" (physically restrained from
other access points) from adjacent, existing developments circumstances exist.
A waiver of these regulations may require additional development requirements
to ensure public safety standards are met.
   E.   Private Rights-Of-Way: Private rights-of-way may be used for
development purposes in all zoning districts subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   Private rights-of-way shall be designed and built as per the South
Weber City Public Works Standard Drawings.
      2.   Private rights-of-way shall meet the provisions of the zoning
district.
      3.   Private rights-of-way shall not be permitted for any portion of road
that is contained on the South Weber City Transportation Map.
      4.   Private rights-of-way shall not be permitted if the road serves to
connect other rights-of-way or subdivisions.
      5.   Private rights-of-way shall meet all requirements of the
International Fire Code, appendix D.
      6.   All development on private rights of way of two (2) lots or more
shall establish a homeowners' association or similar organization that will be
responsible for the care and maintenance of any common property or utilities. A
complete set of covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall outline
the care and maintenance of all private utilities, street improvements and
common spaces. The CC&Rs shall also set forth the funding mechanism for that
maintenance. The CC&Rs shall be recorded and run with the land.
      7.   An easement for all public utilities shall be provided and dedicated
to the city.
      8.   Private Rights-Of-Way; Maintenance: The City will not be responsible
in any way for maintenance or upkeep of surface improvements for private
rights-of-way and does not guarantee services like mail or garbage collection
will extend to the residences on such streets.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-7-3: TRAILS:
   A.   Required: Where a proposed Subdivision includes or adjoins an existing
or planned public trail system as specified in the City's General Plan or
Trails Master Plan the Subdivision plat shall include and provide for the
development of a public trail infrastructure in accordance with said Plan.
   B.   Improvements: Trails shall be developed in accordance with applicable
AASHTO standards with sufficient width, and to safely accommodate two-way
bicycle and pedestrian traffic along the trail corridor. In absence of
applicable AASHTO standards, the Davis County Trails Standards are hereby
adopted and applied.
      1.   The Administrative Land Use Authority, when feasible, may allow the
trail right-of-way to be a substitute for required sidewalk and park strip area
on one side of the street right-of-way dedicated within the Subdivision.
      2.   All trail improvements shall be dedicated to the City or an agreed
upon non-profit third party, for the operation and maintenance after final
acceptance.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-7-4: FENCING:
   A.   Purpose: Provide increased safety from potential dangers due to
agricultural activities, water courses, high-speed traffic, and other potential
dangers or hazards by requiring a barrier between potentially incompatible land
uses.
   B.   Requirement: Fencing shall be required under the following conditions:
      1.   Bordering Agricultural Land: A six foot (6') high fence is required
between the subdivision (any zone) and any land that is zoned Agricultural (A).
         a.   Fencing material shall be chain link unless otherwise approved
according to subsection C.
      2.   Bordering Canals: A six foot (6') high fence is required where the
subdivision borders a canal, canal right-of-way/easement, or canal property
whereon the canal is located.
         a.   Fencing material shall be chain link unless otherwise approved
according to subsection C.
      3.   Bordering Interstate: A six foot (6') high fence is required where
building lots for any land use are adjacent to Interstate 84. The fence shall
be installed along the I-84 right-of-way line.
         a.   The fencing material shall be masonry unless otherwise approved
according to subsection C.
      4.   Buffer Yard: An eight foot (8') high fence/wall as required by
section
10-15-14.
         a.   Fencing/wall material shall be masonry unless otherwise approved
according to subsection C.
      5.   Multiple Conditions: In the case where one or more of the fencing
conditions listed above exist in the same location, the more restrictive
requirement shall govern.
   C.   Other Fencing Materials: The listed material shall be required unless a
different type of fencing material matches the look and feel of other adjacent
fencing materials as requested by the applicant and approved by the
Administrative Land Use Authority. In no case can the quality or purpose be
less than the listed size and material.
   D.   Authority: The Administrative Land Use Authority shall have authority
to implement reasonable fencing requirements for conditions other than those
stated above where potential dangers are currently present or will be present
after the development of the subdivision. The Administrative Land Use Authority
shall also have the authority to waive the fencing requirement where its
removal will not compromise safety or does not accomplish the intent of the
fence.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-7-5: STREET LIGHTING:
   A.   The subdivider shall pay for all outdoor street lighting fixtures.
   B.   The placement and installation of street lighting shall be in
accordance with the adopted Development, Design, and Construction Standards.
   C.   The subdivider shall be required to get power installed into the
subdivision and notify the City when power is available.
   D.   The City is responsible for ordering the streetlights. The streetlights
shall then be installed and maintained by the City's authorized contractor.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-7-6: EASEMENTS:
   A.   General Utility Easements: A minimum ten foot (10') general utility
easement shall traverse the frontage(s) of each lot. The Administrative Land
Use Authority may require additional easements to accommodate utility planning
and future access.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-7-7: LOTS AND PARCELS:
   A.   The lot arrangement, design and shape shall be such that lots will
provide satisfactory and desirable sites for structures and be properly related
to topography and conform to requirements set forth herein. Side lines of lots
shall be approximately at right angles, or radial to the street line whenever
possible and desirable.
   B.   Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to provide
necessary square footage or frontage, which would be unusable for normal
purposes.
   C.   For Subdivisions containing more than two (2) residential building
lots, no lots shall directly access an arterial or collector street.
   D.   All lots shown on the final plat must conform to the minimum
requirements of the zoning code for the zone in which the Subdivision is
located, except for remainder parcels as follows:
      1.   May be used for agricultural purposes but shall not be eligible for
habitation, commercial uses, or primary structures.
      2.   May not be eligible for building permits and may not be eligible for
other permitted uses. All limitations and restrictions shall be clearly noted
on the final plat.
      3.   Shall be described on the final plat; however, an exception may be
granted by the City Engineer.
   E.   Each lot shall have frontage on an improved public road as required in
the zoning code and the Public Works Standards unless a permanent access
easement and shared driveway has been approved.
   F.   All remnants of land left over after subdividing, shall be attached to
adjacent lots or made part of the common area governed by a Community/
Homeowners Association, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. All
lands within the boundaries of the Subdivision shall be accounted for, either
as lots, right of way, or as remainder parcels.
   G.   Lots having double frontage shall not be approved except where
necessitated by topographic or other unusual conditions or where the lots are
adjacent to a road that does not permit direct access (exception: corner lots).
   H.   Contiguous parcels owned by different parties may be embraced in one
final plat, provided that all Owners join in the dedication and
acknowledgments.
   I.   A lot shall not be divided by a city limit or county limit line. Such
boundary lines shall be made at lot lines.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-7-8: UTILITIES TO BE UNDERGROUND:
   A.   All utilities, including those that are normally overhead shall be
placed underground in all Subdivisions. The Subdivider shall establish final
utility grades prior to utilities being placed underground.
      1.   Exception: Wireless communication equipment or where underground
connection is not permitted by the Provider.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 8
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY PRIOR TO PLAT RECORDING
SECTION:
11-8-1: Development Activity Prior To Plat Recording
11-8-2: Subdivision Plat Recording
11-8-3: Improvements Completion Assurance And Guarantee Of Performance
11-8-1: PRE-CONSTRUCTION MEETING:
   A.   Pre-Construction Meeting: Upon completion of the Final Plat and
Improvement Plans Review Cycle and prior to commencing any construction
activity, the Applicant shall schedule and attend a pre-construction meeting as
required in the City's Public Works Standards for Development, Design, and
Construction.
      1.   If the General Contractor changes at any time during construction,
an additional pre-construction meeting shall be held before additional work
commences.
   B.   Inspections: All construction shall be subject to inspections as
required in the City's Public Works Standards for Development, Design, and
Construction.
   C.   Improvement Completion Assurance: At any time after receiving final
approval, the Applicant may post an improvement completion assurance as
outlined in section 11-2-9 for:
      1.   Completion of one hundred percent (100%) of the required public
improvements or infrastructure; or
      2.   If the City has inspected and accepted a portion of the public
improvements, one hundred percent (100%) of the incomplete or unacceptable
public improvements or infrastructure.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-8-2: SUBDIVISION PLAT RECORDING:
   A.   After the plat has been acknowledged, certified, and approved, the City
Recorder shall record the plat in the office of the County Recorder.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-8-3: IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETION ASSURANCE AND GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Purpose: To assure the completion of required improvements and
infrastructure as required by the approved plans, Public Works Standards, and
all applicable ordinances, the Subdivider shall establish a:
      1.   Cash escrow account guarantee with a federally insured financial
institutions; or
      2.   Cash bond with the City of South Weber; or
      3.   Surety bond with a reputable bond provider who is licensed to issue
surety bonds in the state of Utah. The City reserves the right to review any
proposed bond provider's performance and may reject a proposed provider whose
past performance has been questionable or who has been in business fewer than
five (5) years.
      This completion assurance shall be established prior to recording the
subdivision plat. If the subdivider installs the infrastructure and
improvements, and such infrastructure and improvements are inspected and
approved by the City prior to recording the plat, then only warranty portion of
the completion assurance shall be required.
      The provisions of this section do not supersede the terms of a valid
Development Agreement, an adopted phasing plan, or the State Construction Code.
   B.   Cost Estimate: The Subdivider shall submit an updated Engineer's Cost
Estimate for all improvements and infrastructure required within the
Subdivision. The cost estimate shall include quantities, units, and costs for
all improvements and infrastructure required, and shall indicate which items
have already been installed.
      The City Engineer shall review and approve the cost estimate and may
adjust the costs to meet current industry standards. Those items that are
deemed "direct costs" shall be removed from the escrow and shall be accounted
for separately.
   C.   Guarantee Amount: The guarantee shall be equal to one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the cost estimated and approved by the City Engineer.
      1.   One hundred percent (100%) shall be for the cost of those
improvements and infrastructure not yet installed; and
      2.   Ten percent (10%) shall be for a required one-year (1) warranty
period (see subsection
11-9-1D). The warranty amount calculated shall be based upon the total cost of
all required improvements and infrastructure.
   D.   Liability: The Subdivider and/or contractor shall indemnify and hold
harmless the City and its officers, directors, members, partners, agents,
employees, and consultants from all claims, damages, losses, and expenses,
including attorney's fees, arising out of, or resulting from the installation
of the required improvements and infrastructure. The indemnity required hereby
shall be included in the applicable Escrow Agreement.
   E.   Default: In the event the Subdivider is in default with any provision
of this Section, or fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required
improvements and infrastructure within two (2) years from the date of approval
of the final plat, or to pay all liens in connection therewith, or to correct
deficiencies or damages to the improvements and infrastructure required for
final acceptance (see Subsection 10 hereof), the City may declare the escrow
forfeited and the City may install, repair, or cause the required improvements
and infrastructure to be installed or repaired, using the proceeds from the
collection of escrow to defray the expense thereof.
      The City may apply all sums deposited in escrow against the cost of
completing all required improvements and infrastructure and to pay all
expenses, including, but not limited to, all unreimbursed engineering expenses
related to the development, a ten percent (10%) administration fee for the
securing of contracts, and court costs and attorney fees. The default
provisions required hereby shall be included in the applicable Escrow
Agreement.
   F.   Release Of Funds: The Subdivider shall be responsible for the quality
of all materials and workmanship. If improvements and infrastructure are
properly installed and verified via City inspections and testing, liens are
paid, and other conditions are found to be satisfactory, then the City's Escrow
Agent shall authorize the money held in escrow for the specific improvement
completed (except for the ten percent (10%) held during the hereinafter
described warranty period) to be released. If the conditions of material or
workmanship show unusual depreciation, or do not comply with the acceptable
standards of durability, or if required inspections or testing have not been
done, or if any outstanding liens are not paid, then the City may withhold
releasing the money and the City may declare the Subdivider in default. The
City shall have exclusive control over the release of the escrow funds, and
they may be released only upon written approval by the City.
   G.   Direct Costs: The Subdivider shall pay the following direct costs at
the time they establish the required Improvements Completion Assurance. The
funds collected for each item will be used for the construction and
installation of said items by the city; thus, removing the Subdivider's
responsibility for the installation of these items as part their development:
      1.   Half percent (0.5%) of the total construction cost shall be to cover
administrative costs.
      2.   Funds for the current Public Works Standard seal coat treatment. The
amount shall be established by the City Engineer in accordance with recent bid
prices received for similar treatment(s).
      3.   Funds for current Public Works Standard Streetlights and all
associated infrastructure costs.
      4.   Funds for current Public Works Standard Street Signs.
      5.   Funds for mailbox combination boxes, if Subdivider would like them
to be installed by the city (optional).
      6.   Funds associated with any cost agreement(s) with the city that was
established as a condition of approval. (Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-
2024; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 1-14-2025)
CHAPTER 9
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY AFTER PLAT RECORDING
SECTION:
11-9-1: Development Activity After Plat Recording
11-9-1: DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY AFTER PLAT RECORDING:
   A.   Improvements And Infrastructure Required For Building Permit: No
building permit shall be issued by the City unless all required improvements
are installed, inspected, and approved, with the exception of sidewalk, asphalt
pavement, streetlights, and street signs.
   B.   Improvements And Infrastructure Required For Occupancy: No occupancy
permit shall be issued by the City unless all required improvements are
installed, including the sidewalk along the frontage of the building lot in
question, but with the exception of streetlights and street signs.
   C.   Conditional Acceptance Of Improvements And Infrastructure: The City
Engineer shall issue conditional acceptance upon the following:
      1.   Completion of all required improvements and infrastructure.
      2.   The site has been left in an orderly and clean condition following
construction. Construction waste, debris, excess fill material, or any other
similar material shall not be left or abandoned on the site or on other nearby
properties.
      3.   The final plat has been recorded.
      4.   The Subdivider makes a written request for inspection of
improvements and infrastructure for the purpose of conditional acceptance.
         a.   The city will generate a written punch list of items needing
repair, replacement or yet to be completed.
      5.   Improvements and infrastructure are inspected by the City and found
to be acceptable and in compliance.
         a.   Completion of all items identified on the punch list.
      6.   Reproducible as-built drawings have been submitted to and accepted
by the City Engineer.
   D.   Warranty Period: Upon receipt of Conditional Acceptance, all required
improvements and infrastructure shall be warranted by the Subdivider for a
period of one (1) calendar year.
   E.   Final Acceptance: Following the completion of the Warranty Period, the
Public Works Director shall issue final acceptance of the Subdivision
improvements and infrastructure when:
      1.   The Subdivider makes a written request for inspection of
improvements and infrastructure for the purpose of Final Acceptance.
         a.   The city will generate a written punch list of items needing
repair or replacement.
      2.   Improvements and infrastructure are inspected by the City and found
to be acceptable and in compliance.
         a.   Completion of all items identified on the punch list.
   F.   Release Of Remaining Escrow: Upon acceptance by the City Engineer, the
City's Escrow Agent shall authorize the release of all remaining escrow monies.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 10
VARIANCES AND APPEALS
SECTION:
11-10-1: Variances And Appeals Generally
11-10-1: VARIANCES AND APPEALS GENERALLY:
Any Person may petition for a variance or appeal a decision pertaining to this
Title to the Appeal Authority as established in Title 10-4, Appeal Authority.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 11
PENALTY
SECTION:
11-11-1: Penalty
11-11-1: PENALTY:
   A.   Any Person, who shall transfer or sell, or cause to be transferred or
sold, any lot or land in a Subdivision, which Subdivision has not been approved
by the City, and recorded in the office of the County Recorder, shall be guilty
of a Class B misdemeanor for each lot or parcel of land so transferred or sold,
and the description of such lot or parcel of land by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer, or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring, shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the
remedies provided in this Title. The City may enjoin such transfer or sale or
agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity jurisdiction,
or may recover the penalty by civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction, together with costs and attorney fees incurred in enforcing this
Title.
   B.   Any Person violating any of the provisions of this Title shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
   C.   Any Person violating any of the provisions of this Title or the Public
Works Standards or failing to obtain the necessary inspections and tests
required for public improvements and infrastructure shall be assessed a fine as
stated in the City's current adopted Consolidated Fee Schedule. Fines may be
applied daily and separately for each violation.
   D.   The City may bring an action against an Owner to require the property
to conform to the provisions of this Title, the zoning ordinance, or any other
applicable Law. The action may include an injunction, abatement, merger of
title, or any other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, or
abate the violation. The City need only establish the violation to obtain the
injunction.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 12
VACATING OR ALTERING A SUBDIVISION FINAL PLAT, VACATING A STREET,
RIGHT OF WAY, OR EASEMENT, AND PARCEL ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
11-12-1: Vacating, Altering, Or Amending A Final Plat
11-12-2: Vacating A Street, Right Of Way, Or Easement
11-12-1: VACATING, ALTERING, OR AMENDING A FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Vacating, altering, or amending a final plat shall be done in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-608, or its successor statute. This
includes changing a Subdivision boundary, dedicated right of way, the number or
layout of lots, easements, the Subdivision name, and any other aspect of a
recorded final plat. If an amendment proposes significant changes to the
existing Subdivision, then the Administrative Land Use Authority may require
the changes to be made through the vacation of the existing final plat and/or
approval of the changes being done through the process required for new
Subdivisions; this should be done to ensure that significant changes receive
proper review and adequate fees are obtained to cover costs to the City.
   B.   The Administrative Land Use Authority for vacating, altering, or
amending a final plat shall be the same as that for the final plat application.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-12-2: VACATING A STREET, RIGHT OF WAY, OR EASEMENT:
   A.   Vacations shall be done in accordance with Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-
609.5 or its successor statute.
   B.   The Administrative Land Use Authority shall be the City Council.
   C.   Adjusting or modifying an existing street, right of way, or easement
while not eliminating the street, right of way, or easement, and while still
maintaining access, does not constitute a vacation.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 13
EXEMPTIONS FROM PLAT; PARCEL AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
11-13-1: Purpose
11-13-2: Parcel Boundary Adjustments Not In A Recorded Subdivision
11-13-3: Lot Line Adjustments Within A Recorded Subdivision
11-13-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to outline the requirements and
procedures for parcel line adjustments and lot line adjustments in accordance
with Utah State Code and local land use regulations. The intent of this chapter
is to allow owners of real property to adjust common property lines while
minimizing delay and expense without the need of a subdivision plat.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-13-2: PARCEL BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS NOT IN A RECORDED SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Approval Required: Prior to the recording of a parcel line adjustment
between adjoining properties not located within a platted subdivision, the
adjustment must first be approved by the Administrative Land Use Authority if
the any of the properties involved includes a dwelling unit.
      1.   Exemption: Approval is not required prior to recording of a parcel
line adjustment if the properties involved do not contain a dwelling unit.
   B.   Review: Application and the review of a proposed parcel line adjustment
shall follow the procedures listed below:
      1.   Application: An applicant, either an owner of one of the properties
or a representative of the owners, shall submit a complete application which
shall include:
         a.   Property owner(s) affidavit acknowledging the consent of each
party for the proposed adjustment.
         b.   Property survey(s) with all existing improvements to the
properties;
         c.   A legal description of the proposed parcel line and of each
parcel after the boundary line is changed;
         d.   A site plan or exhibit serving as a visual depiction of the
parcel line adjustment;
         e.   Any necessary improvement plans, agreements, or additional
materials needed for review as determined by the Administrative Land Use
Authority.
      2.   Review Procedure: Upon receipt and payment of a complete
application, the Administrative Land Use Authority shall commence the review of
the parcel line adjustment request. The review shall be completed, with a
written response returned to the applicant, within fourteen (14) business days
from the date of complete application. The reviewing parties shall review the
adjustment for compliance with city zoning and public works standards.
   C.   Final Approval: If the proposed parcel line adjustment complies with
all city ordinances and development standards, written approval shall be
provided to the applicant by the City Planner or designee.
   D.   Recording: Upon final approval from the Administrative Land Use
Authority, the applicant shall record the approved documents at the office of
the Davis County Recorder to complete the parcel line adjustment. The parcel
line adjustment may be completed by a quitclaim deed or boundary line agreement
and shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   The written notice of approval of the parcel line adjustment by
South Weber City that recites the legal descriptions of both the original
parcels and the parcels resulting from the exchange of title;
      2.   The approved site plan or exhibit depicting the new parcel
boundaries and adjacent properties if deemed necessary; and
      3.   Any other documents deemed necessary as part of the parcel line
adjustment approval.
   E.   Exception: If the parcel line adjustment is creating a new parcel(s)
for the purpose of constructing a dwelling unit, a subdivision plat must be
approved, and the provisions of this title must be followed.
   F.   All parcel line adjustments shall comply with applicable state code
regulations found under sections 10-9a-523 (property boundary adjustment) and
10-9a-524 (boundary line agreement). A parcel line adjustment shall follow the
procedures provided herein unless exempted from local land use authority review
as provided in the forementioned state code sections.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-13-3: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS WITHIN A RECORDED SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Approval Required: Prior to the recording of a lot line adjustment
between adjoining properties within a platted subdivision, the adjustment must
first be approved by the Administrative Land Use Authority.
   B.   Review: Application and the review of a proposed lot line adjustment
shall follow the procedures listed below:
      1.   Application: An applicant, either an owner of one of the properties
or a representative of the owners, shall submit a complete application which
shall include:
         a.   Property owner(s) affidavit acknowledging the consent of each
party for the proposed adjustment between the lots.
         b.   Property survey(s) with all existing improvements to the lots and
reference to the subdivision within which the properties are located including
easements located on the lots;
         c.   A legal description of each of the proposed lots after the lot
line is changed including any changes to platted easements associated with the
lots;
         d.   A site plan or exhibit serving as a visual depiction of the lot
line adjustment. Although not a plat, the site plan or exhibit shall
sufficiently represent the new lots and include adjacent lots within the
subdivision;
         e.   Any necessary improvement plans, agreements, or additional
materials needed for review as determined by the City Planner, City Engineer,
or designees.
      2.   Review Procedure: Upon receipt and payment of a complete
application, the Administrative Land Use Authority shall commence the review of
the lot line adjustment request. The review shall be completed, with a written
response returned to the applicant, within fourteen (14) business days from the
date of complete application. The reviewing parties shall review the adjustment
for compliance with city zoning and public works standards.
   C.   Final Approval: If the proposed lot line adjustment complies with all
city ordinances and development standards, written approval shall be provided
to the applicant by the City Planner or designee.
   D.   Recording: Upon final approval from the Administrative Land Use
Authority, the applicant shall record the approved documents at the office of
the Davis County Recorder to complete the lot line adjustment. The lot line
adjustment may be completed by quitclaim deed or boundary line agreement and
shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   The written notice of approval of the lot line adjustment by South
Weber City that recites the legal descriptions of both the original lots and
the lots resulting from the exchange of title;
      2.   The approved site plan or exhibit depicting the new lot boundaries
along with adjacent lots within the subdivision; and
      3.   Any other documents deemed necessary as part of the lot line
adjustment approval.
   E.   Exception: If the lot line adjustment is creating a new lot(s) or
parcel(s) for the purpose of constructing a dwelling unit, a subdivision plat
must be approved, and the provisions of this title must be followed.
   F.   All lot line adjustments shall comply with applicable state code
regulations found under section 10-9a-608 (5). A lot line adjustment shall
follow the procedures provided herein unless an amended plat is required per
state statute.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
CHAPTER 14
EXEMPTIONS FOR BONA FIDE AGRICULTURAL AND UTILITY SERVICE PURPOSES
SECTION:
11-14-1: Purpose And Intent
11-14-2: Qualifications Of Land For Agricultural Purposes
11-14-3: Agricultural Partition Parcels As Buildable Lots
11-14-4: Public Improvements And Infrastructure
11-14-5: Use Of Property Created Under This Part For Non-Agricultural Purposes
11-14-6: Utilities
11-14-7: Parent Parcels
11-14-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
Utah Code 10-9a-605(2) exempts agricultural lands from plat requirements under
the certain conditions therein.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-14-2: QUALIFICATIONS OF LAND FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES:
Agricultural land may be divided or partitioned under this Chapter only under
the following circumstances:
   A.   The property must have been solely for agricultural use and actively
devoted to agricultural use as defined by Utah Code 59-2-502 and must continue
to be used solely for agricultural use in the future.
   B.   All of the lots or parcels must meet the minimum lot size requirements
of the applicable zoning district.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-14-3: AGRICULTURAL PARTITION PARCELS AS BUILDABLE LOTS:
An agricultural partition lot is buildable for only bona-fide agricultural
purposes. A parcel created in accordance with this Chapter is not considered a
buildable lot for residential, commercial, industrial, or any other non-
agricultural purposes.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-14-4: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE:
The City shall not require any public improvements and infrastructure to be
installed as a condition of approval for agricultural partitions.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-14-5: USE OF PROPERTY CREATED UNDER THIS PART FOR NON-AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES:
If a lot or parcel created by this part is used for a non-agricultural purpose,
the City shall require the lot or parcel to comply with the requirements of the
Subdivision and land use provisions of the City.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-14-6: UTILITIES:
A Subdivision of land for utility purposes (unmanned facilities such as:
substations, regulator stations, towers, etc.) creating a parcel(s) under eight
thousand square feet (8,000 ft2) in size may be exempted by the Administrative
Land Use Authority for certain provisions of this Title and/or provisions of
City Code relating to lot size, frontage, setbacks, and improvements and
infrastructure.
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
11-14-7: PARENT PARCELS:
The parent parcel from which the agricultural or utility lot(s) is created
shall be labeled as a remainder parcel and shall not be part of an approved
Subdivision until such time as it complies with the provisions of this Title
and other relevant sections of the City Code and has received the applicable
land use approval(s).
(Ord. 2023-17, 11-28-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose, And Methods
12-1-2: Definitions
12-1-3: General Provisions
12-1-4: Administration
12-1-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND METHODS:
   A.   Statutory Authorization: The Legislature of the State of Utah has in
Utah Code Unannotated 10-3-701 delegated the responsibility of local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
   B.   Findings of Fact: The flood hazard areas of South Weber City are
subject to periodic inundation by flood waters, which results in potential loss
of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief; all of which adversely affect the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the inhabitants of South Weber City. These potential
flood losses are caused by:
      1.   The cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains that are known
to cause increases in flood heights and velocities;
      2.   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses and structures
vulnerable to floods because they are inadequately elevated or floodproofed, or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages; and
      3.   Uses deemed unsuitable for floodplain areas or that do not account
for the increased flood risk.
   C.   Statement of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of the City and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
      1.   Protect human life and health;
      2.   Minimize damage to public infrastructure, including but not limited
to utilities, streets, and bridges that are susceptible to flooding;
      3.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions caused by flooding;
      4.   Minimize public expenditures on flood control projects;
      5.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and are generally undertaken at the expense of the public;
      6.   Protect and safeguard the welfare and safety of first responders
should an emergency response is needed;
      7.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
      8.   Promote the notification of potential buyers if properties are in a
flood area.
   D.   Methods of Reducing Flood Losses: To accomplish the purposes outlined
in section subsection 12-1-1.C, Statement of Purpose, this chapter applies the
following methods:
      1.   Restricts or prohibits land uses that are dangerous to health,
safety, or property in times of flooding, or cause excessive increases in flood
heights or velocities;
      2.   Requires that land uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Controls the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
      4.   Controls filling, grading, dredging and other developments that may
increase flood damage; and
      5.   Prevents or regulates the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Ord. 2022-14, 8-23-2022)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
When words or phrases defined in this section are found elsewhere in the City
Code of South Weber City, the definitions below shall be applicable to this
Title 12 only. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
                A flood having a recurrence interval that has a 1-percent chance of beingequaled or
                exceeded during any given year (1-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms "100-hundred-
100-YEAR FLOOD: year flood" and "1-percent-annual-chance flood" are synonymous. The term does notimply
                that the flood will necessarily happen once every 100 hundred years. Mandatory
                floodinsurance requirements may apply.
100-YEAR        The area of land susceptible to being inundated due to theoccurrence of a 1-percent-
FLOODPLAIN:     annual-chance flood.
                A flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance ofbeing equaled or
500-YEAR FLOOD: exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-annual-chance flood). The termdoes not
                imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 500 years and mandatory
                floodinsurance requirement generally does not apply.
500-YEAR        The area of land susceptible to being inundated due to theoccurrence of a 0.2-percent-
FLOODPLAIN:     annual-chance flood.
                A structure that is on the same parcel of property as a principal structure. Its use is
                incidental to the use of the principal structure. The ownership of the accessory
ACCESSORY       structure is the same owner as of the principal structure. An accessory structure is a
STRUCTURE:      non-residential structure of low value that is used solely for the parking of vehicles
                and storage of tools, materials, or equipment. No human habitation is allowed within an
                accessory structure. See section 12-1-5, Appurtenant or Accessory Structure.
                Any improvement that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of
ADDITION:       an existing structure. This includes lateral additions added to the side, front, or
                rear of a structure; vertical additions added on top of a structure; and enclosures
                added underneath a structure.
ALLUVIAL FAN    Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform that
FLOODING:       originates at the apex. It is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of
                erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX:           A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major
                stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
APPURTENANT     See ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
STRUCTURE:
AREA OF FUTURE- The land area that would be inundated by the one percent (1%)-annual-chance (100-year)
CONDITIONS      flood, based on future-conditions hydrology.
FLOOD HAZARD:
                A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH zone on a city's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
AREA OF SHALLOW with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one
FLOODING:       (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
                flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
                characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL The land within a city that is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related
FLOOD-RELATED   erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map
EROSION HAZARD: (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard area,
                in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further refined.
                The land in the floodplain within a city subject to a one percent (1%) or greater
                chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM.
AREA OF SPECIAL After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the
FLOOD HAZARD:   FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/
                AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, or V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term
                "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special
                flood hazard".
BASE FLOOD:     The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
                year.
                The water surface elevation of the one percent (1%) annual-chance flood event. It is
                the height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the
BASE FLOOD      base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. It is
ELEVATION       also the elevation shown on the FIRM and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance
(BFE):          Study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water
                surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of
                equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
                Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides.
BASEMENT:       A walkout basement that does not require a step up to grade is not considered a
                basement.
                Existing flood hazard information adopted by a city and reflected on an effective FIRM,
BEST AVAILABLE  FBFM, and/or within an FIS report; or draft or preliminary flood hazard information
DATA:           supplied by FEMA or from another source. Other sources may include, but are not limited
                to, state, other federal agencies, or local studies, the more restrictive of which
                would be reasonably used by the city.
                A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended
                through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces,
                without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation
BREAKAWAY WALL: system. Any walls below the lowest floor in a building in a V or VE Zone should give
                way under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other damage
                to the elevated portion of the building of the supporting pilings or columns. Breakaway
                walls apply only to V or VE Zones.
BUILDING:       See STRUCTURE.
CHANNELIZATION: The artificial creation, enlargement, realignment, or alteration of a stream channel's
                slope, shape, or alignment. Streambank restoration may be deemed as channelization.
CODE OF FEDERAL The codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register
REGULATIONS     by the executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
(CFR):
CONDITIONAL     FEMA's comment on a proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the
LETTER OF MAP   hydrologic and/or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the
REVISION        modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective BFEs, and/or the SFHA.
(CLOMR):        The letter does not revise an effective map; it indicates whether the project, if built
                as proposed, would be recognized by FEMA.
CONDITIONAL
LETTER OF MAP   FEMA's comment on a proposed structure or property. The letter does not revise an
REVISION BASED  effective map; it indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would be removed
ON FILL (CLOMR- from the floodplain.
F):
                An under-floor space that has its interior floor area (finished or not) no more than 4
CRAWLSPACE:     feet from the bottom floor joist the next higher floor elevation, designed with proper
                openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures of flood water, and is not used for
                habitation. Reference: subsection 12-1-5.B.5 Crawlspace
CRITICAL        A facility or building where even a slight chance of flooding is too great a threat.
FACILITY:       Typical critical facilities include hospitals, fire stations, police stations, schools,
                storage of critical records, assisted living and similar facilities.
                Refers to a clause in a deed that limits the future use of the property in some
DEED            respect. Deed restrictions may impose a vast variety of limitations and conditions. For
RESTRICTION:    example, they may limit the density of buildings, dictate the types of structures that
                can be erected, or prevent buildings from being used for specific purposes or from
                being used at all.
                A building that is used solely for storage of materials or vehicle parking for up to
DETACHED        four housing occupants. If a detached garage is designed or used for habitation or
GARAGE:         conducting business, or has multiple stories, then the building is not considered a
                detached garage under the NFIP.
                Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited
DEVELOPMENT:    to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
                demolition, excavation or drilling operations, or storage either temporary or permanent
                of equipment or materials.
                A non-basement building built, in the case of a building in Zone A1-30, AE, A, A99, AR,
                AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by
                means of pilings, columns (post and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
ELEVATED        water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
BUILDING:       building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of a
                building in Zone A1-30, AE, A, A99, AR, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, an "elevated building"
                also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls
                with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
ENCLOSURE:      An enclosed walled-in area below the lowest floor of an elevated building. Enclosures
                below the BFE may only be used for building access, vehicle parking, and storage.
EROSION:        The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses by wind, water, or other natural
                agents.
EXISTING        Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of
CONSTRUCTION:   the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. It may also
                be referred to as Existing Structures.
EXISTING        A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
MANUFACTURED    servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
HOME PARK OR    minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
SUBDIVISION:    site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of
                the floodplain management regulations adopted by a city.
EXISTING        See EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.
STRUCTURES:
EXPANSION TO AN The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the
EXISTING        lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
MANUFACTURED    utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
HOME PARK OR    concrete pads).
SUBDIVISION:
                The Federal Emergency Management Agency. Fill refers to the placement of materials,
                such as dirt, sand, or rock to elevate a structure, property, or portion of a property
                above the natural elevation of the site, regardless of where the material was obtained
FEMA:           from. The common practice of removing unsuitable material and replacing with engineered
                material is not considered fill if the elevations are returned to the existing
                conditions. Any fill placed or used prior to the area being mapped as a flood hazard
                area is not deemed as fill.
                   1.   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
                dryland areas from:
                      a.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
                      b.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
                source.
                   2.   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) that are proximately caused by flooding as defined
FLOOD OR        in this chapter and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of
FLOODING:       normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited
                along the path of the current.
                   3.   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
                water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
                exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water
                level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
                force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
                unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this chapter.
FLOOD INSURANCE The document FEMA produces twice a year and is used to write flood insurance policies
MANUAL:         underwritten by the NFIP. The document contains definitions, policy rates, coverage and
                limitations, application and insurance policy forms.
FLOOD INSURANCE An official map of a city, on which the Administrator has delineated both the SFHAs and
RATE MAP        the risk premium zones applicable to the city.
(FIRM):
FLOOD INSURANCE An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
STUDY (FIS) OR  corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and
FLOOD ELEVATION determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
STUDY:
FLOODPLAIN      A city issued permit or document that is used for any development that occurs within an
DEVELOPMENT     SFHA identified by FEMA or the city. It is used to address the proposed development to
PERMIT:         ensure compliance with the city's ordinance.
FLOODPLAIN OR   Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source whether or not
FLOOD-PRONE     identified by FEMA (see definition of Flooding).
AREA:
FLOODPLAIN      The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
MANAGEMENT:     flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control
                works, mitigation plans, and floodplain management regulations.
                Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
FLOODPLAIN      purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
MANAGEMENT      control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
REGULATIONS:    state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
                flood damage prevention and reduction.
                An opening in the wall of an enclosed structure that allows floodwaters to
                automatically enter and exit the enclosure. Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 1. Flood
                Protection System means those physical structural works for which funds have been
                authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to
                modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a city subject to an
FLOOD OPENING:  SFHA and to reduce the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
                hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized, flood
                modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
                FEMA only accredits levees, both private and public, that have been certified by a
                professional engineer or firm in which the certification shows that the levee has met
                and continues to meet the minimum regulatory standards cited in Title 44, Chapter 1,
                Section 65.10 of the Code of Federal Regulations (44 CFR 65.10).
                Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to
                structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
                property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. Floodproofing
FLOODPROOFING:  can either be accomplished in the form of dry floodproofing in which the structure is
                watertight below the levels that need flood protection, or wet floodproofing in
                permanent or contingent measures applied to a structure that prevent or provide
                resistance to damage from flooding, while allowing floodwaters to enter the structure
                or area.
FLOODWAY:       See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
FLOODWAY
ENCROACHMENT    The lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and local floodplain maps.
LINES:
                A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
                floodplain management. "freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors
FREEBOARD:      that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a
                selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and
                the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
                A development that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried
FUNCTIONALLY    out in close proximity to water. The term includes docking facilities, port facilities
DEPENDENT USE:  that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
                building and repair facilities. It does not include long-term storage or related
                manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST         The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
ADJACENT GRADE  proposed walls of a structure. In AO Zones, the highest adjacent grade is utilized by
(HAG):          comparing the lowest floor elevation to that of the highest adjacent grade and the
                depth of the AO Zone.
                Any structure that is:
                   1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
                maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
                of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
                Register;
                   2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
                contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
                district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
HISTORIC        district;
STRUCTURE:         3.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
                historic reservation programs that have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
                or
                   4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in cities with
                historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
                      a.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior,
                or
                      b.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
                programs.
LETTER OF MAP   An official amendment, by letter, to an effective FIRM. A LOMA establishes a property's
AMENDMENT       location in relation to the SFHA. It is usually issued because a property or structure
(LOMA):         has been inadvertently mapped as being in the floodplain, when the property or
                structure is actually on natural high ground above the BFE.
                FEMA's modification or revision to an entire or portion of the effective FIRM, or Flood
LETTER OF MAP   Boundary and Floodway Map, or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of
REVISION        physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding
(LOMR):         source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the
                effective BFEs, or the SFHA.
LETTER OF MAP
REVISION BASED  FEMA's amendment, by letter, to an effective FIRM where fill was brought in or used to
ON FILL (LOMR-  elevate a property, portion of property or structure above the BFE.
F):
                A man-made structure usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
LEVEE:          accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of
                water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
                A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated
LEVEE SYSTEM:   structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in
                accordance with sound engineering practices.
                The lowest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
LOWEST ADJACENT proposed walls of a structure. For an existing structure, it means the lowest point
GRADE (LAG):    where the structure and ground touch, including but not limited to attached garages,
                decks, stairs, and basement windows.
                The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or
                flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
LOWEST FLOOR:   storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest
                floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
                violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR Section 60.3.
                A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
MANUFACTURED    chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to
HOME:           the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
                vehicle"; however, a manufactured home may be used for both residential and non-
                residential use.
MANUFACTURED    A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
HOME PARK OR    lots for rent or sale.
SUBDIVISION:
MAP:            The FHBM or the FIRM for a city issued by FEMA.
                For purposes of the NFIP, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North
MEAN SEA LEVEL: American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which BFEs shown on a city's
                FIRM are referenced.
MIXED USE       Structures with both a business and a residential component, but where the area used
STRUCTURES:     for business is less than fifty percent of the total floor area of the structure.
                Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date
                of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a city and includes any subsequent
NEW             improvements to such structures. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
CONSTRUCTION:   structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective
                date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
                any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW             A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
MANUFACTURED    servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
HOME PARK OR    minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
SUBDIVISION:    site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
                date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a city.
                Formal certifications signed and stamped by a professional engineer licensed to
NO-RISE         practice in the state, demonstrating through hydro-logic and hydraulic analyses
CERTIFICATIONS: performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that a proposed development
                will not result in any increase (0.00 feet) in flood levels within the city during the
                occurrence of a base flood event.
PHYSICAL MAP    FEMA's action whereby one or more map panels are physically revised and republished.
REVISION (PMR):
                A vehicle which is:
                   1.   Built on a single chassis;
RECREATIONAL       2.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
VEHICLE:        projection;
                   3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
                   4.   Designed primarily, not for use as a permanent dwelling but, as temporary
                living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY      The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that shall be
FLOODWAY:       reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
                surface elevation more than a designated height.
RIVERINE:       Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook,
                creek, etcetera, which can be intermittent or perennial.
                Refers to the section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which
                provides for the denial of flood insurance coverage for any property that the
SECTION 1316:   Administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted State or local authority to
                be in violation of State or local floodplain management regulations. Section 1316 is
                issued for a property, not a property owner, and remains with the property even after a
                change of ownership.
SPECIAL FLOOD   See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
HAZARD AREA:
                Substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided
START OF        the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
CONSTRUCTION    placement, or other improvement was within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the
(for other than permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
new             construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
construction or installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
substantial     excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
improvements    construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
under the       nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
Coastal Barrier excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
Resources Act   forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
(Pub. L. 97-    such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
348)):          structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
                first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
                whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
                Floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, culvert, bridge, dam, or
                a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a
                manufactured home. Structure, for insurance purposes, means:
                   1.   A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, which
                is affixed to a permanent site;
                   2.   A manufactured home ("a manufactured home," also known as a mobile home, is a
STRUCTURE:      structure: built on a permanent chassis, transported to its site in one or more
                sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation); or
                   3.   A travel trailer without wheels built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent
                foundation, that is regulated under the city's floodplain management and building
                ordinances or laws.
                For insurance purposes, "structure" does not mean a recreational vehicle or a park
                trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in paragraph (3) of this
                definition, or a gas or liquid storage tank.
SUBSTANTIAL     Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
DAMAGE:         structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the
                market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
                Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
                cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure
                before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
                which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work
                performed.
SUBSTANTIAL     The term does not, however, include:
IMPROVEMENT:       1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
                state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been
                identified by the local code enforcement official and are the minimum necessary to
                assure safe living conditions; or
                   2.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", if the alteration will not preclude
                the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
                A grant of relief by a city from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VARIANCE:       Reference: subsection
                12-1-4.E. Variance Procedures
                The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's
                floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the
VIOLATION:      elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required
                in Sections 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
                presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
                The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, (or other
WATER SURFACE   datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies, such as the
ELEVATION:      one percent (1%)-annual-chance flood event, in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
                areas.
WATERCOURSE:    The channel and banks of an identifiable water in a creek, brook, stream, river, ditch
                or other similar feature. (Ord. 2022-14, 8-23-2022)
 
12-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands to which this Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA and areas of identified and
documented flood risk supported using Best Available Data within the
jurisdiction of South Weber City.When the City annexes any land from a
neighboring city and/or county, South Weber City will manage and regulate the
annexed land under this chapter.
   B.   Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and engineering report
entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Davis County, Utah, and incorporated
areas " dated September 15, 2022 (date of effective FIS), accompanying FIRMs,
and any revisions thereto are hereby automatically adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter.The City has elected to adopt Best
Available Data, defined in subsection 12-1-3.A. Lands to which this Chapter
Applies, to regulate floodplain development in addition to utilizing the
effective FIRMs, FIS, and/or FBFM. Where Best Available Data contradicts the
FIRMs, FIS, and/or the FBFM, the more restrictive data shall be utilized.
   C.   Establishment of Development Permit: A Floodplain Development Permit
shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisionsof this chapter.
   D.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants,or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance,
easement,covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes
the more stringentrestrictions shall prevail.
   E.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   F.   Warning and Disclaimer or Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable forregulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rareoccasions, greater
floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by human-madeor
natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   G.   Severability: If any section, provision, or portion of this chapter is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the chapter
shall not be affected.
   H.   Compliance: No structures or developments including buildings,
recreation vehicles, or manufactured homes or land shall hereafter be located,
altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the City
from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violations.
   I.   Stop Work Order:
      1.   Authority. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other City
official discovers any work or activity regulated by this chapter being
performed in a manner contrary to the provision of this chapter, the floodplain
administrator is authorized to issue a stop work order.
      2.   Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the
person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall
immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order,
and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
      3.   Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject
to penalties as prescribed by local or state law including but not limited to
the penalties outlined in subsection 12-1-3.J. Penalties for Noncompliance.
   J.   Penalties for Noncompliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of
the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person, firm,
or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating
or causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable by a fine or by imprisonment, or by both to the maximum extent
permitted by law. Such person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed to be
guilty of a separate offense for each day during which any portion of any
violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person,
firm, or corporation, and shall be punishable as herein provided. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent South Weber City from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 2022-14, 8-23-
2022)
12-1-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator: The City Manager or his/
her designee is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of the
NFIP Regulations and 44 CFR pertaining to floodplain management.
   B.   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator: Duties and
responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Uphold the goals of the City and the NFIP to reduce risk when
possible and increase the city's resistance to future disasters.
      2.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter, including the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement or crawlspace) of all new or substantially improved
structures and any flood-proofing certificates, including the data supporting
such certificates.
      3.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection maps that identify and
locate the boundaries of the SFHAs to which this chapter applies, including,
but not limited to, the FIRM.
      4.   Review development proposals to determine whether a proposed
building site, including sites designed for the placement of manufactured
homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      5.   Review, approve, or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
      6.   Ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state, or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334 and the
Endangered Species Act of 1973) from which prior approval is required.
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent cities and the State
Coordinating Agency which is the Division of Water Rights, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to FEMA.
      9.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.
      10.   When BFE data has not been provided by FEMA, the Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data and
flood way data available from a federal, state, or other source including data
provided by the applicant, in order to administer the provisions of this
chapter.
      11.   When a regulatory flood way has not been designated, no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within Zones A1-30, AE, and AH on the city's FIRM, unless it
is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (0.50) foot at
any point within the City.
      12.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12 of the NFIP
Regulations, a city may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, and AH
on the city's FIRM, which increases the water surface elevation of the base
flood by more than one-half (0.50) foot, provided that the city first meets the
requirements of Section 65.12 for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA's
CLOMR process.
      13.   Zone A Areas: When a regulatory flood way has not been designated
and if the project is determined or reasonably believed to cause an adverse
impact, the Floodplain Administrator shall require new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development (including fill, grading or
excavation) permitted in a Zone A to have an encroachment analysis done prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit. The encroachment analysis shall
create a baseline of existing conditions model and compare it to the proposed
conditions model to determine the potential impact of the project. Based on the
findings, the floodplain administrator shall require as a condition of the
permit a CLOMR to be submitted and approved prior to any work occurring and/or
that a LOMR be submitted to FEMA within six (6) months of completion of the
development.
      14.   If the project is determined or reasonably believed to cause an
adverse effect on the BFE(s), boundaries of the floodplain or any insurable
structures, technical justification for the proposed development shall be
submitted and the city may require a CLOMR or LOMR to be submitted prior to the
permit approval or as a requirement of the permit.
   C.   Requirement to Submit New Technical Data:
      1.   The property owner or developer shall notify FEMA by submittal of a
LOMR within six (6) months of project completion when an applicant had obtained
a CLOMR from FEMA orwhen development altered a watercourse, modified floodplain
boundaries, or modified BFE.
      2.   The property owner or developer shall be responsible for preparing
technical data tosupport the CLOMR or LOMR application and paying any
processing or application feesto FEMA. The property owner or developer is
responsible for submitting the CLOMR and LOMR to FEMA and shall provide all
necessary data to FEMA if requested during thereview process to ensure the
CLOMR or LOMR is issued.
      3.   The Floodplain Administrator shall be under no obligation to sign
the Community Acknowledgement Form, which is part of the CLOMR/LOMR
application, until theapplicant demonstrates that the project will or has met
the requirements of thisordinance and all applicable state federal, and local
laws.
   D.   Permit Procedures: Application for a Development Permit shall be
presented to the Floodplain Administrator onforms furnished by him/her and may
include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Duplicated plans drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions,
and elevation ofproposed landscape alterations.
      2.   Duplicated plans drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions,
and elevation ofexisting and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes.
      3.   Location of the foregoing in relation to SFHAs.
      4.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement andcrawlspace) of all new and substantially improved
structures, if applicable;
      5.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), to which any non-
residential structure (if applicable) shall be flood proofed.
      6.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the non-residential flood proofed structure (if applicable) shall meet the
flood proofing criteria of this chapter and the NFIP Regulations.
      7.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated because of proposed development, if
applicable.
      8.   At the city's discretion, the city may charge a fee for issuance of
floodplain development permits.
      9.   Copies of all floodplain development permits and the associated
documents shall become property of the City and a permanent record.
Approval or denial of a Development Permit by the Floodplain Administrator
shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following
relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and theeffect of such damage on the individual owner.
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems.
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site.
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
The City requires that the following Elevations Certificates be completed for
any new residential or non-residential building construction:
      1.   Proposed Conditions: A proposed conditions Elevation Certificate is
required to be completed by a professional and licensed engineer, surveyor, or
architect as part of the Floodplain Permit package.
      2.   Finished Construction: A finished construction Elevation Certificate
is required to be completed by a professional and licensed engineer, surveyor,
or architect once the structure is completed, utilities are installed, and
grading and landscaping has been completed.
   E.   Variance Procedures: The appeal authority, as established by the City,
shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements
of this chapter after a floodplain development permit has been denied.
      1.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal
authority may appeal such decision to 2nd District Court, Davis County, Utah,
as provided by law.
      2.   The appeal authority, as established by the City, shall hear and
render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in
the enforcement of administration of this chapter.
      3.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to FEMA and the State
Coordinating Agency upon issuing a variance.
      4.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 12-1-4.E. Variance
Procedures have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the
one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
      5.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter.
      6.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      7.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure. The term ‘‘substantial improvement'' does not include
any alteration of a structure or facility listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Prerequisites for granting variances:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief. Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   Showing a good and sufficient cause.
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, conflict with existing local laws or ordinances, considers the need of
ingress and egress during times of floods, and does not jeopardize first
responders' health and welfare.
      2.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the BFE, and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
      3.   Variances may be issued by a city for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
         a.   The criteria outlined in subsection 12-1-4.E. Variance Procedures
are met; and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimizeflood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to
publicsafety.
Variances for freeboard and Allowable Increases:
      1.   Variances may be issued to reduce the freeboard requirement as
described in subsection
12-1-5.B.1.1. Residential Construction freeboard and subsection
12-1-5.B.2.1 Non-Residential Construction freeboard for residential and non-
residential structures.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued to increase the allowed increase in
BFE for floodplain Zones A1-30, AE, and AH as described in subsection 12-1-4.B.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator, subsection 12.
   F.   Watercourse Alterations:
      1.   No alteration to a channel, river, stream, drainage way, or other
watercourse shall diminish the flood-carrying capacity of that watercourse. The
altered or relocated watercourse shall have the same or greater capacity as the
original watercourse.
      2.   All proposals for a watercourse alteration require submittal of a
floodplain development permit. The applicant shall submit a set of plans and
calculations prepared by a registered professional engineer of the proposed
alteration and its effect on flows. An applicant shall provide the following
information. Additional information may be submitted and requested:
         a.   Topographic map of the project area.
         b.   A comparison of the existing and proposed channel capacity,
including engineering calculations prepared by a registered professional
engineer.
         c.   A description of the proposed alteration extent to which any
watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development.
         d.   Land use of adjacent properties.
         e.   Description of any obstructions.
         f.   Dimensions, specifications, and locations of any structures
(bridges, culverts, water crossing, dams, dikes, levees, detention basins,
etcetera).
         g.   Photos of the area.
      3.   Prior to approval of the floodplain development permit, the
applicant shall:
         a.   Submit an application and obtain a CLOMR from FEMA.
         b.   Notify adjacent cities, property owners and the State
Coordinating Agency, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notification to the Floodplain Administrator and to
FEMA.
         c.   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished. (Ord. 2022-14, 8-23-2022)
12-1-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following
provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
      1.   Construction Materials and Methods:
         a.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         b.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
         c.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
         d.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      2.   Utilities:
         a.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
         b.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
         c.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be designed or located to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   B   Temporary Structures. All temporary structures associated with
festivals, carnivals or other temporary uses placed on sites within Zones A1-
30, AE, AH, AO, and A on the city's FIRM or area that has been identified as a
flood hazard area through the use of Best Available Data are required to:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than thirty (30) consecutive days.
      2.   Have a plan in place for the removal of the structure including a
list of necessary supplies, tools, and resources needed to achieve the removal.
      3.   Be capable of being removed within twelve (12) hours.
   C.   Temporary Storage: All temporary storage of materials or equipment on
sites within Zones A1-30, AE, AH, AO, and A on the city's FIRM or area that has
been identified as a flood hazard area through the use of Best Available Data
are required to:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than thirty (30) consecutive days and no
more than ninety (90) cumulative days within a calendar year.
      2.   Have a plan in place for the removal of the equipment or materials
including a list of necessary supplies, tools, and resources needed to achieve
the removal.
      3.   Have proper documentation to support when the materials or equipment
are moved on and off the site.
   D.   Substantial Improvement: Any combination of repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a building or structure, if the
cumulative cost of the entire project equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent,
unless a higher standard option is selected below, of the market value of the
structure only (not of the structure and land value combined) before the
improvement or repair is started then the work shall be considered as
substantial improvement. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any
repairs are considered substantial improvements regardless of the actual repair
work performed. For Substantial Damage, refer to subsection 12-1-5.F.
Substantial Damage. The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
      2.   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
   E.   Cumulative Substantial Improvement: The City has elected a higher
standard option that includes a cumulative substantial improvement threshold
that is defined as:
Substantial Improvement shall also include any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure
taking place within a selected five (5)-year timeframe.
   F.   Substantial Damage: Substantial damage means damage of any origin
sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market
value of the structure only, unless a higher standard option is selected,
before the damage occurred. This term also applies to structures which have
incurred any damage that equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the
structure's market value regardless of the actual repair work performed. When a
structure or building has been determined as substantially damaged, any work or
repair on said structure or building will be considered as substantial
improvement and will be required to meet the development requirements set forth
within this chapter for substantial improvement.
   G.   Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Determination: For
applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures,
including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of
occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, and any other improvement
of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in
coordination with the applicable City officials and staff, shall:
      1.   Estimate the market value or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure only, not of land and building, before the start of
construction of the proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of
the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred
and before any repairs are made.
      2.   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure.
      3.   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; the determination
requires evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as
specified in the subsection 12-1-5.D. Substantial Improvement and subsection
12-1-5.E. Cumulative Substantial Improvement.
      4.   Utilize FEMA's Substantial Improvement/Substantial Desk Reference
when making anydetermination on Substantial Improvement and/or Substantial
Damage.
      5.   The substantial improvement regulations apply to all of the work
that is proposed as theimprovement, even if multiple permits are issued.
Therefore, the determination of thecost of the improvement should consider all
costs of all phases of the work beforeissuance of the first permit.
      6.   Notify the applicant that if it is determined that the work
constitutes substantialimprovement or repair of substantial damage and that
compliance with the flood, thisordinance is required.
   H.   Specific Standards: In all SFHAs and areas of known or suspected flood
risk areas, the following provisions shall apply:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to the BFE, unless a free-board option is noted below. If a
free-board option is noted, new construction and substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to the free-board
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor
shall submit certified elevations to the Floodplain Administrator that the
standards of this chapter are satisfied.
         a.   Residential Construction Freeboard: The City has elected to adopt
a free-board requirement of one (1) foot of free-board meaning the lowest floor
shall be built 1.0 foot above the BFE.
         b.   Residential Construction Setback: For all new construction and
substantial improvement of any residential structure outside SFHAsbut within
fifty (50) feet of an SFHA, the following minimum requirements shall apply:
            (1)   The minimum setback distance from the edge of a flood hazard
area to the nearest wallof a basement shall be fifty (50) feet.
            (2)   The lowest floor level elevation (including crawlspace and
basement) shall be no lessthan the closest adjacent BFE.
            (3)   The lowest opening shall be no less than 1.0 foot above the
closest adjacent BFE.
      2.   Non-Residential Construction:
         a.   New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial,
industrial, or othernon-residential structure shall either have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to the base flood level, unless a freeboard
option is noted below, or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet the following provisions:
            (1)   Be designed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight withwalls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structuralcomponents having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamicloads and effects of buoyancy.
            (2)   Have a registered professional engineer or architect develop
and/or reviewstructural design, specifications, and plans for the construction
and certify thatthe design and methods of construction are in accordance with
acceptedstandards of practice as outlined in this subsection.
         b.   A record of such certification that includes the specific
elevation (in relation tomean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintainedby the Floodplain Administrator.
            (1)   If the use or occupancy of the building changes in the future
to residential, then the dryfloodproofing of the structure cannot be used when
determining compliance of thestructure to the residential construction of this
chapter, subsection 12-1-5.H.1. Residential Construction, subsection 12-1-
5.H.1.a. Residential Construction Freeboard and subsection 12-1-5.H.1.b.
Residential Construction Setback. As such, the building will not be
grandfathered into compliance and will be required to bebrought into compliance
with the residential construction requirements of this chapter.
         c,   Non-Residential Construction Freeboard: The City has elected to
adopt a freeboard requirement of one (1) foot of freeboard for new construction
and substantial improvement of any non-residential structure, meaning the
lowest floor shall be built 1.0 foot above the BFE.
         d.   Non-Residential Construction Setback: New construction and
substantial improvement of non-residential structure outside areas of special
flood hazards but within fifty (50) feet of an SFHA.The following minimum
requirements shall apply to construction of non-residential structures:
            (1)   The minimum setback distance from the edge of a flood hazard
area to the nearest wallof a basement shall be fifty (50) feet.
            (2)   The lowest floor level elevation (including crawlspace and
basement) shall be no lessthan the closest adjacent BFE.
            (3)   The lowest opening shall be no less than 1.0 foot above the
closest adjacent BFE.
The development and construction of the structure shall conform to the
provision in FEMA/FIA-Technical Bulletins 1, 2, 10 and 11. Certification and
documentation from a professional, licensed engineer or architect is required
if the structure's lowest floor is built below the BFE.
      3.   Non-Residential Construction Access (Ingress-Egress): New
development proposals will be designed, to the maximum extent practicable, so
non-residential building sites, walkways, driveway, and roadways are located on
land with a naturalgrade within elevation not less than the BFE and with dry
land access.
      4.   Enclosures:
         a.   New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed
areas below the lowestfloor that are to be used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or storage in an areaother than a basement and that are
subject to flooding, shall be designed to automaticallyequalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
offloodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall either be certified
by a registeredprofessional engineer or architect, or shall meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
            (1)   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one (1) squareinch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1)
foot above grade.
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
         b.   The development and construction of the structure shall conform
with the provision in FEMA/Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)-Technical
Bulletins 1 and 2. Certification and documentation from a professional,
licensed engineer or architect is required if the structure's lowest floor is
built below the BFE.
         c.   Enclosure Non-Conversion Agreement: For any construction that has
an enclosure, a non-conversion agreement shall be completed as part of the
permitting process. The non-conversion agreement:
            (1)   Acknowledges the risk associated with this building practice.
            (2)   Acknowledges the use of the area that was permitted as an
enclosure will be used solely on accessory or appurtenant structure of low
value whose usage is only for building access, parking, or storage.
            (3)   Allows for city, state and/or federal officials to conduct
periodic inspections to ensure compliance.
      5.   Crawlspace: New construction and substantial improvements built on a
crawlspace or sub-grade (below grade) crawlspace may be permitted if the
development is designed and meets or exceeds the standards found in FEMA's
Technical Bulletins 1, 2, and 11, which include but are not limited to the
following:
         a.   The structure shall be affixed to a permanent foundation,
designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy. Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace
construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five
(5) feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design
professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer.
         b.   The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the BFE and, as such,
shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each flood vent opening
can be no more than one (1) foot above the LAG.
         c.   The crawlspace enclosure shall have proper openings that allow
equalization of hydrostatic pressure by allowing automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. To achieve this, a minimum of one (1) square inch of flood opening
is required per one (1) square foot of the enclosed area subject to
flooding.4.Portions of the building below the BFE shall be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation
walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists,
insulation, piers, or other materials that extend below the BFE. Ductwork, in
particular, shall either be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters.
         d.   Any building utility systems within the crawlspace shall be
elevated above the BFE ordesigned so that floodwaters cannot enter or
accumulate within the systemcomponents during flood conditions.
         e.   The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE shall not be
more than two (2) feetbelow the LAG.
         f.   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the
lowest interior grade ofthe crawlspace floor to the bottom of the floor joist
of the next higher floor cannotexceed four (4) feet at any point.
         g.   There shall be an adequate drainage system that removes
floodwaters from the interiorarea of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should
be drained within a reasonable timeafter a flood event.
      6.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a city's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes shall be
elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
         b.   Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the city's FIRM on sites outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood,
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the BFE, unless a higher standard
option was selected (reference paragraph 4 of this subsection) and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
         c.   In A1-30, AH, AO and AE Zones, manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park shall be elevated
so that the lowest floor is at or above the BFE, unless a higher standard
option was selected; or the chassis is supported by reinforced piers no less
than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and securely anchored.
         d.   All manufactured homes are placed so that the bottom of the I-
beam be at or above the BFE in zones A1-A30, AH, AO, and AE on the city's FIRM
plus any applicable free-board as established by this chapter by the City and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      7.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles placed on sites within
Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the city's FIRM shall either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred and eighty (180)
consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready forhighway use; OR
         b.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection
12-1-4.D, Permit Procedures, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      8.   Appurtenant or Accessory Structure: Accessory or appurtenant
structures not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in size and located
within zones A, A1-A30, AH, AO, or AE shall:
         a.   Be detached from a residence;
         b.   As required in the 44 CFR Section 60.3(a)3:
            (1)   "Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effects of buoyancy;"
            (2)   "Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage"
below the BFE, be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters and
meet all applicable building codes;"
            (3)   "Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages;"
            (4)   "Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding;"
         c.   Comply with the floodway encroachment "no-rise" provisions of the
NFIP Regulations;
         d.   Not be used for human habitation including but not limited to
working, sleeping, and living.
         e.   Include, in the submittal for Floodplain Development Permit,
sufficient documentation demonstrating full compliance with this section,
including, but not limited to, the use of flood resistant materials, anchoring,
and flood openings.
   I.   1.   Standards for Subdivision Proposals:
         a.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with the provisions of this
chapter.
         b.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to floodhazards.
         c.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain
Development Permit requirements of this chapter.
         d.   BFE data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, or
whichever is lesser.
         e.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
         f.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
      2.   Standards for Subdivisions Setback: For all residential subdivisions
and manufactured home parks outside areas of SFHAs but within fifty (50) feet
of an SFHA, the following provisions shall apply:
The following minimum requirements shall apply to construction of non-
residential structures within residential subdivision and manufactured home
parks:
         a.   The minimum setback distance from the edge of a flood hazard area
to the nearest wall of a basement shall be fifty (50) feet.
         b.   The lowest floor level elevation (including crawlspace and
basement) shall be no less than the closest adjacent BFE.
         f.   The lowest opening shall be no less than 1.0 foot above the
closest adjacent BFE.
The development and construction of the structure shall conform to the
provision in FEMA/FIA-Technical Bulletins 1, 2, 10 and 11. Certification and
documentation from a professional, licensed engineer or architect is required
if the structure's lowest floor is built below the BFE.
      3.   Standards for Subdivision Access (Ingress-Egress): New subdivision
development proposals shall be designed, to the maximum extent practicable, so
residential buildings sites, walkways, driveways, and roadways are located on
land with a natural grade with elevation not less than the BFE and with dry
land access.
   J.   Properties Removed from the Floodplain by FILLA Floodplain Development
Permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition
to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the
issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), unless such
new structure, or substantial improvement or addition complies with the
following:
      1.   Residential Construction: The lowest floor (including basement),
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities (including ductwork), shall be elevated to the
elevation noted in subsection 12-1-5.H.1 Residential Construction and
subsection 12-1-5.H.1.a. Residential Construction freeboard.
      2.   Non-residential Construction: The lowest floor (including basement),
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities (including ductwork), shall be elevated to the
elevation noted in subsection 12-1-5.H.2 Non-Residential Construction and
subsection 12-1-5.H.2.a. Non-Residential Construction freeboard, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the
structure or addition is watertight to at the elevation noted in subsection 12-
1-5.H.2 Non-Residential Construction with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. (Ord.
2022-14, 8-23-2022)
