CITY CODE
of
SUNSET CITY, UTAH
1997
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-05, passed 11-18-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of Sunset City, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 2025-05, passed November 18, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 98-03
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE CITY CODE OF SUNSET, UTAH
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Sunset, Utah:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Sunset, Utah prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official
Code and Law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catch line and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, three (3) copies
of which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official City Code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Mayor and City
Council.
   PASSED, APPROVED, AND ADOPTED this 7th day of July, 1998.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1784664b6642baab328065ba98598485c1c51e5d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1326.png]
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Sunset City. This City
Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the SUNSET CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the City Council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as provided in Section
 1-1-3  of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1997 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Title. (1997 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the City Code. (1997 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Recorder shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the City
Recorder. Any person having custody of a copy of the City Code shall make every
effort to maintain said Code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the City Recorder. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and
shall be returned to the office of the City Recorder when directed so to do by
order of the City Council. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances; Exception
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES; EXCEPTION:
   A.   All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this
City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or
are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances. (1997 Code)
   B.   Neither this Code nor the above repealing subsection shall affect any
right accrued or the tenure of office of any person holding office at the time
when this Code takes effect, nor shall the repeal of any ordinance hereby have
the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded. (1989
Code § 1-2-6, 7-1-1989)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1997 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatsoever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1997 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the
opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been
changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/
or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1997 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   CITY: Sunset City, County of Davis, State of Utah.
   CODE: The Municipal Code of Sunset City.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL: Any City employee vested with the duty and
responsibility of enforcement of the City codes, ordinances, and policies.
      Examples:
      Administration: Business licenses, building permits
      Building Inspector: On site inspection/construction practices
      Fire: Fire codes
      Police: Traffic and other duties requiring the issuance of citations and/
or tickets, with the power to arrest
   COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of Sunset City.
   COUNTY: The County of Davis, State of Utah.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of Sunset
City".
   FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
   HIGHWAY: All roads, alleys, lanes, streets, courts, lanes, trails and
bridges laid out or erected as such by the public or dedicated or abandoned to
the public or made such in actions for the partition of real property.
   KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the acts exist, which bring the act
or admission within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any
knowledge of such an act or admission.
   LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation. The term license includes any certificate, permit or
license issued by the City.
   MALICE OR MALICIOUSLY: Imports a wish to vex, annoy or injure another person
or an intent to do a wrongful act established either by proof or by presumption
of law.
   NEGLIGENT, NEGLIGENCE AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such attention to
the nature or probable consequence of an act or omission as a prudent person
ordinarily bestowed in acting in his own concern.
   NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
   OATH: An affirmation in all cases in which by law, an affirmation must be
substituted for an oath and in such cases, the words swear and sworn shall be
equivalent to the words affirmed and affirm.
   OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this Code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of Sunset City".
   OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the
consumer.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   SHALL: The word shall is mandatory and not merely directory.
   STATE: The State of Utah.
   STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   TENSE: The present tense shall include the future tense and the future tense
shall include the past tense.
   TIME: The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by
excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last is a holiday or
a Sunday, and then it is also excluded. Whenever any act of a secular nature
other than a work of necessity or mercy is appointed by law or contract to be
performed upon a particular day which day falls upon a holiday, such act may be
performed upon the next succeeding business day, with the same effect as if it
had been performed upon the day appointed. In all cases where any ordinance
shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to
be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only
as they deem necessary for the prompt performance of such duty or compliance
with such notice.
   WHOLESALER: The terms wholesaler and wholesale dealer, as used in this Code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
   WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law or to injure another
or to acquire an advantage.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1989 Code § 1-3-1, 7-1-1989; 1997 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Classification; Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability
1-4-1: CLASSIFICATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanors Classified 1 :
      1.   Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
         a.   Class B misdemeanors;
         b.   Class C misdemeanors.
      2.   An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful in this Code or any ordinance of the City when no other
specification as to punishment or category is made, is a Class B misdemeanor.
   B.   Infractions 2 :
      1.   Infractions are not classified.
      2.   Any offense which is made an infraction in this Code or other
ordinances of the City, or which is expressly designated an infraction and any
offense designated by this Code or other ordinances of the City which is not
designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified is an
infraction.
   C.   Fines:
      1.   Persons 3 : A person convicted of an offense may be sentenced to pay
a fine, not exceeding:
         a.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction is of a
Class B misdemeanor; and
         b.   Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) when the conviction is of a
Class C misdemeanor or infraction.
2. Corporations 4 : The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon a
corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an
offense defined in this Code or for an offense defined outside this Code for
which no special corporate fine is specified shall be to pay an amount fixed by
the court, not exceeding:
         a.   Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the conviction is for a
Class B misdemeanor; and
         b.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction is for a
Class C misdemeanor or for an infraction.
      3.   Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is
specified, the person may be fined as for a Class C misdemeanor.
   D.   Imprisonment:
      1.   Misdemeanors 5 : A person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor
may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
         a.   In the case of a Class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding
six (6) months;
         b.   In the case of a Class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days.
      2.   Infractions 6 : A person convicted of an infraction may not be
imprisoned but may be subject to a fine, forfeiture and disqualification, or
any combination. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 76-3-104.
2 2. U.C.A. § 76-3-105.
3 3. U.C.A. § 76-3-301.
4 4. U.C.A. § 76-3-302.
5 1. U.C.A. § 76-3-204.
6 2. U.C.A. § 76-3-205.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Applicability; Continued Violation: The penalty provided in this
Chapter shall be applicable to every section of the City Code the same as
though it were a part of each and every separate section. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues unless otherwise specifically provided in
this City Code. (1997 Code)
   B.   Offense Of Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense is
made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (1989 Code § 1-4-3,
7-1-1989)
   C.   No Specific Penalty Declared: Whenever the doing of any act or the
omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this
City Code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such
breach, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply. (1997 Code)
   D.   Revocation Of License: When a person is convicted of a violation of any
section of this Code, any license previously issued by the City may be revoked
by the City Council. (1989 Code § 1-4-2, 7-1-1989)
1-4-3: LIABILITY:
   A.   Employers And Agents: When the provisions of this Code prohibit the
commission or omission of an act, not only the person actually doing the
prohibited thing or omitting the direct act, but also the employer and all
other persons concerned or aiding or abetting therein shall be guilty of the
offense described and liable for the penalty prescribed for the offense. (1989
Code § 1-4-4, 7-1-1989)
   B.   Officers And Employees: No provision of this Code designating the
duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer
or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform
such duty, unless the intention of the City Council to impose such fine or
penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in
the section creating the duty. (1989 Code § 1-4-5, 7-1-1989)
CHAPTER 5
CORPORATE NAME AND SEAL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Official And Legal Name
1-5-2: Corporate Seal Described
1-5-1: OFFICIAL AND LEGAL NAME:
The official and legal name of this Municipal corporation shall be Sunset City.
Whenever deemed desirable, appropriate or necessary to the execution of any
legal document there may be added to the official name of this City the
additional words, "a Municipal corporation" for the purpose of designating the
Municipal character of said corporation. (1989 Code § 1-1-1)
1-5-2: CORPORATE SEAL DESCRIBED:
The Seal heretofore provided and used by the City is described as follows: two
(2) concentric circles in the outer of which appears the words "Sunset, Davis
County, Utah" and in the inner of which appear the words, "Corporate Seal" is
hereby declared to have been, and that it is now and hereafter shall be the
Corporate Seal of the City. (1989 Code § 1-1-2)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Membership, Terms And Powers
1-6-2: Duties And Authority Of Mayor
1-6-3: Meetings, Procedure And Conduct; Voting
1-6-4: Municipal Administration
1-6-5: Ordinances And Procedures
1-6-1: MEMBERSHIP, TERMS AND POWERS:
   A.   Number Of Members; Legislative Body: The City Council shall be a
Council of six (6) persons, one of whom shall be the Mayor and the remaining
five (5) shall be Councilmembers. The City Council shall be the legislative and
governing body of the City. (1989 Code § 2-3-1, 10-4-1988; 1997 Code)
   B.   Eligibility:
      1.   Meeting Residency Requirement:
         a.   A person filing a declaration of candidacy for a City office
shall:
            (1)   Have been a resident of the municipality in which the person
seeks office for at least one year immediately before the date of the election;
            (2)   Meet the other requirements of Utah Code Annotated section
20A-9-203.
         b.   A person living in an area annexed to the City meets the
residency requirement of this subsection if that person resided within the area
annexed to the City for at least one year before the date of election.
      2.   Registered Voter Requirement: Any person elected to a City office
shall be a registered voter in the City.
      3.   Maintain Residency Within City:
         a.   Each elected officer of the City shall maintain residency within
the boundaries of the City during his term of office.
         b.   If an elected officer of the City establishes his principal place
of residence as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-2-105, outside the
City during his term of office, the office is automatically vacant.
      4.   Absence From City; Office Vacated: If an elected City officer is
absent from the City any time during his term of office for a continuous period
of more than sixty (60) days without the consent of the City legislative body,
the City office is automatically vacant. (1997 Code)
   C.   Terms Of Office: The Mayor and Councilmembers shall enter upon their
duties at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the first Monday in January next
succeeding their election. The Mayor and each Councilmember shall continue in
office for a term of four (4) years and in each case until a successor is duly
elected and qualified, unless otherwise provided. If any elective officer of
the City shall at any time during his term of office move from the limits of
the City, his office shall thereby become vacant. (1989 Code § 2-1-2, 10-4-
1988)
   D.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Privileges And Authority Provided By Law: The Mayor and City
Council, as the administrative and legislative body, shall have, exercise and
discharge all the rights, powers, privileges and authority conferred by the
laws of the State upon cities of the third class, and shall perform all duties
that may be required of them by State statute. (1989 Code § 2-3-2, 10-4-1988)
      2.   Regulation Of Officers: The City Council shall have the power to
formulate and adopt by ordinance or resolution all necessary rules and
regulations prescribing the duties and conduct of the other officers of the
City, including the management of the respective officers not in conflict with
this Code or with the laws of the State. (1989 Code § 2-3-9, 10-4-1988)
   E.   Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 20A-1-510. (1997 Code)
1-6-2: DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF MAYOR:
   A.   Chief Executive: The mayor shall be the chief executive of the city and
shall preside at all meetings of the city council. (1989 Code §§ 2-2-1, 2-2-2,
10-4-1988)
   B.   No Vote Except In Tie: The mayor shall not vote except in case of a tie
vote of the city council. (1989 Code § 2-2-2, 10-4-1988)
   C.   Budget Officer: The mayor shall be the budget officer of the city, or
he may appoint, with the approval of the city council, some other person to
exercise the function of budget officer. On or before May 1 of every year, the
budget officer shall prepare and file with the city recorder, for the ensuing
budget year, on forms provided by the state auditor and in accordance with
state statute, a tentative budget for each fund for which a budget may be
required. (1989 Code § 2-2-4, 10-4-1988)
   D.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Remit Fines; Release Imprisoned Persons: The mayor may remit fines
and forfeitures and release any person imprisoned for violation of the city
ordinances, but he shall report any such remission or release with the reason
theretofore to the city council at its next session. (1989 Code § 2-2-5, 10-4-
1988)
      2.   Suppress Disorder: The mayor may exercise within the city limits,
the power to suppress disorder and keep the peace. (1989 Code § 2-2-6, 10-4-
1988)
      3.   Require Aid: The mayor may, when necessary, call upon every resident
of the city over age twenty one (21) years to aid in enforcing the laws of the
state and ordinances of the city. (1989 Code § 2-2-7, 10-4-1988)
      4.   Examine Records: The mayor may, at any time, examine and inspect the
books, records and papers of any officer or agent employed by the city. (1989
Code § 2-2-8, 10-4-1988)
      5.   All Other Duties Prescribed By Law: The mayor shall perform all
other duties prescribed by law or ordinance and shall see that the laws and
ordinances are faithfully executed, but may not serve as recorder, treasurer or
justice of the peace. (1989 Code § 2-2-9, 10-4-1988)
   E.   Mayor Pro Tempore: During the temporary absence or disability of the
mayor, the city council shall elect one of its number to act as mayor pro
tempore, who during such absence or disability shall have all the powers and
duties of the mayor. The election of a mayor pro tempore shall be entered in
the minutes of the meeting. (1989 Code § 2-2-10, 10-4-1988; amd. 1997 Code)
1-6-3: MEETINGS, PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT; VOTING:
   A.   Regular Meetings:
      1.   The city council shall hold two (2) regular meetings which shall be
held on the first and third Tuesday of each month at the city offices.
      2.   The meetings held on the dates specified in the foregoing subsection
shall begin promptly at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M.; provided, that:
         a.   If the meeting date is a legal holiday, then the meeting shall be
held at the same time and place above described on the next following day which
is not a legal holiday.
         b.   The city council may, by resolution, provide for a different time
and place for holding regular meetings of the city council.
         c.   The mayor, with the consent of a majority of the city council is
needed to cancel any regular city council meeting.
   B.   Special Meetings: If at any time the business of the city requires a
special meeting of the city council, such meeting may be ordered by the mayor
or any two (2) members of the city council. The order shall be entered in the
minutes of the city council. The order shall provide at least three (3) hours'
notice of the special meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the city
recorder on each council member who did not sign the order by delivering the
notice personally or by leaving it at the council member's usual place of
abode. The personal appearance by a council member at any specially called
meeting constitutes a waiver of the notice required in this section.
   C.   Emergency Meetings: When, because of unforeseen circumstances, it is
necessary for the city council to hold an emergency meeting to consider matters
of an emergency or urgent nature, the notice requirements contained in
subsection F of this section may be disregarded and the best notice practicable
given, but not less than three (3) hours' notice. No such emergency meeting of
the city council shall be held unless an attempt has been made to notify all of
the council members and a majority votes in the affirmative to hold the
meeting. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-3-2012)
   D.   Work Meetings: A work meeting may be scheduled by any member of the
council with the consent of two (2) other members of the council (mayor
included).
      1.   Work meetings can serve the purpose of discussion or study of any
item deemed necessary by those calling said meeting.
      2.   After discussion at a work meeting, items will be referred:
         a.   To a future work meeting if the matter needs further work by the
council; or
         b.   To a future regular council meeting to be considered as council
business or, if the matter is ready for final action, to the consent agenda.
      3.   Generally, no action will be taken on items discussed at a work
meeting; however, the council may make an exception and suspend its rules to
vote on matters under discussion if three (3) or more of the council members in
attendance vote to suspend the rules.
      4.   During a work meeting the council members and the mayor may sit
around a conference table, rather than at the dais, to provide a more informal
atmosphere and to allow a freer exchange of ideas. (Ord. 2016-01, 3-1-2016)
   E.   Open Meetings: Every meeting is open to the public, unless closed
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 52-4-204 and 52-4-205, governing
closed meetings.
   F.   Notice Of Meetings: At least once each year, the city council shall
give notice of its annual meeting schedule, specifying the date, time and place
of such meeting. The city council shall give reasonable notice of the agenda,
date, time and place of each of its meetings. This public notice shall be given
at least four (4) days prior to any meeting and shall be given by posting
written notice at the Sunset City hall, and by providing notice to at least one
newspaper of general circulation within the city limits, or to a local media
correspondent.
   G.   Quorum: The majority of the city council shall constitute a quorum to
do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and are hereby
empowered to compel the attendance of an absent member. Should any member of
the city council, when notified by the chief of police or other authority that
his presence is necessary to form a quorum (unless he shall present an excuse
satisfactory to the city council at its next regular meeting), or should any
member leave the council meeting while in session without the consent of the
city council when such leaving would break the quorum, may be fined in any sum
not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00).
   H.   City Council Meeting Agenda: All meetings of the city council will have
a notice and agenda that complies with the Utah open meetings act. An item may
be placed on the agenda by the mayor, city manager (administrator), or at the
request of any council member. Agenda items must be submitted to the city
recorder at least five (5) days before the date of the meeting. Any item that
is submitted to the city recorder after that time will be put on the next
following meeting agenda. The city recorder shall notify the mayor of the added
agenda item.
   I.   Rules Of Proceedings: The city council shall determine its own rules of
proceedings and may punish its members for disorderly conduct with the
concurrence of at least three (3) members of the city council.
      1.   Role Of The Mayor As Chair And Others At Council Meetings: The mayor
shall preside at meetings of the city council and participate in discussion of
all matters. The mayor shall vote as a member thereof only in case of a tie or
where otherwise specifically authorized to do so by state law, and shall have
no power to veto. In addition, the mayor, as the chair, has the primary
responsibility for ensuring that the council's rules of procedure are followed
and for maintaining the dignity of council meetings. The mayor calls the
meeting to order and confines the discussion to the agenda. The mayor
recognizes council members for motions and statements and may allow audience
and staff participation at appropriate times. The council requires the mayor to
have knowledge of the city's adopted rules of parliamentary procedure and how
to apply it. The mayor is to ensure that the Utah open and public meetings act
is complied with. The mayor should know how to courteously ensure those who
have the floor are not interrupted and to rule out of order those not following
meeting procedures. The mayor will recognize the council member offering the
motion, restate the motion, ask for a second and, if a second is granted, the
mayor shall present it to the council for consideration. There can be up to
three (3) motions on the floor at the same time and no more than three (3). The
mayor can reject a fourth motion until the mayor has dealt with the three (3)
that are on the floor and has resolved them. Then the mayor calls for the vote,
announces the vote, then announces the next order of business.
         a.   Procedure: When there are two (2) or three (3) motions on the
floor (after motions and seconds) at the same time, the vote should proceed
first on the last motion that is made. So, for example, assume the first motion
is a basic "motion to adopt ordinance 10-1". During the discussion of this
motion, a member might make a second motion to "amend the main motion to adopt
ordinance 10-1 with changes in paragraph 1 as follows...". And perhaps, during
that discussion, a member makes yet a third motion as a "substitute motion that
we refer the matter to the planning commission". The proper procedure would be
as follows:
First, the mayor would deal with the third (the last) motion on the floor, the
substitute motion. After discussion and debate, a vote would be taken first on
the third motion. If the substitute motion passed, it would be a substitute for
the basic motion and would eliminate it. The first motion would be moot, as
would the second motion (which sought to amend the first motion), and the
action on the agenda item would be completed on the passage by the city council
of the third motion (the substitute motion). No vote would be taken on the
first or second motions. On the other hand, if the substitute motion (the third
motion) failed then the mayor would proceed to consideration of the second
(now, the last) motion on the floor, the motion to amend.
Second, if the substitute motion failed, the mayor would now deal with the
second (now, the last) motion on the floor, the motion to amend. The discussion
and debate would focus strictly on the amendment. If the motion to amend passed
the mayor would now move to consider the main motion (the first motion) as
amended. If the motion to amend failed the mayor would now move to consider the
main motion (the first motion) in its original format, not amended.
Third, the mayor would now deal with the first motion that was placed on the
floor. The original motion would either be in its original format, or, if
amended, would be in its amended format.
   J.   Public Comment: There shall be on every agenda of the city council an
item entitled "public comment". The public comment portion of the meeting shall
be limited to the public speaking to the council on any item. Members of the
public shall be free to express any idea, question, or viewpoint without
limitation except for time and the manner of the presentation. Individual
members of the public shall be limited to three (3) minutes' time. The chair of
the meeting shall ensure that the public comment is civil and orderly. The
chair shall use its best efforts to allow the free expression of the public and
keep the meeting in order. Council members should not interrupt, argue with, or
otherwise interfere with any comment by a member of the public. The mayor and
city council may ask clarifying questions of the member of the public making a
presentation and other members of the public may ask clarifying questions of
the presenter at the discretion of the chair. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-3-2012)
   K.   Council Member Participation: At regular meetings of the city council,
council members shall speak only after being recognized by the mayor/chair. Any
meeting designated as a work meeting shall be more informal and council members
may freely participate as long as proper decorum is maintained. Council members
shall conduct themselves at all times with decorum and respect. They shall
refrain from making any disparaging remarks concerning any other member of the
governing body or the public. Any member of the council wishing to speak on any
item on the agenda shall be recognized by the mayor/chair to do so. The member
will be allowed to speak uninterrupted until they have yielded the floor back
to the mayor/chair.
      1.   Exception: A member of the council may call out a point of order if
he or she feels the point has been made and no further comments need to be made
by the speaker. After the point of order is recognized by the mayor/chair, the
member will make a motion to limit the speaker's comments to a one minute
closing statement. A second and a majority vote would close the member's
statements after one minute. This will in no way hinder the member's ability to
speak later on the item if additional information is disclosed. (Ord. 2017-01,
1-17-2017)
   L.   Meeting Adjournment: Meetings of the city council, as a goal, shall be
scheduled to end at or before ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and the mayor and city
council shall use their best efforts to conclude the meeting in a timely
manner. However, no motion to extend the time of the meeting is necessary to be
made. The meetings of the city council shall not be adjourned until all items
listed on the agenda have been acted upon and a motion to adjourn is made and
approved by a majority of the city council.
   M.   Voting:
      1.   Vote Taken: A vote shall be taken upon all ordinances and all
propositions creating any liability against the city, and in all other cases at
the request of any member of the city council, which vote shall be entered in
the minutes of the meeting. The concurrence of a majority of the members of the
city council elected or legally appointed shall be necessary to the passage of
any ordinance or proposition creating any liability against the city. Where
there is an even number of council members present, the consent or concurrence
of three (3) of the council members shall be sufficient to confirm an
appointment or concur in the removal of an appointive officer.
      2.   Reconsideration Of Votes: No vote of the city council shall be
reconsidered or rescinded in any special meeting, unless at such special
meeting there is present as large a number of council members as were present
when such vote was taken.
   N.   Electronic Meetings:
      1.   Definitions: As used in this subsection:
   ANCHOR LOCATION: The physical location from which the electronic meeting
originates or from which the participants are connected.
   ELECTRONIC MEETING: A meeting of a Sunset City public body convened or
conducted by means of a conference using electronic communications.
   ELECTRONIC NOTICE: Electronic mail or fax.
   MONITOR: To hear or observe, live, by audio or video equipment, all of the
public statements of each member of the public body who is participating in a
meeting.
   PARTICIPATE: The ability to communicate with all of the members of the
public body, either verbally or electronically, so that each member can hear or
observe the communication.
   PUBLIC BODY: The Sunset City council and the planning commission.
   PUBLIC HEARING: A portion of a meeting at which comments from the public
will be accepted.
   PUBLIC STATEMENT: A statement made in the ordinary course of business of the
public body with the intent that all other members of the public body receive
it.
      2.   Procedures: The public body may, by following the procedures and
requirements of this subsection, convene and conduct an electronic meeting. The
public body convening or conducting an electronic meeting shall:
         a.   Give public notice of the meeting pursuant to section 52-4-202,
Utah Code Annotated, 1953, by posting written notice at the anchor location;
         b.   Provide written or electronic notice to at least one newspaper of
general circulation within the state, and a local media correspondent; and
         c.   In addition to giving public notice required by subsection N2a of
this section, provide:
            (1)   Notice of the electronic meeting to the members of the public
body at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting so that they may
participate in and be counted as present for all purposes, including the
determination that a quorum is present; and
            (2)   A description of how the members will be connected to the
electronic meeting.
      3.   Procedures Governing Electronic Meetings: The procedures to be
followed at the electronic meeting shall be the same as those followed by the
public body in a nonelectronic open and public meeting. The mayor or chair
shall conduct the meeting and the meeting shall be held pursuant to the agenda
posted for that meeting. Prior to commencing the electronic meeting, an
electronic link shall be established with all participants and the anchor
location. Minutes shall be kept for the meeting in accordance with the
requirements of the open meetings law. Following passage of a motion to
adjourn, the electronic link shall be terminated and the meeting shall be
deemed concluded. The initial anchor location for meetings of the public body
shall be the Sunset City Hall located at 200 West 1300 North, Sunset City, UT
84015. If the meeting is a public hearing, space and facilities will be
provided at the anchor location so that interested persons and the public may
attend, monitor and participate in the open portions of the meeting. All
electronic meetings shall comply with the Utah open and public meetings act.
   4.   Procedures for Single Person Participating Electronically: The public
body shall accommodate a member request to participate in a public meeting via
electronic means (i.e.: telephonic or telecommunications conference) or a
request from persons with disabilities needing special assistance to
participate in a public meeting so long as the request is made forty-eight (48)
hours in advance of the start of the public meeting and excepting any
logistical limitations that prevent the requested accommodation of
participating in the public meeting via electronic means.
      a.   Upon receiving a request for participation in a public meeting via
electronic means, the public body shall notify the City Recorder, who shall be
responsible to ensure proper public notice per U.C.A. § 52-4-207 (3) (a). The
City Recorder shall ensure that other notice requirements are met, and that an
anchor location is set, and space for the public is at the anchor location as
required by U.C.A. § 52-4-207(3)(b).
      b.   The City’s responsibility to provide electronic or telephonic
connections that will allow participation in a public meeting via electronic
means shall be restricted to the capability of the City’s current equipment.
Determination as to individuals that will receive an electronic or telephonic
connection will be determined by the order that individuals’ requests are
received by the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tempore or Chairperson.
      c.   Prior to, or at the beginning of, the public meeting or portion of
the public meeting in which individuals will be participating by electronic
means, the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tempore or Chairperson shall confirm that
individuals are connected.
   5.    Emergency Electronic Attendance: The Mayor, Mayor Pro Tempore, Elected
Officials or Chairpersons may participate in a public meeting requiring less
than twenty-four (24) hours advance notice via phone in order to form a quorum
and/or if the person wishing to participate electronically cannot physically be
present due to unplanned circumstances. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-3-2012; amd. Ord.
2015-08, 11-4-2015; Ord. 2023-02, 2-21-2023)
1-6-4: MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Action On Committee Reports: If requested by any two (2) council
members, any report of a committee made to the city council shall be deferred
for final action thereon to the next regular council meeting after the report
is made. (1989 Code § 2-3-7, 10-4-1988)
   B.   Record Of Meetings:
      1.   Open Meetings: Written minutes shall be kept of all meetings. Such
minutes shall include:
         a.   The date, time and place of the meeting;
         b.   The names of council members present and absent;
         c.   The substance of all matters proposed, discussed or decided, and
a record by individual council member of votes taken; (1989 Code § 2-3-8, 10-4-
1988)
         d.   The names of all citizens who appeared for testimony and the
substance in brief of their testimony; (1989 Code § 2-3-8, 10-4-1988; amd. 1997
Code)
         e.   Any other information that any council member requests be entered
in the minutes.
      2.   Closed Meetings: Written minutes shall be kept of all closed
meetings and shall include:
         a.   The date, time and place of the meeting;
         b.   The names of council members present and absent;
         c.   The names of all others present, except where such disclosure
would infringe on the confidence necessary to fulfill the original purpose of
the closed meeting;
         d.   Any closed meeting shall comply with the appropriate state
statutes.
      3.   Permanent Form: A record of the proceedings of all meetings of the
city council shall be made and put in a permanent form by the city recorder as
part of his duties as set forth in chapter 7, article A of this title. Such
record shall be open to public inspection during regular office hours. (1989
Code § 2-3-8, 10-4-1988)
   C.   Consideration Of Claims: It shall be the duty of the city council to
examine all claims presented against the city when properly verified and such
of them as are found to be valid obligations of the city shall be approved and
ordered paid, according to the city purchasing policy. (1989 Code § 2-3-10, 10-
4-1988; amd. 1997 Code)
   D.   Appointments:
      1.   Certain Entities: Any appointment made by the mayor to certain
entities, as designated by the city council, including, but not limited to, the
Wasatch integrated waste management district board, the North Davis sewer
district board and the mosquito abatement district - Davis board shall be made
only to an elected official, and shall be for a term not to exceed the
appointee's term of office or reassignment by the mayor, whichever first
occurs, and shall be made only upon the appointee agreeing to resign upon the
conditions indicated in this subsection.
      2.   City Council Approval Required: Appointments must be made with the
advice and consent of the city council. If it is made from the city council,
said appointment shall not exceed the time said member is serving on the city
council. Upon the conclusion of the municipal term of office or a determination
by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, to withdraw the
appointment, the board member shall be deemed to have resigned from the date of
the term of municipal office expired or the change in assignment became
effective. Each person accepting an appointment from the mayor shall, prior to
accepting such appointment, sign a letter acknowledging the above conditions of
the appointment and agreeing to the resignation upon the conditions indicated
in this subsection.
      3.   Others Eligible: Appointments made by the mayor to all other such
bodies may be made from among elected or appointed city officials, city
employees or citizens who will properly represent the interest of the city. All
such appointments must be made with the advice and consent of the city council.
(Ord. 2012-04, 10-2-2012)
   E.   Procedure For Interaction With Employees: Any elected official, whether
mayor or a member of the city council, may ask questions of and receive
information from any city employee or department head. (Ord. 2014-10(A), 10-7-
2014)
1-6-5: ORDINANCES AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Power Exercised By Ordinance: The city council may pass any ordinance
to regulate, require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity,
business, conduct or condition authorized by statute or any other provision of
law. An officer of the city shall not be convicted of a criminal offense where
he relied on or enforced an ordinance he reasonably believed to be a valid
ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive damages that the
official acted in good faith in enforcing an ordinance or that he enforced an
ordinance on advise of legal counsel.
   B.   Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the city council shall
contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
      1.   A number;
      2.   A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the
ordinance;
      3.   A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
      4.   An ordaining clause which states:
Be it ordained by the City Council of Sunset City:
      5.   The body or subject of the ordinance;
      6.   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of
the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance
which prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of a
city ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and
refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
      7.   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the
date when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as
required by this section;
      8.   A line for the signature of the mayor or acting mayor to sign the
ordinance;
      9.   A place for the city recorder to attest the ordinance and fix the
seal of the city; and
      10.   Where the mayor may disapprove an ordinance passed by the city
council, the ordinance must show, that it was passed with the mayor's approval
or that if the mayor disapproved the ordinance, that it was passed over his
disapproval. If the mayor neither approves nor disapproves an ordinance, the
ordinance should show that it became effective without the approval or
disapproval of the mayor.
   C.   Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
      1.   Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed by
the mayor, or if he is absent, by the mayor pro tempore, or by a quorum of the
city council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be
void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-704(1), (2), (3) or (4).
      2.   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication
or posting or thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council,
whichever is closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become
effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so
provided in the ordinance.
      3.   Ordinances which do not have an effective date shall become
effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty (30) days
after final passage by the city council, whichever is sooner.
   D.   Publication And Posting Of Ordinances: All ordinances, except those
enacted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-706 through 10-3-710,
before taking effect shall be deposited in the office of the city recorder and
a short summary of the ordinance published at least once in a newspaper
published within the city, or if there is no newspaper published therein, then
by posting complete copies in three (3) public places within the city. Any
ordinance, code, or book, other than the state code, relating to building or
safety standards, city functions, administration, control, or regulations, may
be adopted and shall take effect without further publication or posting, if
reference is made to the code or book and at least three (3) copies have been
filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city recorder
prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the city council. Any state law
relating to building or safety standards, city functions, administration,
control or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further
publication or posting if reference is made to the state code. The ordinance
adopting the code or book shall be published in the manner provided in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-711. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 7
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Appointment Of Officers
1-7-2: Compensation
1-7-3: Oath Of Office
1-7-4: Obligations, Responsibilities And Duties
1-7-5: Vacancies
1-7-6: Expiration Of Term; Delivery Of Records
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
   A.   Designated Offices: The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall appoint a qualified person to each of the Offices of City
Recorder and City Treasurer, Chief of Police, Fire Chief and Public Works
Director, except where provided by law or ordinance.
   B.   Authority To Fill Vacancies: The Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the City Council, may also appoint all such officers as may be provided for by
law or ordinance and in like manner, fill all vacancies among the same, except
as otherwise provided by law.
   C.   Terms Of Office: All appointive officers shall continue in office until
their respective successors are appointed and qualified, unless they are sooner
removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of a majority of the City Council, or
a majority of the City Council with the concurrence of the Mayor. (Ord. 2017-
10, 11-21-2017)
1-7-2: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Determined By Ordinance: The elective and appointive officers shall
receive such compensation for their services as the Mayor and the City Council
may determine by ordinance adopting compensation or compensation schedules.
   B.   Review Upon Motion: Upon its own motion, the City Council may review or
consider the compensation of any officer of the City or a salary schedule
applicable to any officer of the City, for the purpose of determining whether
or not it should be adopted, changed or amended. In the event the City Council
decides that said compensation or salary schedules should be adopted, changed
or amended, said proposed changes may be heard at the next regularly scheduled
City Council meeting.
   C.   Notice Of Meeting: Notice of time, place and purpose of the meeting
shall be published at least seven (7) days prior thereto by a publication in at
least one issue of a newspaper published in the County within which the City is
situated and generally circulated in the City. (1989 Code § 2-1-8, 10-4-1988)
   D.   Enact Ordinance: After the conclusion of the meeting, the Mayor and
City Council may enact an ordinance fixing, changing or amending the
compensation of any elective or appointive officer of the City or adopting a
compensation schedule applicable to any officer. (1989 Code § 2-1-8, 10-4-1988;
amd. 1997 Code)
   E.   Paid Monthly: The compensation of all City officers shall be paid at
least monthly out of the City Treasury. (1989 Code § 2-1-8, 10-4-1988)
1-7-3: OATH OF OFFICE:
All officers of the City, whether elected or appointive, shall, before they
enter upon their duties in their respective offices, take, subscribe and file
the constitutional oath of office. All oaths of office shall be filed with the
City Recorder. (1989 Code § 2-1-6, 10-4-1988; amd. 1997 Code)
1-7-4: OBLIGATIONS, RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES:
   A.   Records Open To Inspection: All records, books, papers and documents
belonging to any office of the City shall be open at any time to inspection by
the Mayor, or any member of the City Council, or the public, during regular
business hours. A fee, as set by resolution, may be charged for providing
copies of public records to individuals. (1989 Code § 2-1-9, 10-4-1988)
   B.   Expenditures To Be Approved: No purchase shall be made and no
indebtedness incurred by any officer or employee of the City without approval
and order of the City Administrator or of some other person duly authorized and
commissioned by the City Council to act as purchasing agent for the City. (1989
Code § 2-1-10, 10-4-1988; amd. 1997 Code)
   C.   Not To Exceed Budget Appropriations: No City officer shall make or
incur expenditures or encumbrances in excess of the total appropriation for any
department in the budget as adopted or as subsequently amended. Any obligation
that is so contracted by any such officer shall be and become the obligation of
the officer or department head himself, and shall not be or become valid or
enforceable against the City, unless authorized and approved by the City
Council. (1989 Code § 2-1-11, 10-4-1988)
   D.   Interest In Business Entity Regulated By City; Disclosure Statement
Required:
      1.   Every appointed or elected officer or employee who is an officer,
director, agent or employee or the owner of a substantial interest in any
business entity which is subject to the regulation of the City in which he is
an elected or appointed officer or employee, shall disclose the position held
and the nature and value of his interest upon first becoming appointed, elected
or employed by the City, and again at any time thereafter if the elected or
appointed officer's or employee's position in the business entity has changed
significantly or if the value of his interest in the entity has increased
significantly since the last disclosure.
      2.   The disclosure shall be made in a sworn statement filed with the
Mayor. The Mayor shall report the substance of all such disclosure statements
to the members of the City Council, or may provide to the members of the City
Council copies of the disclosure statement within thirty (30) days after the
statement is received by him.
      3.   This subsection does not apply to instances where the value of the
interest does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Life insurance
policies and annuities shall not be considered in determining the value of any
such interest.
   E.   Interest In Business Entity Doing Business With City; Disclosure:
      1.   Every appointed or elected officer or employee who is an officer,
director, agent, employee or owner of a substantial interest in any business
entity which does or anticipates doing business with the City, in which he is
an appointed or elected officer or employee, shall publicly disclose to the
members of the City Council, of which he is a member or by which he is
employed, immediately prior to any discussion by such City Council concerning
matters relating to such business entity, the nature of his interest in that
business entity.
      2.   The disclosure statement shall be entered in the minutes of the
meeting.
      3.   Disclosure by a City employee under this subsection is satisfied if
the employee makes the disclosure in the manner required by subsection D of
this section and Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1305. (1997 Code)
   F.   Council To Define Powers And Duties: The duties, powers and privileges
of all City officers shall be defined by the City Council. (1989 Code § 2-1-13,
10-4-1988)
1-7-5: VACANCIES:
If a vacancy shall occur in the Office of City Recorder, City Treasurer, City
Administrator, Chief of Police, Fire Chief or Public Works Director, the Mayor,
by and with the consent of the City Council, shall fill such vacancy by
appointment for the unexpired term. All appointed officers shall continue in
office until their successors are appointed and qualified. (1989 Code § 2-1-5C,
10-4-1988; amd. 1997 Code)
1-7-6: EXPIRATION OF TERM; DELIVERY OF RECORDS:
Every officer and employee of the City, upon expiration of his term for any
cause whatsoever shall, within five (5) days after notification and request,
deliver to the City all books and records which may be the property of the
City. (1989 Code § 2-1-14, 10-4-1988; amd. 1997 Code)
ARTICLE A. CITY RECORDER
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Duties And Responsibilities
1-7A-2: Annual Report
1-7A-3: Maintenance Of Files
1-7A-4: Deputy Recorder; Clerks
1-7A-1: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Bond Required: The City Recorder shall, before entering upon the duties
of his office, execute and file with the City Treasurer a corporate surety bond
in a sum to be fixed by resolution of the City Council. (1989 Code § 2-4-12,
10-4-1988)
   B.   Ex Officio Auditor: The City Recorder shall be the ex officio Auditor
of the City. (1989 Code § 2-4-10, 10-4-1988)
   C.   General: The City Recorder shall keep his office at the place of
meeting of the City Council or at some other place convenient thereto as the
City Council may direct. He shall keep the Corporate Seal and all papers and
records of the City, and shall keep a record of the proceedings of the City
Council. It shall be the duty of the City Recorder to attend meetings of the
City Council. Copies of all papers filed in his office and transcripts from all
records of the City Council certified by him under the Corporate Seal shall be
evidence in all courts as if the original were produced. (1989 Code § 2-4-1,
10-4-1988)
   D.   Contracts: The City Recorder shall countersign all contracts made on
behalf of the City, and every contract made on behalf of the City or to which
the City is a party shall be void unless signed by the City Recorder. He shall
maintain a record of all contracts, properly indexed, which record shall be
open to the inspection of all interested persons. (1989 Code § 2-4-2, 10-4-
1988)
   E.   Books And Records Of Funds: The City Recorder shall maintain or cause
to be maintained the general books for each fund of the City and all subsidiary
and detailed records relating thereto, including a list of the outstanding
bonds, for what purpose, when and where payable, and the rate of interest each
bond may respectively bear, together with the outstanding amount of each bond.
(1989 Code § 2-4-3, 10-4-1988)
   F.   Claims:
      1.   The City Recorder shall maintain the general books for each fund of
the City and all subsidiary records relating thereto, including a list of the
outstanding bonds, their purpose, amount, terms, date and place payable.
      2.   The City Recorder shall keep accounts with all receiving and
disbursing officers of the City, shall preaudit all claims and demands against
the City before they are allowed, and shall prepare the necessary checks in
payment. Such checks shall include an appropriate certification pursuant to
Utah Code Annotated section
11-1-1, examples of which shall be presented in the Uniform Accounting Manual
for Utah Cities. The City Recorder shall also certify on the voucher or check
copy, as appropriate, that:
         a.   The claim has been preaudited and documented;
         b.   The claim has been approved in one of the following ways:
            (1)   Purchase order directly approved by the City Council;
            (2)   Claim directly approved by the City Council; or
            (3)   Claim approved by the financial officer.
         c.   The claim is within the lawful debt limit of the City; and
         d.   The claim does not overexpend the appropriate departmental budget
established by the City Council. (1997 Code)
   G.   Warrants: In the event the City is without funds on deposit in one of
its appropriate bank accounts with which to pay any lawfully approved claim,
the City Auditor or City Recorder shall draw and sign a warrant upon the City
Treasurer for payment of the claim, said warrant to be tendered to the payee
named thereon. (1989 Code § 2-4-4, 10-4-1988)
   H.   Charge Fees For Copies: The City Recorder shall charge a fee for making
copies of and certifying any of the official records of this office and such
fee shall be paid in advance prior to delivery of any such copy by the person
requesting such services. A schedule of fees shall be promulgated by the City
Recorder. (1989 Code § 2-4-11, 10-4-1988)
1-7A-2: ANNUAL REPORT:
Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the close of each fiscal year 1  the
City Recorder or other delegated person shall present to the City Council an
annual financial report prepared in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles, as prescribed in the Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah
Cities. This requirement may be satisfied by presentation of the audit report
furnished by the independent auditor, if the financial statements included are
appropriately prepared and reviewed with the City Council. Notwithstanding the
acceptability of the audit report furnished by the independent auditor in
substitution for financial statements prepared by an officer of the City, the
City Council has the responsibility for those financial statements. The
independent auditor has the responsibility of reporting whether the City's
financial statements are prepared in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles. Copies of the annual financial report or the audit
report furnished by the independent auditor shall be filed with the State
Auditor and shall be filed as a public document in the office of the City
Recorder. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  1-9-2 of this Title.
1-7A-3: MAINTENANCE OF FILES:
The City Recorder shall maintain the following files in addition to the other
necessary files required by law:
   A.   Three Copies Of Code: Three (3) copies of the compiled and current City
ordinances in book form with all effective ordinances in their title, chapter
and section sequence, plus copies of all codes in book form which have been
adopted.
   B.   Record Of Ordinances And Resolutions: A book kept in chronological
order with record of all resolutions, ordinance changes and ordinances. This
record shall be the original of all resolutions and ordinances signed by the
appropriate City official and attested and sealed with the official City Seal
by the City Recorder and dated with the date of passage. This record shall also
include with each original ordinance an original affidavit of publication by
the publisher or his agent, or if posted, a certificate of posting. All
ordinances shall be given a number in their order of passage followed by their
year of passage.
   C.   Copies Of Effective Ordinances: A file with copies of all effective
ordinances to be sold or otherwise provided to any person who requests a copy
of any ordinance.
   D.   Journal Of Minutes: A journal of all minutes of the City Council
meetings.
   E.   Record Of Contracts: A record of all contracts; with the original
contract to be kept in alphabetical order, with a copy of all contracts to be
kept in chronological order.
   F.   Record Of Recorded Documents: A record of all documents recorded in the
County Recorder's office, to be kept by subject matter and with the original to
be filed chronologically pursuant to the date of recording. (1989 Code § 2-4-8,
10-4-1988)
1-7A-4: DEPUTY RECORDER; CLERKS:
There may be appointed by the Mayor and City Council a Deputy Recorder and
clerks for such office as may be deemed necessary to fully perform the
functions of said office. The City Treasurer may not be appointed as Deputy
Recorder. (1989 Code § 2-4-9, 10-4-1988)
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Duties, Generally
1-7B-2: Receipts For Payment
1-7B-3: Issuance Of Checks
1-7B-4: Warrants; Order Of Payment
1-7B-5: Special Assessments; Application Of Proceeds
1-7B-6: Care And Misuse Of Funds
1-7B-1: DUTIES, GENERALLY:
   A.   Custodian: The City Treasurer is custodian of all monies, bonds or
other securities of the City.
   B.   Responsibilities: The City Treasurer shall:
      1.   Determine the cash requirements of the City and provide for the
investment of all monies by following the procedures and requirements of Utah
Code Annotated title 51, chapter 7, State Money Management Act;
      2.   Receive all public funds and monies payable to the City, within
three (3) business days after collection, including all taxes, licenses, fines
and intergovernmental revenue;
      3.   Keep an accurate detailed account of all monies received under
subsection B2 of this Section, in the manner provided for in Utah Code
Annotated title 10, chapter 6 and as directed by the City Council by ordinance
or resolution; and
      4.   Collect all special taxes and assessments as provided by law and
ordinance. (1997 Code)
1-7B-2: RECEIPTS FOR PAYMENT:
The City Treasurer shall give or cause to be given to every person paying money
to the City treasury a receipt or other evidence of payment therefor,
specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid and shall file the
duplicate of such receipt or other evidence of payment in the office of the
City Auditor or City Recorder. (1989 Code § 2-5-2, 10-4-1988)
1-7B-3: ISSUANCE OF CHECKS:
The City Treasurer, or such other person as the City Council may by resolution
designate, shall sign all checks prepared by the City Auditor or City Recorder.
Prior to affixing the signature, the City Treasurer, or such other person,
shall determine that sufficient funds are on deposit in the appropriate bank
account of the City to honor the check. The City Treasurer shall make provision
for payment of all warrants issued before signing any subsequently issued
checks. (1989 Code § 2-5-3, 10-4-1988)
1-7B-4: WARRANTS; ORDER OF PAYMENT:
The City Treasurer shall pay all warrants in the order in which presented and
as money becomes available for payment thereof in the appropriate funds of the
City. The City Treasurer shall note upon the back of each warrant presented to
him the date of presentation and the date of payment. (1989 Code § 2-5-4, 10-4-
1988)
1-7B-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS:
All monies received by the City Treasurer on any special assessment shall be
applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made.
The money shall be used for the payment of interest and principal on bonds or
other indebtedness issued in settlement thereof, and shall be used for no other
purpose whatever, except as otherwise provided by Utah Code Annotated section
10-6-131. (1989 Code § 2-5-5, 10-4-1988; 1997 Code)
1-7B-6: CARE AND MISUSE OF FUNDS:
The City Treasurer shall keep all monies belonging to the City separate and
distinct from his own money and shall promptly make deposit thereof in the
appropriate bank accounts of the City. Whenever it shall appear to the City
Council that the City Treasurer, or any other officer, is making profit out of
public money or is using the same for any purpose not authorized by law, it
shall suspend him from office. Upon his conviction for such offense, his office
shall become vacant. (1989 Code § 2-5-6, 10-4-1988; 1997 Code)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Creation Of Office
1-7C-2: Legal Advisor
1-7C-3: Represent City
1-7C-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created the office of city attorney. (1989 Code § 2-7-1, 10-4-
1988)
1-7C-2: LEGAL ADVISOR:
   A.   The city attorney shall act as the legal advisor of the city in all
matters pertaining to contracts with or by the city and on any question of law
arising out of any provisions of this code or otherwise. He shall advise the
mayor and/or city council on such legal questions as may arise in relation to
the business of the city, and shall report, at any time as the mayor or city
council may direct, upon any matters in his hands, which may be necessary for
their information.
   B.   The city attorney shall advise any city council member on such legal
questions as may arise in relation to the business of the city when the council
member has first consulted with the mayor, or mayor pro tem in the absence of
the mayor, unless the legal question is regarding the competency of the mayor.
(Ord. 2010-03, 2-2-2010)
1-7C-3: REPRESENT CITY:
It shall be the duty of the city attorney to appear and represent the city in
all suits that may be brought in any court of record or otherwise, in which the
city may be plaintiff or defendant, or in any manner interested, and to
prosecute or defend such suit and protect the interests of the city as the
circumstances may require. (1989 Code § 2-7-3, 10-4-1988)
ARTICLE D. ADDITIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE POSITIONS
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Creation
1-7D-2: Appointment
1-7D-3: Duties
1-7D-4: Bond
1-7D-1: CREATION:
The city hereby elects to create additional administrative positions pursuant
to Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-916, the offices of public works director
and recreation director. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-2-2010)
1-7D-2: APPOINTMENT:
In each of the posts created by this article, on or before the first Monday in
February following a municipal election, the mayor, with the advice and consent
of the city council, may appoint qualified persons to the offices of public
works director and recreation director. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-2-2010)
1-7D-3: DUTIES:
The duties of public works director and recreation director may be such as
determined by the mayor and the city council by either adoption of an
ordinance, resolution or approval of a job description. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-2-
2010)
1-7D-4: BOND:
The public works director and recreation director may be required to obtain a
bond in an amount to be determined by the mayor and city council in accordance
with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-2-2010)
CHAPTER 8
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Conducted According To State Statute
1-8-2: Primary Election
1-8-3: Campaign Finance Disclosure
1-8-4: Political Activity
1-8-5: Filing Fee Or Petition For Candidates For Mayor And City Council
1-8-1: CONDUCTED ACCORDING TO STATE STATUTE:
Election for mayor and council members shall be conducted according to the
municipal election section of Utah Code Annotated sections 20A-9-404(1) and
(2). (Ord. 95-3-21, 3-21-1995)
1-8-2: PRIMARY ELECTION:
This chapter provides for the candidates for mayor and council members to be
nominated at a primary election, if required. A primary election will be held
only when the number of candidates filing for an office exceeds twice the
number to be elected. The candidates nominated at the primary election, plus
candidates that were not required to run in the primary, are to be placed on
the November ballot. (Ord. 95-3-21, 3-21-1995)
1-8-3: CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE:
   A.   General: All candidates for elective municipal office shall comply with
the campaign finance disclosure requirements set forth in this section.
   B.   Definitions:
   CANDIDATE: Any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective
office of the city; or is nominated by a committee, party, or petition; or
received contributions or made expenditures or consents to another person
receiving contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing about
such person's nomination or election to such office; or causes on his/her
behalf, any written material or advertisement to be printed, published,
broadcast, distributed or disseminated which indicates an intention to seek
such office.
   CONTRIBUTION: When done for political purposes, monetary and nonmonetary
contributions such as in-kind contributions, contributions of tangible things,
or anything of value given to a candidate. Contributions shall not include
personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering
their time on behalf of a candidate.
   EXPENDITURE: Any disbursement from contributions, receipts, or from an
account described in subsection F of this section, such as a purchase, payment,
donation, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, gift of money or anything of
value made for political purposes or an express, legally enforceable contract,
promise, or agreement to make any purchase, payment, donation, distribution,
loan, advance, deposit, gift of money, or anything of value for a political
purpose.
   C.   Filing Of Disclosure Reports: Each candidate who is not eliminated at a
municipal primary election shall file with the city recorder a dated and signed
campaign financial statement which complies with this chapter.
   D.   Time Of Filing: The statements required by this chapter shall be filed
no later than seven (7) days before the day on which the municipal general
election is held and no later than thirty (30) days following the day on which
the municipal general election is held. Candidates who are eliminated at the
primary election shall file a report thirty (30) days after the day on which
the primary election is held. The statements required by this chapter are
considered filed if they are received in the Sunset City recorder's office by
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the date they are due.
   E.   Contents Of Statement: The statements shall include contributions
received and expenditures made up to and including five (5) days before the
campaign finance statement is due, excluding a contribution or expenditure
previously reported as follows:
      1.   A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00)
received by the candidate, and the name of the donor;
      2.   An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or
less received by the candidate; and
      3.   A list of each expenditure made for a political purpose and the
recipient of each expense.
   F.   Separate Account: All contributions related to the candidate's
candidacy shall be deposited into a separate campaign account in a financial
institution and shall not be deposited into or mingled with a personal or
business account.
   G.   Unknown Or Above Limit Contributions: Within thirty (30) days after
receiving a contribution that is cash or a negotiable instrument, exceeds the
reporting limit, and is from a donor whose name is unknown, a candidate shall
disburse the amount of the contribution to the treasurer of Sunset for deposit
into the city's general fund or to an organization that is exempt from federal
income taxation under section 501(c)(3), internal revenue code.
   H.   Public Information: The statements required by this section shall be
public documents and shall be available for public inspection and copying
during regular business hours. Appropriate costs may be assessed pursuant to
the provisions of government records access and management act.
   I.   Penalty For Noncompliance: Any candidate who fails to comply with the
provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 2015-02, 5-19-2015)
1-8-4: POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section:
   CONTRIBUTION: A gift, subscription, donation, unpaid or partially unpaid
loan, advance or deposit of money or anything of value to a candidate, a
candidate's personal campaign committee, an office holder, or a party
committee; compensation paid for personal services rendered without charge to a
candidate, the candidate's personal campaign committee, or an office holder; or
goods or services provided at less than fair market value to or for the benefit
of a candidate, the candidate's personal campaign committee, or an office
holder.
   ELECTIVE OFFICE: The office of mayor or council member.
   EMPLOYEE: A person who is not an elected officer who is employed on a full
or part time basis by Sunset City, including volunteer firefighters, or by the
Sunset City community development and renewal agency under title 17C, limited
purpose local government entities - community development and renewal agencies.
   WORKING HOURS: Occurring at any time when an officer or employee is:
      1.   Acting within the course and scope of employment; or
      2.   Scheduled to work, unless the officer or employee is off on any type
of approved leave.
"Working hours" shall not include a lunch break afforded to the officer or
employee, when taken away from the officer's or employee's place of employment.
   B.   Purpose: It is the intent of this provision to regulate certain
political activity of city officers or employees in order to promote the
efficiency and effectiveness of the city government, the avoidance of conflicts
of interest and the unreasonable disruption of city operations, the maintenance
of good working relationships, the undivided loyalty of officers and employees
and the integrity of public service. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to restrict the right of an employee to hold membership in, and
support, a political party, to vote as he or she chooses, to express his or her
personal opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to make voluntary
contributions to a party or candidate, to actively participate in a political
campaign, to maintain political neutrality and to attend political meetings
after working hours.
   C.   Restricted Activities: No officer or employee of the city shall:
      1.   Engage in any political activity during working hours, or while in a
city uniform or city vehicle; or while at his or her place of employment within
the city;
      2.   Use, or allow to be used, any city equipment while engaged in any
political activity;
      3.   Directly or indirectly coerce, command or advise another municipal
officer or employee to pay, lend or contribute part of the officer's or
employee's salary or compensation, or anything else of value to a political
party, committee, organization, agency or person for political purposes;
      4.   Attempt to make another officer's or employee's personnel status
dependent on the officer's or employee's support or lack of support of a
political party, affiliation, opinion, committee, organization, agency or
person engaged in political activity.
   D.   Supervisory And Management Positions: No officer or employee who is in
a supervisory or management position shall solicit, or be in any manner
concerned in soliciting, any assessment, subscription, contribution or
political service, whether voluntary or involuntary, related to any political
purpose whatsoever from any city officer or employee who is directly supervised
by the requesting officer or employee.
   E.   Nonelective Not To Hold Elective Office: No nonelective officer or
employee of the city shall hold elective office during his or her employment or
hold other appointive office during his or her employment, except as an
assigned part of that employment. No nonelective officer or employee of the
city shall hold a city elected office.
   F.   Declarations Of Candidacy For City Elective Office: Neither the filing
of a declaration of candidacy, nor a leave of absence approved under subsection
G of this section, may be used as the basis for an adverse employment action,
including discipline or termination, against the officer or employee.
   G.   Leaves Of Absence:
      1.   A nonelective officer or employee who has filed a declaration of
candidacy shall be given a leave of absence without pay for the period of time
between the primary election and the general election and shall use any
available vacation leave to engage in campaign activities.
      2.   If a nonelective officer or employee is elected to a public office,
the officer or employee shall be given a leave of absence without pay for the
time during which the employee receives compensation for service in the public
office and use any vacation or other leave available to serve in the public
office. (Ord. 2009-08, 7-14-2009)
1-8-5: FILING FEE OR PETITION FOR CANDIDATES FOR MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   A thirty five dollar ($35.00) filing fee is hereby established for the
office of mayor and city council member.
   B.   The filing fee is to be paid at the time of filing of candidacy. This
filing fee shall be refundable only if it is determined that the person filing
is not qualified to be a candidate, or who is found to have improperly filed.
   C.   As an alternative to paying a filing fee, a prospective candidate may
file a petition signed by twenty five (25) registered and valid Sunset City
voters in support of their candidacy. (Ord. 2011-03, 6-7-2011)
CHAPTER 9
BUDGET AND FISCAL PROCEDURE
SECTION:
1-9-1: Conform To State Law
1-9-2: Fiscal Year
1-9-3: Preparation
1-9-4: Public Inspection
1-9-5: Public Hearing
1-9-6: Adoption
1-9-1: CONFORM TO STATE LAW:
The Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities shall be followed in the
City. (1989 Code § 4-1-1, 7-18-1989)
1-9-2: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year shall begin July 1 and end June 30 of each year. (1989 Code §
4-1-2, 7-18-1989)
1-9-3: PREPARATION:
On or before May 1 of every year, the budget officers shall prepare for the
ensuing year and file with the City Council a tentative budget for each fund
for which a budget may be required by law. A tentative cash budget for each
utility fund and a tentative cash budget for such other special funds shall be
prepared, as the City Council may require. (1989 Code § 4-1-3, 7-18-1989; 1997
Code)
1-9-4: PUBLIC INSPECTION:
The tentative budget, as amended by the City Council, and all supporting
schedules and data, shall be a public record in the office of the City
Recorder, available for public inspection for a period of at least ten (10)
days prior to the adoption of the final budget. (1989 Code § 4-1-4, 7-18-1989)
1-9-5: PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   Notice: At the meeting of the City Council at which the tentative
budget is adopted, the City Council shall determine the time and place of a
public hearing to consider the adoption of the budget, and shall order that
notice thereof be published at least seven (7) days prior thereto, by
publication in at least one issue of a newspaper published in the City. (1989
Code § 4-1-5, 7-18-1989)
   B.   Interested Persons Heard: At the time and place so advertised or any
time or place to which public hearing may be adjourned, the City Council shall
hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested
persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against the estimates
of revenue and expenditures or any item thereof in any fund. (1989 Code § 4-1-
6, 7-18-1989)
   C.   May Continue Review: After the conclusion of the public hearing, the
City Council may continue its review of the tentative budget and may insert
such new items or may increase or decrease such items of expenditure as were
the proper subject of consideration at said public hearing, except as
restricted by law. (1989 Code § 4-1-7, 7-18-1989)
1-9-6: ADOPTION:
On or before June 30 of each fiscal year, the City Council shall, by written
resolution, adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. A copy of the final
budget shall be certified and filed with the State Auditor. (1989 Code § 4-1-7,
7-18-1989)
CHAPTER 10
PROPERTY TAX LEVY
SECTION:
1-10-1: Statute Adopted By Reference
1-10-1: STATUTE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The provisions of Utah Code Annotated sections 10-6-120 and 10-6-133, Property
Tax Levy, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 11
SUNSET JUSTICE COURT
SECTION:
1-11-1: Creation
1-11-2: Contract With Qualified Individual
1-11-3: Facilities
1-11-4: Clerical And Staff Personnel
1-11-5: Court Clerk Duties
1-11-6: City Attorney; Appeals
1-11-1: CREATION:
The city council hereby creates a justice court under Utah Code Annotated,
title 78, chapter 5, effective July 1, 1989, and terminates the city's
representation under the circuit court act. (Ord. 2-8-1, 6-20-1989; amd. 1997
Code)
1-11-2: CONTRACT WITH QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL:
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall hereby
contract with a qualified individual to sit as Sunset justice court judge for a
period of one year, with said term terminating June 30 and every June 30
thereof. The city attorney, at the direction of the mayor and city council,
shall prepare a contract to be entered into between the city and the justice
court judge covering the length of time and other duties and services that the
justice court judge will provide to the city, and the remuneration to be paid
thereon. (Ord. 2-8-1, 6-20-1989)
1-11-3: FACILITIES:
The city, in order to maintain a justice court, shall provide suitable and
adequate facilities for the conduct of judicial business, as well as any basic
office supplies as may be necessary for the operation of this justice court.
Said facilities are hereby designated as a city office building, with said
address to be 200 West 1300 North, Sunset, Utah. (Ord. 2008-01, 2-5-2008)
1-11-4: CLERICAL AND STAFF PERSONNEL:
The city shall provide the necessary clerical and staff personnel to support
the operation and function of the justice court. Said employees shall be paid
by the city, and shall be located in the city office building specified in
section
1-11-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2-8-1, 6-20-1989)
1-11-5: COURT CLERK DUTIES:
The duties of the justice court clerk shall be as follows:
   A.   Collection Of Fines: Be responsible for the collection of all fines,
fees and forfeitures as may be imposed by Utah Code Annotated and/or adopted by
the city council.
   B.   Post Schedule: Conspicuously post a schedule of times when the justice
court shall sit in the city and conduct its normal business proceedings.
   C.   Establish Accounting System: Establish an accounting system for the
proper receipt, verification and transmittal of the various fines, fees and
forfeitures to be handled by the justice court.
   D.   Familiar With Duties: Become familiar with clerical duties, as may be
outlined by the justice court act, and any specific assignments pertaining to
said department operating as the justice court.
   E.   Record Storage System: Establish a number, filing and record storage
system for justice court cases.
   F.   Obtain Rules Of Practice: Obtain and become familiar with the rules of
practice of the justice court as may be promulgated from time to time by the
Utah judicial council or any other group.
   G.   Supply Of Forms: Secure a supply of forms pertaining to the justice
court. (Ord. 2-8-1, 6-20-1989)
1-11-6: CITY ATTORNEY; APPEALS:
The city attorney shall represent the interest of the city in any appeals from
the justice court to the circuit court involving violations of city ordinances.
(Ord. 2-8-1, 6-20-1989)
CHAPTER 12
PUBLIC RECORDS MAINTENANCE AND DISPOSITION
SECTION:
1-12-1: Definitions
1-12-2: Records Committee Created
1-12-3: Classification, Authority And Duties
1-12-4: Disposition Of Records
1-12-5: Disposal By City Agency Prohibited
1-12-6: Penalty
1-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations shall have the meaning prescribed to them below. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words
in the singular number include the plural:
   PUBLIC OFFICES AND PUBLIC OFFICERS: Respectfully, the offices and officers
of any court, department, City Council, board, commission, institution or other
agency of the City.
   PUBLIC RECORDS: Includes all books, papers, letters, documents, maps, plans,
photographs, sound recordings, management information systems or other
documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or
received and retained by any City office as may be required under State law or
in connection with the transaction of public business by public offices and
agencies. The term "public records" does not include preliminary drafts or
personal notes made or received and retained by the public agency in the
ordinary course of business, unless, in the opinion of the Records Committee, a
public interest in subjecting these records to the classification procedure of
this Chapter clearly outweighs the public interest in exempting them from
classification, unless records or data, or class of data in these records is
otherwise controlled by law.
   RECORDS COMMITTEE: The Sunset City Council, Mayor, and City Attorney. (Ord.
2-1-15, 1-21-1992; 1997 Code)
1-12-2: RECORDS COMMITTEE CREATED:
There is created a Records Committee, composed of the Mayor, City Council and
City Attorney. The Records Committee shall meet to review all policies and
programs for the collection, classification, retention, disclosure and disposal
of City records, as needed. (Ord. 2-1-15, 1-21-1992; 1997 Code)
1-12-3: CLASSIFICATION, AUTHORITY AND DUTIES:
The Records Committee has the following classification, authority and duties:
   A.   Review Designations: To review the designations made by responsible
authority and to reclassify any data on individuals or systems of data on
individuals maintained by City agencies upon petition by a reasonable
authority, by the individual who is the subject of the data or any interested
party, except as otherwise provided by law;
   B.   Initiate Designations: To initiate at its own discretion the
designation and classification of data on individuals or systems of data on
individuals maintained by City agencies, except as otherwise provided by law;
and
   C.   Adopt Rules And Procedures: To adopt rules regulating its own meetings
and procedures consistent with State statute on open and public meetings, and
any other applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 2-1-15, 1-21-1992)
1-12-4: DISPOSITION OF RECORDS:
Every custodian of City records shall submit to the Records Committee, in
accordance with the standards established by said Records Committee, schedules
proposing the length of time each record series should be retained. No record
series may be destroyed without prior approval of the Records Committee. The
Records Committee shall determine whether the records in question are
administrative, legal, physical, research or of historical value. Those records
unanimously determined to be of no administrative, legal, physical, research or
historical value shall be disposed of by any method the Records Committee may
specify. A list of all records so disposed of, together with a statement
certifying compliance with this Chapter, signed by the members of the Records
Committee, shall be filed and preserved in the office of which the records were
drawn and the files of each of the other officers who are signatories to the
certificate. Records having future value may be maintained if unanimously
agreed upon by the members of the Records Committee. Public records in the
custody of the City may be disposed of upon a similar determination by the
Records Committee and the head of the agency from which the records were
received. (Ord. 2-1-15, 1-21-1992)
1-12-5: DISPOSAL BY CITY AGENCY PROHIBITED:
No public records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by any City
agency unless it is determined by the Records Committee that the record has no
further administrative, legal, physical, research or historical value. (Ord. 2-
1-15, 1-21-1992)
1-12-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Violation: Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   City Employee: Any City employee who wilfully violates any provision of
this Chapter or the rules promulgated under this Chapter is subject to
suspension without pay or discharge after a hearing as provided by law. (Ord.
2-1-15, 1-21-1992; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 13
RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT ACT
SECTION:
1-13-1: Statute Adopted By Reference
1-13-1: STATUTE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah Government Records Access And Management Act (title 63,
chapter 2), as amended, are hereby adopted by the City. Any and all violations
thereof shall be considered violations of this Chapter, and each such violation
shall subject the violator thereof to penalty provisions under this Chapter if
proceeded hereunder. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 14
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES
SECTION:
1-14-1: Purpose
1-14-2: Definitions
1-14-3: Guidelines
1-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide advisory guidelines for the city to
assist the city in identifying actions that involve physical taking or exaction
of private real property that may have constitutional taking issues. (Ord.
2003-02, 2-18-2003)
1-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein:
   CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES: Actions involving the physical or regulatory
taking of private real property by the city that might require compensation to
a private real property owner under:
   A.   The fifth or fourteenth amendment of the constitution of the United
States;
   B.   Article I, section 22 of the Utah constitution; or
   C.   Any recent court rulings governing the physical or regulatory taking of
private real property by a governmental entity. (Ord. 2003-02, 2-18-2003)
1-14-3: GUIDELINES:
The following guidelines shall be considered by the city when taking any action
that might result in the physical or regulatory taking of private real
property:
   A.   Identification: The city should review the following to determine and
identify whether a proposed governmental action raises constitutional taking
issues:
      1.   Does the action result in a permanent physical occupation of private
property?
      2.   Does the action require a property owner to dedicate property or
grant an easement to the city?
      3.   Does the action deprive the property owner of all economically
viable uses of the property?
      4.   Does the action have a severe impact on the property owner's
economic interest?
      5.   Does the action deny a fundamental attribute of ownership?
   B.   Analysis: If the city determines that a governmental action involves
constitutional taking issues, the proposed action should be reviewed by the
city to analyze the possible taking and to determine the action to be taken. In
reviewing the proposed action, the following factors may be analyzed:
      1.   The effect the potential taking would have on the use or value of
the private property;
      2.   The likelihood that the action may result in a constitutional
taking;
      3.   Any alternatives to the proposed action that would fulfill the
city's lawful objectives and reduce the risk of a constitutional taking;
      4.   The cost to the city for payment of compensation if a taking is
determined;
      5.   The governmental interest involved and its nexus to the potential
taking; and
      6.   If the action is roughly proportionate or reasonably related to the
impact of any proposed development.
   C.   Appeals: Any owner of private property whose interest in the property
is subject to a physical or regulatory taking by the city, pursuant to a final
and authoritative decision or action of the city, may appeal the city's
decision or action by filing a written notice of appeal and statement of the
grounds for the appeal in the city recorder's office within thirty (30) days
from the date of the city's decision or action. The city council or its
designee shall hear all evidence regarding the appeal and render its decision
and findings in writing within fourteen (14) days from the date the appeal was
filed. If the city fails to hear and decide the appeal within fourteen (14)
days, the city's decision or action is presumed to be approved.
   D.   Limitations: The guidelines set forth herein are advisory only and
shall not be construed to expand nor limit the scope of the city's liability
for a constitutional taking. The city shall have no legal liability to any
person, firm or entity of any nature whatsoever and a court may not impose
liability upon the city for failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2003-02, 2-18-2003)
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL PROCEDURE
SECTION:
1-15-1: Right Of Appeal
1-15-2: Appeal Procedure
1-15-3: Appeal Board
1-15-4: Board Decision
1-15-5: Court Of Appeal
1-15-1: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
No employee except officers appointed by the mayor or other person or body
exercising executive power, the police chief, the deputy police chief, the fire
chief, deputy or assistant fire chief, heads of departments, superintendents,
probationary employee, part time employee, or a seasonal employee shall be
discharged, suspended without pay for more than two (2) days or involuntarily
transferred to a position with less remuneration because of his politics or
religious belief or incident to, or through changes, either in the elective
officers, governing body or heads of departments. In all cases where any
employee except officers appointed by the mayor or other person or body
exercising executive power, the police chief, the deputy police chief, the fire
chief, deputy or assistant fire chief, heads of departments, superintendents,
probationary employee, part time employee, or a seasonal employee is
discharged, suspended without pay for more than two (2) days, or involuntarily
transferred from one position to another for any reason, the employee shall
have the right to appeal such discharge, suspension or transfer in accordance
with this chapter. Officers appointed by the mayor or other person or body
exercising executive power, the police chief, the deputy police chief, the fire
chief, deputy or assistant fire chief, heads of departments, superintendents,
probationary employee, part time employee, or a seasonal employee are employees
at will and shall have no rights of appeal for any discharge, suspension or
transfer. (Ord. 2004-05, 8-17-2004)
1-15-2: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
All administrative appeals shall be processed according to the following
procedure:
   A.   The appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of the appeal with
the city recorder within ten (10) days after the discharge, suspension or
transfer. Upon the filing of such appeal, the city recorder shall forthwith
refer a copy of the same to the appeal board. Upon receipt of the referral from
the city recorder, the appeal board shall forthwith commence its investigation,
take and receive evidence and fully hear and determine the matter which relates
to the cause for the discharge, suspension or transfer.
   B.   The employee shall be entitled to appear in person and to be
represented by counsel, to have a public hearing, to confront the witness whose
testimony is to be considered and to examine the evidence to be considered by
the appeal board.
   C.   The appeals board shall sustain the discharge, suspension or transfer
if it is presented substantial evidence that cause existed for the discharge,
suspension or transfer. (Ord. 2004-05, 8-17-2004)
1-15-3: APPEAL BOARD:
There is hereby created an appeal board to consist of the city council which
shall hear the appeal. (Ord. 2004-05, 8-17-2004)
1-15-4: BOARD DECISION:
The decision of the appeal board shall be by secret ballot, and shall be
certified to the city recorder within fifteen (15) days from the date the
matter was referred to it or within any continued time period. The board may,
as part of its decision, provide that the employee shall receive his salary for
the period of time during which he is discharged, suspended or any deficiency
in salary for the period he was transferred for less remuneration. In no case
shall the employee be discharged, suspended for more than two (2) days without
pay or transferred, where an appeal is taken, except upon the concurrence of at
least a majority of the membership of the governing body of Sunset City. (Ord.
2004-05, 8-17-2004)
1-15-5: COURT OF APPEAL:
A final action or order of the appeal board may be appealed to the court of
appeal by filing with that court a notice of appeal within thirty (30) days
after the issuance of the final action or order of the appeal board. (Ord.
2004-05, 8-17-2004)
CHAPTER 16
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
1-16-1: Created
1-16-2: Purpose
1-16-3: Agency Board
1-16-4: Powers And Duties
1-16-1: CREATED:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 17B-4-201(1) of the Utah redevelopment
agencies act (the "act"), there is created the Sunset City redevelopment agency
(the "agency"), a separate body corporate and politic, and a political
subdivision of the state of Utah, the geographic boundaries of which are
coterminous with the corporate boundaries of the city, as provided in section
17B-4-201(1) of the act. (Ord. 2005-04, 2-23-2005)
1-16-2: PURPOSE:
The agency is created to undertake, where necessary or desirable,
redevelopment, economic development and/or education housing development within
the city community and to that end, shall possess all the powers bestowed upon
it by the Utah state legislature under the provisions of the act. (Ord. 2005-
04, 2-23-2005)
1-16-3: AGENCY BOARD:
The governing board of the agency (the "agency board") shall consist of the
sitting members of the Sunset City council, as required by section 17B-4-203(1)
of the act. (Ord. 2005-04, 2-23-2005)
1-16-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The agency shall have power to retain outside consultants, attorneys
and staff, but may employ the city staff for its day to day operations.
   B.   The city staff is hereby directed and authorized:
      1.   To prepare and to file with the lieutenant governor's office, within
ten (10) days after the adoption date hereof, a notice of the adoption of
ordinance 2005-04, with a copy thereof, as required by Utah Code Annotated
section 17B-4-201(2)(a); and
      2.   Upon receipt of the lieutenant governor's certificate of
incorporation, to file, within twenty (20) days of such receipt, notice of the
agency's creation and incorporation, together with the certificate of
incorporation, with the state tax commission and the state auditor. (Ord. 2005-
04, 2-23-2005)
CHAPTER 17
PROCUREMENT PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-17-1: Purposes Of Chapter
1-17-2: Definitions
1-17-3: Administration; Procurement Officer
1-17-4: Procurement Requirements
1-17-5: Public Notice Of Procurement Process Or Sole Source Procurement
1-17-6: Purpose Of Specifications
1-17-7: Small Purchases
1-17-8: Invitation For Bids; Contents; Notice
1-17-9: Bid Opening And Acceptance
1-17-10: Correction Or Withdrawal Of Bids; Cancellation Of Award
1-17-11: Evaluation Of Bids; Award; Cancellation; Disqualification
1-17-12: Action When All Bids Are Overbudget
1-17-13: Contracts Awarded By Request For Proposals
1-17-14: Request For Proposals; Notice; Contents
1-17-15: Opening Of Proposals And Acceptance
1-17-16: Discussions; Best And Final Offers
1-17-17: Evaluation Of Proposals; Evaluation
1-17-18: Cost-Benefit Analysis
1-17-19: Sole Source; Award Of Contract Without Competition; Notice
1-17-20: Cancellation And Rejection Of Bids And Proposals
1-17-21: Debarment From Consideration For Award Of Contracts; Causes For
Debarment
1-17-22: Emergency Procurement
1-17-23: Determination Of Nonresponsibility Of Bidder Or Offeror
1-17-24: Bonds Necessary When Contract Is Awarded; Waiver; Action; Attorney Fee
1-17-25: Alternative Methods Of Construction Contracting Management
1-17-26: Drug And Alcohol Testing
1-17-27: Selection Committee For Architect-Engineer Services
1-17-28: Selection As Part Of Design-Build Or Lease
1-17-29: Protest; Time; Authority To Resolve Protest
1-17-30: Decisions Of Department Head To Be In Writing; Effect Of No Writing
1-17-31: Further Appeal Procedures
1-17-32: Application Of Utah Procurement Code And This Chapter
1-17-1: PURPOSES OF CHAPTER:
The underlying purposes and policies of this chapter are:
   A.   To ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all persons who deal with
the procurement system of the city;
   B.   To provide increased economy in city procurement activities; and
   C.   To foster effective broad based competition within the free enterprise
system. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions in section 63G-6a-103 of the Utah procurement code shall apply
to this chapter unless the context herein clearly indicates otherwise. The
provisions of the Utah administrative code under "purchasing" may be consulted
for guidance in interpreting and applying this chapter. The wording and context
of such statutory provisions and administrative regulations shall be modified,
interpreted and applied in such manner as to render the terms thereof
applicable to the city insofar as practicable. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-3: ADMINISTRATION; PROCUREMENT OFFICER:
The department heads and court supervisor shall be the procurement officers for
their departments in the city and shall administer the purchasing system
provided by these procedures. They shall perform the duties and have powers
concerning purchasing matters as follows:
   A.   The department head or court supervisor may, in writing, appoint a
designee within their department of the city to make purchases for their
department within the scope of such appointment and only in the absence of the
department head or court supervisor.
   B.   Administer and maintain the purchasing system and other rules and
regulations established by these procedures. No purchases, including petty cash
purchases, are to be made without the prior knowledge and consent of the
department head, court supervisor or designee. All purchases and petty cash
withdrawals are to be documented on the appropriate forms and are to be
properly receipted for at the point of transaction. The penalty for failure to
comply with this section could be liability for the expenses incurred, as
determined by the governing body of the city.
   C.   A department head or court supervisor may recommend to the city council
such new or revised purchasing rules and regulations as are deemed desirable
and shall interpret day to day the provisions of these procedures.
   D.   Designees may negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the
purchase of supplies, equipment and contractual services.
   E.   The department head, court supervisor or designee shall seek to obtain
as full and open competition as practicable on all purchases under the
circumstances.
   F.   The department head, court supervisor or designee shall keep informed
on current developments in the field of purchasing, i.e., prices, market
conditions, new products, etc.
   G.   The department head or court supervisor shall prescribe and maintain
such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of these procedures and
other rules and regulations.
   H.   The department head, court supervisor or designee shall supervise the
inspection of all supplies and equipment to assure conformance with
specifications.
   I.   The department head or court supervisor shall authorize transfer of
surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed.
   J.   The department head or court supervisor shall maintain a bidder's list,
vendor's catalog file, and other records needed for the efficient operation of
the purchasing system.
   K.   The department head or court supervisor may enter into contracts on
behalf of the city subject to directions, rules and regulations of the
governing body.
   L.   Reference is made to the provisions of Sunset City corporation
personnel policies and procedures. Section 12 entitled "Purchase Orders" and
section 13 entitled "Purchasing Policy" (the "provisions") which provisions are
hereby adopted by reference as part of this chapter. Such provisions shall
govern procurements unless such provisions are in conflict with or do not cover
matters contained in this chapter, in which case this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. 2017-02, 1-17-2017)
1-17-4: PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The city may not obtain a procurement item unless the city complies with the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-5: PUBLIC NOTICE OF PROCUREMENT PROCESS OR SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT:
   A.   When the city issues an invitation for bids, a request for proposals,
or a notice of sole source procurement required to be published in accordance
with this section, the city shall provide public notice that includes:
      1.   An invitation for bids or a request for proposals, the name of the
city;
      2.   An invitation for bids or a request for proposals, information on
how to contact the city in relation to the invitation for bids or request for
proposals;
      3.   A notice of sole source procurement, contact information and other
information relating to contesting, or obtaining additional information in
relation to, the sole source procurement;
      4.   An invitation for bids or a request for proposals, the date of the
opening and closing of the invitation for bids or request for proposals;
      5.   A notice of sole source procurement, the earliest date that the city
may make the sole source procurement;
      6.   Information on how to obtain a copy of the invitation for bids,
request for proposals, or further information related to the sole source
procurement; and
      7.   A general description of the procurement items that will be obtained
through the standard procurement process or sole source procurement.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection D of this section, for an invitation
for bids or a request for proposals, the city shall publish the notice
described in subsection A of this section, using at least one of the following
methods:
      1.   At least seven (7) days before the day of the deadline for
submission of a bid or other response, publish the notice:
         a.   In a newspaper of general circulation in the state; or
         b.   In a newspaper of local circulation in the area:
            (1)   Directly impacted by the procurement; or
            (2)   Over which the city has jurisdiction; or
      2.   At least seven (7) consecutive days before the day of the deadline
for submission of a bid or other response, publish notice:
         a.   On the main website for the city; or
         b.   On a state website.
   C.   Except as provided in subsection D of this section, for a sole source
procurement for which notice is required to be published in accordance with
this section, the city shall publish the notice described in subsection A of
this section, using at least one of the following methods:
      1.   At least seven (7) days before the day on which the city makes the
sole source procurement, publish the notice:
         a.   In a newspaper of general circulation in the state; or
         b.   In a newspaper of local circulation in the area:
            (1)   Directly impacted by the procurement; or
            (2)   Over which the city has jurisdiction; or
      2.   At least seven (7) consecutive days before the day on which the city
makes the sole source procurement, publish the notice:
         a.   On the main website for the city; or
         b.   On a state website.
   D.   The city may reduce the seven (7) day period described in subsection B
or C of this section, if the procurement officer or the procurement officer's
designee signs a written statement that:
      1.   States that a shorter time is needed; and
      2.   As it relates to an invitation for bids or a request for proposals,
determines that competition from multiple sources may be obtained within the
shorter period of time.
   E.   The city shall make a copy of an invitation for bids or a request for
proposals available for public inspection at the city hall or on the website
described in subsection B2 of this section.
   F.   The city, when making a sole source procurement, shall make a copy of
information related to the sole source procurement available for public
inspection at the city hall or on the website described in subsection C2 of
this section. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-6: PURPOSE OF SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   All specifications shall seek to promote the overall economy and best
use for purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the needs of
the city and may not be unduly restrictive.
   B.   The requirements of this section regarding the purposes and
nonrestrictiveness of specifications shall apply to all specifications,
including those prepared by architects, engineers, designers, and draftsmen for
public contracts. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-7: SMALL PURCHASES:
   A.   As used in this section:
      1.   "Annual cumulative threshold" means the maximum total annual amount,
established under subsection B1a of this section that the city may expend to
obtain procurement items from the same source under this section.
      2.   "Individual procurement threshold" means the maximum amount,
established under subsection B1b of this section, for which the city may
purchase a procurement item under this section.
      3.   "Single procurement aggregate threshold" means the maximum total
amount, established under subsection B1c of this section that the city may
expend to obtain multiple procurement items from one source at one time under
this section.
   B.   The city council may make rules governing small purchases, including:
      1.   Establishing expenditure thresholds including:
         a.   An annual cumulative threshold;
         b.   An individual procurement threshold; and
         c.   A single procurement aggregate threshold;
      2.   Establishing procurement requirements relating to the thresholds
described in subsection B1 of this section; and
      3.   The use of electronic, telephone, or written quotes.
   C.   Expenditures made under this section by the city may not exceed the
threshold, unless the mayor gives written authorization to exceed the threshold
that includes the reasons for exceeding the threshold.
   D.   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, the city:
      1.   May not use the small purchase standard procurement process
described in this section for ongoing, continuous, and regularly scheduled
procurements that exceed the annual cumulative threshold; and
      2.   Shall make its ongoing, continuous, and regularly scheduled
procurements that exceed the annual cumulative threshold through a contract
awarded through another standard procurement process described in this chapter.
   E.   This section does not prohibit regularly scheduled payments for a
procurement item obtained under another provision of this chapter.
   F.   It is unlawful for a person to intentionally or knowingly divide
procurement into one or more smaller procurements with the intent to make
procurement:
      1.   Qualify as a small purchase, if, before dividing the procurement, it
would not have qualified as a small purchase; or
      2.   Meet a threshold established by rule if, before dividing the
procurement, it would not have met the threshold.
   G.   A division of a procurement that is prohibited under subsection F of
this section includes doing any of the following with the intent or knowledge
described in subsection F of this section:
      1.   Making two (2) or more separate purchases;
      2.   Dividing an invoice or purchase order into two (2) or more invoices
or purchase orders; or
      3.   Making smaller purchases over a period of time.
   H.   A person who violates subsection F of this section is subject to the
criminal penalties described in section 63G-6a-408(8)(b), Utah code. (Ord.
2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-8: INVITATION FOR BIDS; CONTENTS; NOTICE:
   A.   The bidding standard procurement process begins when the city issues an
invitation for bids.
   B.   An invitation for bids shall:
      1.   State the period of time during which bids will be accepted;
      2.   Describe the manner in which a bid shall be submitted;
      3.   State the place where a bid shall be submitted; and
      4.   Include, or incorporate by reference:
         a.   A description of the procurement items sought;
         b.   The objective criteria that will be used to evaluate the bids;
and
         c.   The required contractual terms and conditions.
   C.   The city shall publish an invitation for bids in accordance with the
requirements of section 63G-6a-406, Utah code. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-9: BID OPENING AND ACCEPTANCE:
   A.   Bids shall be opened:
      1.   Publicly, except as provided herein;
      2.   In the presence of one or more witnesses, unless an electronic bid
opening process is used where bidders may see the opening of the bid
electronically; and
      3.   At the time and place indicated in the invitation for bids.
   B.   Bids shall be accepted unconditionally, without alteration or
correction, except as otherwise authorized by this chapter.
   C.   The procurement officer shall reject a bid that is not responsive or
responsible.
      1.   A bid that is not responsive includes a bid that:
         a.   Is conditional;
         b.   Attempts to modify the bid requirements;
         c.   Contains additional terms or conditions; or
         d.   Fails to conform with the requirements or specifications of the
invitation for bids.
      2.   A bid that is not responsible includes a bid where the procurement
officer reasonably concludes that the bidder or an employee, agent, or
subcontractor of the bidder, at any tier, is unable to satisfactorily fulfill
the bid requirements.
   D.   The city may not accept a bid after the time for submission of a bid
has expired.
   E.   The procurement officer shall:
      1.   Record the name of each bidder and the amount of each bid; and
      2.   After the bid is awarded, make the information described in
subsection E1 of this section available for public disclosure. (Ord. 2014-08,
8-5-2014)
1-17-10: CORRECTION OR WITHDRAWAL OF BIDS; CANCELLATION OF AWARD:
   A.   Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids, or the
cancellation of an award or a contract that is based on an unintentionally
erroneous bid, may be made.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the following changes may
not be made to a bid after the bid opening:
      1.   Changes in bid pricing;
      2.   Changes in the cost evaluation formula; or
      3.   Changes in other provisions that are prejudicial to fair competition
or to the interest of the city.
   C.   A decision to permit the correction or withdrawal of a bid or the
cancellation of an award or a contract under subsection A of this section shall
be supported in a written document, signed by the procurement officer. (Ord.
2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-11: EVALUATION OF BIDS; AWARD; CANCELLATION; DISQUALIFICATION:
   A.   The city shall evaluate each bid using the objective criteria described
in the invitation for bids, which may include:
      1.   Experience;
      2.   Performance ratings;
      3.   Inspection;
      4.   Testing;
      5.   Quality;
      6.   Workmanship;
      7.   Time and manner of delivery;
      8.   References;
      9.   Financial stability;
      10.   Cost;
      11.   Suitability for a particular purpose; or
      12.   Other objective criteria specified in the invitation for bids.
   B.   Criteria not described in the invitation for bids may not be used to
evaluate a bid.
   C.   The city shall:
      1.   Award the contract as soon as practicable to:
         a.   The lowest responsive and responsible bidder who meets the
objective criteria described in the invitation for bids; or
         b.   If, in accordance with subsection D of this section, the city
disqualifies the bidder described in subsection C1a of this section, the next
lowest responsive and responsible bidder who meets the objective criteria
described in the invitation for bids; or
      2.   Cancel the invitation for bids without awarding a contract.
   D.   In accordance with subsection E of this section, the city may
disqualify a bidder for:
      1.   A violation of this chapter;
      2.   A violation of a requirement of the invitation for bids;
      3.   Unlawful or unethical conduct; or
      4.   A change in circumstance that, had the change been known at the time
the bid was submitted, would have caused the bidder to not be the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder who meets the objective criteria described in
the invitation for bids.
   E.   If the city disqualifies a bidder under subsection D of this section,
the city shall:
      1.   Make a written finding, stating the reasons for disqualification;
and
      2.   Provide a copy of the written finding to the disqualified bidder.
   F.   If the city cancels an invitation for bids without awarding a contract,
the city shall make available for public inspection a written justification for
the cancellation. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-12: ACTION WHEN ALL BIDS ARE OVERBUDGET:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, if the city
certifies that all accepted bids exceed available funds and that the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder does not exceed the available funds by more
than five percent (5%), the city may negotiate an adjustment of the bid price
and bid requirements with the lowest responsive and responsible bidder in order
to bring the bid within the amount of available funds.
   B.   The city may not adjust the bid requirements under subsection A of this
section if there is a substantial likelihood that, had the adjustment been
included in the invitation for bids, a person that did not submit a bid would
have submitted a responsive, responsible, and competitive bid. (Ord. 2014-08,
8-5-2014)
1-17-13: CONTRACTS AWARDED BY REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS:
   A.   A request for proposal standard procurement process may be used instead
of bidding if the city determines, in writing, that the request for proposals
standard procurement process will provide the best value to the city.
   B.   The request for proposals standard procurement process is appropriate
to use for:
      1.   The procurement of professional services;
      2.   A design-build procurement;
      3.   When cost is not the most important factor to be considered in
making the selection that is most advantageous to the city; or
      4.   When factors, in addition to cost, are highly significant in making
the selection that is most advantageous to the city. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-14: REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS; NOTICE; CONTENTS:
   A.   The request for proposals standard procurement process begins when the
city issues a request for proposals.
   B.   A request for proposals shall:
      1.   State the period of time during which a proposal will be accepted;
      2.   Describe the manner in which a proposal shall be submitted;
      3.   State the place where a proposal shall be submitted;
      4.   Include, or incorporate by reference:
         a.   A description of the procurement items sought; and
         b.   A description of the subjective and objective criteria that will
be used to evaluate the proposal; and
         c.   The standard contractual terms and conditions required by the
city;
      5.   State the relative weight that will be given to each score awarded
for the criteria described in subsection B4b of this section, including cost;
      6.   State the formula that will be used to determine the score awarded
for the cost of each proposal;
      7.   State that discussions may be conducted with offerors who submit
proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award,
followed by an opportunity to make best and final offers, but that proposals
may be accepted without discussions.
   C.   The city shall publish a request for proposals in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-15: OPENING OF PROPOSALS AND ACCEPTANCE:
   A.   The city shall ensure that proposals are opened in a manner that avoids
disclosing the contents to competing offerors during the evaluation process.
   B.   The city may not accept a proposal:
      1.   After the time for submission of a proposal has expired; or
      2.   That is not responsive to the request for proposals. (Ord. 2014-08,
8-5-2014)
1-17-16: DISCUSSIONS; BEST AND FINAL OFFERS:
   A.   After proposals are received and opened, the city may conduct
discussions with the offerors and allow the offerors to make best and final
offers after the discussions.
   B.   The city shall:
      1.   Ensure that each offeror receives fair and equal treatment with
respect to the other offerors;
      2.   Establish a schedule and procedures for conducting discussions;
      3.   Ensure that information in each proposal and information gathered
during discussions is not shared with other offerors until the contract is
awarded;
      4.   Ensure that auction tactics are not used in the discussion process,
including discussing and comparing the costs and features of other proposals;
and
      5.   Set a common date and time for the submission of best and final
offers.
   C.   If an offeror chooses not to participate in a discussion or does not
make a timely best and final offer, the offer submitted by the offerors before
the conduct of discussions shall be treated as the offeror's best and final
offer. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-17: EVALUATION OF PROPOSALS; EVALUATION:
   A.   Each proposal shall be evaluated using the criteria described in the
request for proposals, which may include:
      1.   Experience;
      2.   Performance ratings;
      3.   Inspection;
      4.   Testing;
      5.   Quality;
      6.   Workmanship;
      7.   Time, manner, or schedule of delivery;
      8.   References;
      9.   Financial stability;
      10.   Suitability for a particular purpose;
      11.   Management plans;
      12.   Cost; or
      13.   Other subjective or objective criteria specified in the request for
proposals.
   B.   Criteria not described in the request for proposals may not be used to
evaluate a proposal.
   C.   The city shall:
      1.   Appoint an evaluation committee consisting of at least three (3)
individuals; and
      2.   Ensure that the evaluation committee and each member of the
evaluation committee:
         a.   Does not have a conflict of interest with any of the offerors;
         b.   Can fairly evaluate each proposal;
         c.   Does not contact or communicate with an offeror for any reason
other than conducting the standard procurements process; and
         d.   Conducts the evaluation in a manner that ensures a fair and
competitive process and avoids the appearance of impropriety.
   D.   The evaluation committee may conduct interviews with, or participate in
presentations by, the offerors.
   E.   Except as provided in subsection F or G of this section, each member of
the evaluation committee is prohibited from knowing, or having access to, any
information relating to the cost, or the scoring of the cost, of a proposal
until after the evaluation committee submits its final recommended scores on
all other criteria to the city.
   F.   1. As used in this subsection F, "management fee" includes only the
following fees of the construction manager/general contractor:
         a.   Preconstruction phase services;
         b.   Monthly supervision fees for the construction phase; and
         c.   Overhead and profit for the construction phase.
      2.   When selecting a construction manager/general contractor for a
construction project, the evaluation committee:
         a.   May, at any time after the opening of the responses to the
request for proposals, have access to, and consider, the management fee
proposed by the offerors; and
         b.   Except as provided in subsection G of this section, may not know
or have access to any other information relating to the cost of construction
submitted by the offerors, until after the evaluation committee submits its
final recommended scores on all other criteria to the city.
   G.   The city is not required to comply with subsection E of this section
if, before opening the responses to the request for proposals, the city:
      1.   Signs a written statement:
         a.   Indicating that, due to the nature of the proposal or other
circumstances, it is in the best interest of the city to waive compliance with
subsection E of this section; and
         b.   Describing the nature of the proposal and the other circumstances
relied upon to waive compliance with subsection E of this section; and
      2.   Makes the written statement available to the public, upon request.
   H.   The evaluation committee shall award scores to each responsive and
responsible proposal that has not been disqualified from consideration under
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-18: COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS:
   A.   If the highest score awarded by the evaluation committee, including the
score for cost, is awarded to a proposal other than the lowest cost proposal,
and the difference between the cost of the highest scored proposal and the
lowest cost proposal exceeds the greater of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
or five percent (5%) of the lowest cost proposal, the city shall make an
informal written cost-benefit analysis that:
      1.   Explains, in general terms, the advantage to the city of awarding
the contract to the higher cost offeror;
      2.   Includes, except as provided in subsection A3 of this section, the
estimated added financial value to the city of each criteria that justifies
awarding the contract to the higher cost offeror;
      3.   Includes, to the extent that assigning a financial value to a
particular criteria is not practicable, a statement describing:
         a.   Why it is not practicable to assign a financial value to the
criteria; and
         b.   In nonfinancial terms, the advantage to the city based on the
particular criteria, of awarding the contract to the higher cost offeror;
      4.   Demonstrates that the value of the advantage to the city of awarding
the contract to the higher cost offeror exceeds the value of the difference
between the cost of the higher cost proposal and the cost of the lower cost
proposals; and
      5.   Includes any other information required by rule made by the city.
   B.   If the informal cost-benefit analysis described in subsection A of this
section does not justify award of the contract to the offeror that received the
highest score, the city:
      1.   May not award the contract to the offeror that received the highest
score; and
      2.   May award the contract to the offeror that received the next highest
score, unless:
         a.   An informal cost-benefit analysis is required, because the
difference between the cost proposed by the offeror that received the next
highest score and the lowest cost proposal exceeds the greater of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) or five percent (5%) of the lowest cost proposal; and
         b.   The informal cost-benefit analysis does not justify award of the
contract to the offeror that received the next highest score.
   C.   If the informal cost-benefit analysis described in subsection A of this
section does not justify award of the contract to the offeror, described in
subsection B of this section, who received the next highest score, the city:
      1.   May not award the contract to the offeror that received the next
highest score; and
      2.   Shall continue with the process described in subsection B of this
section for each offeror that received the next highest score, until the city:
         a.   Awards the contract in accordance with the provisions of this
section; or
         b.   Cancels the request for proposals.
   D.   1. The city is not required to make the cost-benefit analysis described
in this section for a contract with a construction manager/general contractor
if the contract is awarded based solely on the qualifications of the
construction manager/general contract and the management fee described in
subsection 63G-6a-707(6), Utah code.
      2.   The city shall make rules that establish procedures and criteria for
awarding a contract described in subsection D1 of this section to ensure that:
         a.   A competitive process is maintained; and
         b.   The contract awarded is in the best interest of the city.
   E.   The award of contract, cancellation or disqualification of an offeror
shall be made in accordance with procedures outlined in this chapter. (Ord.
2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-19: SOLE SOURCE; AWARD OF CONTRACT WITHOUT COMPETITION; NOTICE:
   A.   As used in this section:
      1.   "Transitional costs" mean the costs of changing from an existing
provider of, or type of, a procurement item to another provider of, or type of,
procurement item.
      2.   "Transitional costs" include:
         a.   Training costs;
         b.   Conversion costs;
         c.   Compatibility costs;
         d.   System downtime;
         e.   Disruption of service;
         f.   Installation costs; and
         g.   Ancillary software, hardware, equipment, or construction costs.
      3.   "Transitional costs" do not include:
         a.   The costs of preparing for or engaging in a procurement process;
or
         b.   Contract negotiation or contract drafting costs.
   B.   The city may award a contract for a procurement item without
competition if the city determines in writing that:
      1.   There is only one source for the procurement item; or
      2.   The award to a specific supplier, service provider, or contractor is
a condition of a donation that will fund the full cost of the supply, service,
or construction item.
   C.   Circumstances under which there is only one source for a procurement
item may include:
      1.   Where the most important consideration in obtaining a procurement
item is the compatibility of equipment, technology, software, accessories,
replacement parts, or service;
      2.   Where a procurement item is needed for trial use or testing;
      3.   Where transitional costs are unreasonable or cost prohibitive; or
      4.   Procurement of public utility services.
   D.   The city shall make rules regarding the publication of notice for a
sole source procurement that, at a minimum, require publication of notice of a
sole source procurement, in accordance with section 63G-6a-406, Utah code, if
the cost of the procurement exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   E.   The city may extend a contract for a reasonable period of time without
engaging in a standard procurement process, if:
      1.   The award of a new contract for the procurement item is delayed due
to a protest or appeal;
      2.   The standard procurement process is delayed due to unintentional
error;
      3.   Changes in industry standards require significant changes to
specifications for the procurement item;
      4.   The extension is necessary to prevent loss of federal funds;
      5.   The extension is necessary to address a circumstance where the
appropriation of state or federal funds has been delayed; or
      6.   The extension covers the period of time during which contract
negotiations with a new provider are being conducted. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-20: CANCELLATION AND REJECTION OF BIDS AND PROPOSALS:
   A.   The city may cancel an invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or
other solicitation or reject any or all bids or proposals, or other
solicitation, when it is in the best interests of the city.
   B.   The reasons for a cancellation or rejection described in subsection A
of this section shall be made part of the contract file. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-
2014)
1-17-21: DEBARMENT FROM CONSIDERATION FOR AWARD OF CONTRACTS; CAUSES FOR
DEBARMENT:
   A.   After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable
opportunity for that person to be heard, the department head may, after
consultation with the city attorney:
      1.   Debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts
for a period not to exceed three (3) years; or
      2.   Suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if there
is probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in any activity that
might lead to debarment.
   B.   A suspension described in subsection A2 of this section may not be for
a period exceeding three (3) months, unless an indictment has been issued for
an offense which would be a cause for debarment under subsection C of this
section, in which case the suspension shall remain in effect until after the
trial of the suspended person.
   C.   The causes for debarment include the following:
      1.   Conviction of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or
attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract or in the
performance of a public or private contract or subcontract;
      2.   Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft,
forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen
property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or
business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects
responsibility as a contractor;
      3.   Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes;
      4.   Failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the terms
of the contract;
      5.   A violation of this chapter; or
      6.   Any other cause that the department head determines to be so serious
and compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor, including
debarment by another governmental entity. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-22: EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city may
authorize an emergency procurement without using a standard procurement process
when an emergency condition exists.
   B.   A procurement officer who authorizes an emergency procurement under
subsection A of this section shall:
      1.   Make the authorization in writing, stating the emergency condition
upon which the emergency procurement is made; and
      2.   Ensure that the procurement is made with as much competition as
reasonably practicable while avoiding harm, or a risk of harm, to the public
health, safety, welfare, or property of the city. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-23: DETERMINATION OF NONRESPONSIBILITY OF BIDDER OR OFFEROR:
   A.   A determination of nonresponsibility of a bidder or offeror made by the
city shall be made in writing.
   B.   The unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply
information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be
grounds for a determination of nonresponsibility with respect to the bidder or
offeror.
   C.   Subject to title 63G, chapter 2, government records access and
management act, information furnished by a bidder or offeror pursuant to this
section may not be disclosed outside of the city without prior written consent
by the bidder or offeror. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-24: BONDS NECESSARY WHEN CONTRACT IS AWARDED; WAIVER; ACTION; ATTORNEY
FEE:
   A.   When a construction contract is awarded under this chapter, the
contractor to whom the contract is awarded shall deliver the following bonds or
security to the city which shall become binding on the parties upon the
execution of the contract:
      1.   A performance bond satisfactory to the city that is in an amount
equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the price specified in the contract and
is executed by a surety company authorized to do business in this state or any
other form satisfactory to the city; and
      2.   A payment bond satisfactory to the city that is in an amount equal
to one hundred percent (100%) of the price specified in the contract and is
executed by a surety company authorized to do business in this state or any
other form satisfactory to the city, which is for the protection of each person
supplying labor, service, equipment, or material for the performance of the
work provided for in the contract.
   B.   1. When a construction contract is awarded under this chapter, the city
may not require a contractor to whom a contract is awarded to obtain a bond of
the types referred to in subsection A of this section from specific insurance
or surety company, producer, agent, or broker.
      2.   A person who violates subsection B1 of this section is guilty of an
infraction.
   C.   The city may waive the requirement of a bid, performance, or payment
bond for circumstances in which the city considers any or all of the bonds to
be unnecessary to protect the city.
   D.   A person shall have a right of action on a payment bond under this
section for any unpaid amount due to the person if:
      1.   The person has furnished labor, service, equipment, or material for
the work provided for in the contract for which the payment bond is furnished
under this section; and
      2.   The person has not been paid in full within ninety (90) days after
the last day on which the person performed the labor or service or supplied the
equipment or material for which the claim is made.
   E.   An action upon a payment bond may only be brought in a court of
competent jurisdiction in a county where the construction contract was to be
performed. The action is barred if not commenced within one year after the last
day on which the claimant performed the labor or service or supplied the
equipment or material on which the claim is based. The obligee named in the
bond need not be joined as a party to the action.
   F.   In any suit upon a payment bond, the court shall award reasonable
attorney fees to the prevailing party, which fees shall be taxed as costs in
the action. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-25: ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTING MANAGEMENT:
   A.   The city shall, by rule provide as many alternative methods of
construction contracting management as determined to be feasible.
   B.   The rules described in subsection A of this section shall:
      1.   Grant to the department head the discretion to select the
appropriate method of construction contracting management for a particular
project; and
      2.   Require the department head to execute and include in the contract
file a written statement describing the facts that led to the selection of a
particular method of construction contracting management for each project.
   C.   Before choosing a construction contracting management method, the city
shall consider the following factors:
      1.   When the project must be ready to be occupied;
      2.   The type of project;
      3.   The extent to which the requirements of the city, and the way they
are to be met are known;
      4.   The location of the project;
      5.   The size, scope, complexity, and economics of the project;
      6.   The source of funding and any resulting constraints necessitated by
the funding source;
      7.   The availability, qualification, and experience of public personnel
to be assigned to the project and the amount of time that the public personnel
can devote to the project; and
      8.   The availability, qualifications, and experience of outside
consultants and contractors to complete the project under the various methods
being considered.
   D.   The city may make rules that authorize the use of a construction
manager/general contractor as one method of construction contracting
management.
   E.   The rules described in subsection B of this section shall require that:
      1.   The construction manager/general contractor be selected using:
         a.   A standard procurement process; or
         b.   An exception to the requirement to use a standard procurement
process; and
      2.   When entering into a subcontract that was not specifically included
in the construction manager/general contractor's cost proposal, the
construction manager/general contractor shall procure the subcontractor by
using a standard procurement process, or an exception to the requirement to use
a standard procurement process.
   F.   Procurement rules adopted by the city may authorize the use of a
design-build provider as one method of construction contracting management.
   G.   A design-build contract may include a provision for obtaining the site
for the construction project.
   H.   A design-build contract or a construction manager/general contractor
contract may include provision by the contractor of operations, maintenance, or
financing. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-26: DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING:
The city may require drug and/or alcohol testing for employees of contractors
and subcontractors in safety sensitive positions. It is the responsibility of
contractors and subcontractors to monitor their employees and to provide
competent employees. The city has no responsibility or duty to require drug
and/or alcohol testing, however, the city may establish such requirement in the
contract documents. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-27: SELECTION COMMITTEE FOR ARCHITECT-ENGINEER SERVICES:
   A.   In the procurement of architect-engineer services, the city shall
encourage firms engaged in the lawful practice of their profession to submit
annually a statement of qualifications and performance data.
   B.   The mayor and city council shall be the evaluation committee for
architect-engineer services contracts under its authority.
   C.   An advisory evaluation committee for architect-engineer services
contracts may be established by the mayor and city council.
   D.   An advisory evaluation committee shall:
      1.   Evaluate current statement of qualifications and performance data on
file with the city, together with those that may be submitted by other firms in
response to the announcement of the proposed contract;
      2.   Consider no less than three (3) firms; and
      3.   Based upon criteria established and published by the city the mayor
and city council shall select no less than three (3) of the firms considered to
be the most highly qualified to provide the services required. (Ord. 2014-08,
8-5-2014)
1-17-28: SELECTION AS PART OF DESIGN-BUILD OR LEASE:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, architect- engineer
services may be procured as part of the services obtained in a design-build
contract or as part of the services obtained in a lease contract for real
property, if the qualifications of those providing the architect-engineer
services are part of the consideration in the selection process. (Ord. 2014-08,
8-5-2014)
1-17-29: PROTEST; TIME; AUTHORITY TO RESOLVE PROTEST:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, a person who is an
actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or contractor who is aggrieved in
connection with a procurement or award of a contract may protest to the
department head as follows:
      1.   With respect to an invitation for bids or a request for proposals:
         a.   Before the opening of bids or the closing date for proposals; or
         b.   If the person did not know and should not have known of the facts
giving rise to the protest before the bid opening or the closing date for
proposals, within seven (7) days after the day on which the person knows or
should have known of the facts giving rise to the protest; or
      2.   If subsection A1a of this section does not apply, within seven (7)
days after the day on which the person knows or should have known of the facts
giving rise to the protest.
   B.   A person who is debarred or suspended under this chapter may protest
the debarment or suspension to the department head that ordered the debarment,
as applicable, within seven (7) days after the day on which the debarment or
suspension is ordered.
   C.   A person who files a protest under this section shall include in the
filing document:
      1.   The person's address of record and e-mail address of record; and
      2.   A concise statement of the grounds upon which the protest is made.
   D.   A person described in subsection A, B or C of this section who fails to
timely file a protest under this section may not bring a protest, action, or
appeal challenging a solicitation or award of a contract, or a debarment or
suspension, before the department head, an appeals panel, a court, or any other
forum.
   E.   The city may enter into a settlement agreement to resolve a protest.
(Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-30: DECISIONS OF DEPARTMENT HEAD TO BE IN WRITING; EFFECT OF NO WRITING:
   A.   After a timely protest is filed, the department head:
      1.   Shall consider the protest; and
      2.   May hold a hearing on the protest.
   B.   1. The department head or designee may:
         a.   Subpoena witnesses and compel their attendance at a protest
hearing; or
         b.   Subpoena documents for production at a protest hearing.
      2.   The rules of evidence do not apply to a protest hearing.
      3.   If a hearing on a protest is held under this section, the city
recorder or designee shall:
         a.   Record the hearing;
         b.   Preserve all evidence presented at the hearing; and
         c.   Preserve all records and other evidence relied upon in reaching
the written decision described in this section.
      4.   Regardless of whether a hearing on a protest is held under this
section, the city recorder or designee shall preserve all records and other
evidence relied upon in reaching the written decision.
      5.   The records may not be destroyed until the decision, and any appeal
of the decision, becomes final.
   C.   The department head or designee shall promptly issue a written
decision. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform
of the right to judicial or administrative review.
   D.   A decision is effective until stayed or reversed. The decision shall be
final and conclusive unless the protestor, prospective contractor, or
contractor:
      1.   Commences an action in city court in accordance with subsection 63G-
6a-1802(5), Utah code;
      2.   Files an appeal.
   E.   If the department head or designee does not issue the written decision
within thirty (30) calendar days after the day on which a written request for a
final decision is filed, or within a longer period as may be agreed upon by the
parties, the protester may proceed as if an adverse decision had been received.
   F.   A determination under this section regarding an issue of fact may not
be overturned on appeal unless the decision is arbitrary and capricious or
clearly erroneous. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-2014)
1-17-31: FURTHER APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any additional appeal beyond an appeal to the department head shall be governed
by the applicable provisions of the Utah procurement code. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-5-
2014)
1-17-32: APPLICATION OF UTAH PROCUREMENT CODE AND THIS CHAPTER:
With respect to situations, matters and procedures not specifically covered by
this chapter, the provisions of the Utah procurement code and the provisions of
Utah administrative code, entitled "purchasing" shall be guidelines in
determining city policy insofar as said statutory provisions and administrative
regulations are applicable.
The wording and context for such statutory provisions and administrative
regulations shall be modified, interpreted and applied in such manner as to
render the terms thereof applicable to the city insofar as practicable.
The city is authorized to make procurement through the Utah state cooperative
contracts, the NASPA Cooperative Purchasing Organization, LLC, DBA WSCA/NASPO
Cooperating Purchasing Organization or similar contacts or organizations that
are approved by the Utah state purchasing division. Such procurements are
deemed to have complied with the city's procurement procedures. (Ord. 2014-08,
8-5-2014)
CHAPTER 18
SOCIAL MEDIA
SECTION:
1-18-1: Purpose
1-18-2: General Disclaimer
1-18-3: Social Media Policy
1-18-1: PURPOSE:
The goal of Sunset City's website and use of social media sites (including, but
not limited to, Facebook) is to enhance the city's means of providing
information about Sunset City and city services to its residents, businesses
and visitors. Sunset City's website is not a public forum for the exercise of
free speech. (Ord. 2016-02, 3-1-2016)
1-18-2: GENERAL DISCLAIMER:
Information contained in the Sunset City website, including information
contained in external links, is provided without any warranties or
representations of any kind as to accuracy, reliability, timeliness, or
content. Under no circumstances shall Sunset City be liable for any acts or
omissions based upon reliance on any information contained in or linked to the
website, nor shall the city be liable for any consequences of such reliance.
Links or references to other information or organizations do not constitute an
endorsement by the city. (Ord. 2016-02, 3-1-2016)
1-18-3: SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the Sunset City Face book page is to serve as a
mechanism for communication between Sunset City government and members of the
public. All content created or posted on Sunset City's social media pages
belongs to the city, may be considered a public record and is subject to public
disclosure under the Utah government records and access management act
("GRAMA"). The city reserves the right to restrict or remove any content that
is deemed to be in violation of Sunset City's social media policy or any
applicable law. Sunset City social media site articles and comments containing
any of the following forms of content shall not be allowed:
      1.   Comments in support of or opposition to political campaigns or
ballot measures.
      2.   Profane language or content.
      3.   Content that promotes, fosters, or perpetuates discrimination on the
basis of race, creed, color, age, religion, gender, marital status, status with
regard to public assistance, national origin, physical or mental disability or
sexual orientation.
      4.   Sexual content or links to sexual content.
      5.   Solicitations of commerce.
      6.   Conduct or encouragement of illegal activity.
      7.   Information that may tend to compromise the safety or security of
the public or public systems.
      8.   Content that violates a legal ownership interest of any other party.
      9.   Comments not topically related to the particular social medium
ai1icle being commented upon, including random or unintelligible comments.
   B.   Monitoring: We understand that social media is a 24/7 medium; however,
the monitoring capability of the city's public relations staff is not.
Accordingly, no requests for emergency services, or other immediate responses,
should be made via social media. Also, the city may not be aware of
inappropriate comments right away, therefore we request that any such comments,
personal attacks, or negative speech be either ignored or responded to
politely.
   C.   Posted Comments: A comment posted by a member of the public on any city
social media site is the opinion of the commentator or poster only, and
publication of a comment does not imply endorsement of, or agreement by, the
city, nor do such comments necessarily reflect the opinions or policies of the
city.
   D.   Deny Access: The city reserves the right to deny access to city social
media sites for any individual who violates the city's social media policy at
any time and without prior notice.
   E.   Right To Report A Violation: All comments posted to any city Facebook
site are bound by Facebook's statement of rights and responsibilities, located
at http://www.facebook.com/terms.-php,and the city reserves the right to report
any violation of Facebook's statement of rights and responsibilities to
Facebook with the intent of Facebook taking appropriate and reasonable
responsive action.
   F.   Links To External Websites: Consistent with the purpose of its website,
Sunset City may in its sole discretion provide external web links to the
following: governmental entities and educational institutions; generally
recognized community organizations, organizations providing information about
art, cultural, sporting, and recreational activities in the Sunset area;
entities with which the city has an existing contractual relationship, entities
or events that receive funding from the city or are otherwise sponsored by the
city; entities that contribute to city initiatives and that the city wishes to
acknowledge; and web pages that provide free information on local conditions
for Sunset City, such as weather or snow conditions. Links may be removed or
replaced at the sole discretion of Sunset City at any time without notice. This
policy may be revised without prior notice.
   G.   Links To Other Entities To Sunset City's Website: It is not necessary
to obtain advance permission to link to the Sunset City website, however Sunset
City website content and URLs may change at any time without notice. Entities
and individuals linking to the Sunset City website shall not capture any of the
city's web pages within frames; present Sunset City content as their own, or
otherwise misrepresent Sunset City website content; misinform users about the
origin or ownership of Sunset City website content; or make any statement or
implication that Sunset City is endorsing, recommending, or favoring, any
product, viewpoint, or service.
   H.   Sunset City Events Calendar: The Sunset City website provides a link to
the Sunset City events calendar. The city posts Sunset City govenm1ent events.
The city may post external events consistent with the purpose of the city
website and external website links policy.
   I.   Legal Notice: Communication provided to Sunset City through its
website, through e-mail or any other messaging system does not constitute legal
notice to Sunset City.
   J.   Copyright Policy: All material on the Sunset City website is protected
by international and U.S. copyright law. Distribution, minoring, modification,
or reuse of text, graphics, photographs or videos is not permitted without the
express written permission of Sunset City. The city makes no warranty that
information on its website is free of copyright claims or other restrictions on
free use. Information contained in the Sunset City website may be printed for
personal use. Commercial use is prohibited.
(Ord. 2016-02, 3-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2024-05, 9-3-2024)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Established; Membership
2-1-2: Powers And Duties
2-1-3: Compensation
2-1-4: Rules And Regulations
2-1-5: Records
2-1-6: Removal Of Member
2-1-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Created, Terms, Vacancy: A planning commission is hereby created for
the city pursuant to state statute. The planning commission shall consist of
eight (8) members to be appointed by the mayor and the city council from duly
qualified electors of the city. A city council member shall act as liaison
between city council and planning commission. There shall be five (5) members
and three (3) alternate members of the planning commission appointed by the
mayor and city council with the recommendation of the planning commission as
follows: two (2) shall serve until January 1, 1999, and three (3) shall serve
until January 1, 2001. In the month of December 1998, and every second year
thereafter, like numbers shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years to
take the place of members whose terms shall next expire. Appointees shall take
office January 1 next ensuing and shall serve until the expiration of the term
for which appointed, until otherwise removed as provided by law, or until the
successor is appointed and qualified, whichever occurs first. Any vacancy
occurring during the term of any member of the planning commission by reason of
death, resignation, removal or disqualification shall be promptly filled by the
mayor and city council for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-
19-2002)
   B.   Appointment Of Chairman: Each year the planning commission chairman
shall be appointed by the mayor with the concurrence of the city council. (1989
Code § 13-1-7, 3-7-1989)
   C.   Appointment Of Specific Members: The planning commission shall consist
of individuals as set forth herein; provided, that no single professional,
vocational or special interest group shall provide more than two (2) members.
The city council shall appoint members from such professional, vocational and
interest group areas as well as geographical areas to ensure a reasonable
representation of the community. (1989 Code § 13-1-8, 3-7-1989)
2-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Prescribed By Statute: The planning commission shall have such powers
and functions and shall perform such duties as are prescribed by the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 9, as amended, and shall also have
such powers and functions and shall perform such other duties in connection
with the planning and zoning 1  of the city as may hereafter be prescribed by
any ordinance of the city or state statute relating thereto.
   B.   Specific Powers: The planning commission shall have the specific
powers, responsibilities and duties as follows:
      1.   Master Plan:
         a.   It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to
prepare and submit to the city council for its approval, a master plan for the
physical development of the city, including other areas outside of its
boundaries which, in the planning commission's judgment, bear relation to the
planning of the city. The planning commission may, from time to time, amend,
extend or add to the master plan or carry any part or subject matter into
greater detail.
         b.   In preparing the master plan, the planning commission shall make
careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions and
probable future growth of the city and its environs. The plan shall be made
with a general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the city in accordance with existing and future
needs.
         c.   The Planning Commission may make reports and recommendations
relating to the plan and development of the City to public officials and
agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other
organizations and citizens. In general, the Planning Commission shall have such
powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote
City planning.
      2.   Zoning:
         a.   The Planning Commission, through its own initiative may, or by
order of the City Council, shall make recommendations for changes in the Zoning
Map or in the text of the zoning and planning provisions of this Code, and
shall have all powers granted by law, or by these provisions, in the
preparation of zoning maps and the recommendations for zoning in the City.
         b.   After receiving the recommendations of the Planning Commission,
the City Council may amend the Zoning Map and/or the zoning or planning
regulations. No substantial change shall be made in said amendment as
recommended by the Planning Commission, unless the same shall be resubmitted to
the Planning Commission, which shall be returned to the City Council within
thirty (30) days. (1989 Code § 13-1-4, 3-7-1989)
      3.   Subdivisions 1 ; Penalty: It shall be the duty of the Planning
Commission to review and approve, or disapprove, all subdivisions of land. No
plat of a subdivision or land lying within the City shall be filed or recorded
in the County Recorder's office until it shall have been submitted to and
approved by the Planning Commission and City Council, and such approval entered
in writing on the plat by the chairman of the Planning Commission and the Mayor
for the City Council, or other designated members or employees. The County
Recorder should not file or record a plat of a subdivision without such
approval and any County Recorder so doing may be deemed guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without
such approval shall be void. (1989 Code § 13-1-4, 3-7-1989; amd. 1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
1 1. See Title 11 of this Code.
2-1-3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the Planning Commission shall each receive compensation for each
meeting attended in an amount that shall be set and established by resolution
of the City Council from time to time. (1989 Code § 13-1-3, 3-7-1989)
2-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Planning Commission, with the concurrence of the City Council, shall adopt
rules, regulations and procedures subject to the provisions of the laws of the
State and the planning and zoning ordinances of the City in such case made and
provided for the regulation of its procedure and conduct of its duties, and may
amend such rules from time to time. All such rules and all amendments thereof
shall be reduced to writing and shall be filed with the City Recorder. (1989
Code § 13-1-6, 3-7-1989)
2-1-5: RECORDS:
The Planning Commission shall keep a public record of its proceedings, which
shall be filed with the City Recorder. (1989 Code § 13-1-5, 3-7-1989)
2-1-6: REMOVAL OF MEMBER:
Any member of the Planning Commission may be removed without cause by the
Mayor, with the concurrence of the City Council, or the City Council with the
concurrence of the Mayor, for failure to attend three (3) Planning Commission
meetings in a row without being excused by the chairman or for improper
conduct. (1989 Code § 13-1-2; amd. 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 2
APPEAL AUTHORITY
SECTION:
2-2-1: Purpose And Intent
2-2-2: Appointment Of Appeal Authority
2-2-3: Appeal Authority Procedures
2-2-4: Time To Appeal
2-2-5: Final Decision Of Appeal Authority
2-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to establish an appeal authority to hear and
decide:
   A.   Requests for variances from the terms of the land use ordinances;
   B.   Appeals from decisions applying the land use ordinances; and
   C.   Appeals from fees charged in accordance with Utah code section 10-9a-
510. (Ord. 2015-05, 8-18-2015)
2-2-2: APPOINTMENT OF APPEAL AUTHORITY:
The appeal authority shall consist of one or more attorneys or other persons
qualified by expertise in land use issues to be appointed from time to time as
the need arises by resolution of the Sunset City council and to serve under
such terms and conditions as provided in such appointment. (Ord. 2015-05, 8-18-
2015)
2-2-3: APPEAL AUTHORITY PROCEDURES:
The appeal authority member or members shall act and function in accordance
with the provisions of title 10, chapter 9a, part 7, Utah Code Annotated, 1953,
or any subsequent amendments or provisions thereof. (Ord. 2015-05, 8-18-2015)
2-2-4: TIME TO APPEAL:
Any person or entity claiming to be adversely affected by a land use decision
of Sunset City shall have ten (10) calendar days within which to appeal to the
appeal authority a written land use decision issued by Sunset City. The
appellant shall have the burden of proving that the decision was erroneous. The
appeal shall be based upon the record created by the city and shall not be
reviewed de novo. The appeal authority shall uphold the decision of the city if
the decision is supported by substantial evidence. (Ord. 2015-05, 8-18-2015)
2-2-5: FINAL DECISION OF APPEAL AUTHORITY:
The appeal authority shall issue a final decision in writing within forty five
(45) days after the appeal has been filed. The decision may be appealed to the
district court as provided for and in accordance with title 10, chapter 9a,
part 8, Utah Code Annotated, 1953. (Ord. 2015-05, 8-18-2015)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: License Required
3-1-3: Double Fee For Failure To Obtain Required License
3-1-4: Application For License
3-1-5: Inspections For Code Compliance
3-1-6: Denial Or Revocation Of License
3-1-7: License Period
3-1-8: Contents Of License
3-1-9: Exhibition Of License
3-1-10: Branch Establishments/Separate Businesses
3-1-11: License Fees
3-1-12: Exemptions To The Business License Fee
3-1-13: Penalty
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
   BUSINESS: Any enterprise carried on for the purpose of gain or economic
profit, except the acts of employees rendering services for employers.
   PERSON: Any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust,
estate, firm, partnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust,
corporation, association, society or other group of individuals acting as a
unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise. (Ord.
2003-01, 2-18-2003)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Unless exempted by State, Federal or local law, it shall be unlawful
for any person to engage in business within the City of Sunset, whether on a
temporary or permanent basis, without first procuring the license required by
this chapter. All licenses issued under the provisions of this title are
nontransferable and expire on December 31 of each year.
   B.   Exceptions are as follows:
      1.   Home occupation businesses that do not create an additional offsite
impact that exceeds the impact of residential use alone (see
title 10, chapter 9, "Home Occupations", of this Code).
      2.   A business that is operated only occasionally by an individual who
is under eighteen (18) years of age is not required to obtain a City business
license.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or allow to be sold, more
than two (2) vehicles, boats, motorcycles, trailers, mobile homes, camper
shells or a combination of either within any twelve (12) month period without
first procuring a business license from the City for allowing the sale of said
vehicles. (Ord. 2017-11, 11-21-2017)
3-1-3: DOUBLE FEE FOR FAILURE TO OBTAIN REQUIRED LICENSE:
Unless exempted by State, Federal or local law, any person who engages in
business prior to obtaining a business license shall pay double the specified
fee for said license. The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any
person from fully complying with all the requirements of the law, nor from any
other prescribed penalties. (Ord. 2003-01, 2-18-2003)
3-1-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   All applications for license shall be in writing to the City Recorder
and all applications for license must be signed by the Mayor.
   B.   Each application shall state:
      1.   Date of application.
      2.   Name and address of applicant.
      3.   Name and location of business.
      4.   Detailed description of the business to be conducted.
      5.   If applicable, State Sales Tax reporting number, State contractor's
license number, State real estate broker's license number, etc.
      6.   Any other facts necessary for the determination of the license fee
and propriety of issuance of the license.
   C.   Any change in the above information furnished by the applicant shall be
forwarded in writing, within ten (10) days of the change, to the city recorder.
   D.   The applicant must include the fee designated on the business license
fee schedule with his or her completed application.
   E.   Unless otherwise provided herein, no business license fee is refundable
for any reason whatsoever, once the license has been issued. If a license is
denied, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the amount paid in
excess of the ten dollar ($10.00) application processing cost and the cost of
any inspections that may have been completed. (Ord. 2003-01, 2-18-2003)
3-1-5: INSPECTIONS FOR CODE COMPLIANCE:
Prior to the issuance of a license to engage in a business not previously
licensed at that location, or a business with a change of location, the
applicant shall permit inspection of the prospective place of business to
ensure compliance with building, fire and health codes. The city may, at any
time, inspect the business premises during normal business hours or request
business documents to verify information offered in a new application or by an
existing licensee. Failure to comply with city codes may result in revocation
of the business license. (Ord. 2003-01, 2-18-2003)
3-1-6: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   If a license under the provisions of this chapter is denied, the
applicant therefor shall be given written notice thereof.
   B.   The city council may revoke any license obtained by fraud or deceit or
upon the violation of any laws of the state of Utah, the United States
government or the ordinances of the city governing operation of the business
for which the applicant is applying for the license. Prior to revocation, the
licensee shall be served with a written notice of the violation and to appear
before the city council at the next regular meeting and show cause why said
license should not be revoked.
   C.   No person who has been denied a license, or whose license has been
revoked under the provisions of this chapter, shall thereafter be granted a
license under the provisions of this chapter for six (6) months after such
denial or revocation has occurred. (Ord. 2003-01, 2-18-2003)
3-1-7: LICENSE PERIOD:
New license certificates issued between January 1 and November 30 shall be
valid through December 31 of the year of issuance unless revoked. New license
certificates issued between December 1 and December 31 may be valid through
December 31 of the year following the year of issuance. Renewed license
certificates shall be valid through December 31 of the year of renewal unless
revoked. (Ord. 2003-01, 2-18-2003)
3-1-8: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:
   A.   The name of the licensee and any other name under which such business
is to be conducted.
   B.   The type of business and address of each business licensed.
   C.   The date of issuance and expiration thereof.
   D.   Such other information as the city recorder shall determine. (Ord.
2003-01, 2-18-2003)
3-1-9: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of each licensee to keep his/her license displayed and
exhibited in a conspicuous place within the business while the license is in
force. Every licensee that does not have a fixed place of business shall
produce the license for inspection when requested to do so. (Ord. 2003-01, 2-
18-2003)
3-1-10: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS/SEPARATE BUSINESSES:
   A.   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
separate location in which business is engaged in within the city as if such
branch establishment or location were a separate business. Each license
authorizes the licensee to engage only in the business licensed at the location
and in the manner designated in such license.
   B.   Where two (2) or more persons conduct separate businesses at the same
location, each such person shall obtain a separate license for each such
business and must pay the required license fee for such business. (Ord. 2003-
01, 2-18-2003)
3-1-11: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   The license fee rates shall be set by resolution as may be adopted and
passed by the city council and a copy shall be available at the city offices.
It shall cover the types of business and the business license fee set on a per
year basis. (Ord. 2003-01, 2-18-2003)
   B.   If any license renewal fee is not paid by January 15 of each year, a
penalty of fifty percent (50%) of such license fee shall be added to the
original amount due. If the license fee plus penalty fee is still not paid by
February 1, a penalty of seventy five percent (75%) of the license fee shall be
added to the original amount due. If the license fee plus penalty fee is still
not paid by March 1, a citation for engaging in business without a license
shall be issued and an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be added
to cover collection costs. Should it be necessary to take this matter to court,
the business shall become responsible to reimburse the city for all attorney
fees, court costs and any other expenses incurred by the city to clear up the
account. Said business license shall not be issued without the payment of said
penalties herein prescribed. (Ord. 2005-11, 11-15-2005)
3-1-12: EXEMPTIONS TO THE BUSINESS LICENSE FEE:
   A.   No business license fee shall be imposed under this section upon the
following persons or businesses:
      1.   Any person engaged in business for solely religious, charitable,
eleemosynary or other types of strictly nonprofit purposes who is tax exempt in
such activities under the laws of the United States and the state of Utah, nor
shall any business license fee be imposed on any person engaged in a business
specifically exempted from municipal taxation and fees by the laws of the
United States or the state of Utah; nor shall any business license fee be
imposed on any nonprofit corporation duly incorporated according to the
provisions of the Utah nonprofit corporation and cooperative association act.
      2.   Any insurance company or agent, for so long as state law exempts
them.
      3.   Any contractor holding a valid license issued by the local
jurisdiction in which the licensee has its principal place of business, and by
the state under Utah Code Annotated, part 3, chapter 55, title 58.
      4.   Any alarm company holding a valid business license issued by the
local jurisdiction in which the licensee has its principal place of business.
      5.   Any tow truck motor carrier holding a valid business license to
perform tow truck service issued by the local jurisdiction in which the
licensee has its principal place of business unless the tow truck business is
also physically located in Sunset City.
      6.   Any person who sells his/her own property which was not acquired for
resale, barter or exchange and who does not conduct such sales or act as a
participant by furnishing goods in such a sale more than twice during any
calendar year.
      7.   Any person selling surplus household goods or furnishings at a
private residence in the garage or yard, if such garage or yard sale is held no
more frequently than three (3) days in any one calendar year at the same
residence. (Ord. 2014-01, 3-4-2014)
   B.   Any person claiming exemption pursuant to this section shall file a
verified statement with the city recorder stating the facts upon which
exemption is claimed. The city recorder shall, upon a proper showing contained
in the verified statement, and upon approval by the city council, issue a
license to a person claiming exemption under the provisions of this chapter
without payment to the city of the license fee required by this chapter. (Ord.
2003-01, 2-18-2003)
3-1-13: PENALTY:
Any person engaging in business within the city, whether on a temporary or
permanent basis, without first obtaining a license as herein provided, or after
such license has been revoked, shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor
and subject to penalty as provided in section
 1-4-1 of this code.
Any previously licensed business cited for engaging in business in violation of
this chapter shall have five (5) days from the date of citation to comply with
this law. Failure of the licensee to comply within five (5) days of the date of
citation will subject the business to closure and will subject the licensee to
all applicable civil and criminal penalties. (Ord. 2003-01, 2-18-2003)
CHAPTER 2
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-2-1: Statute Adopted By Reference
3-2-1: STATUTE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-201 et seq., as amended,
are hereby adopted by reference. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3-1: Intent
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Tax Imposed
3-3-4: Exemptions To Tax
3-3-5: Existing Franchise Agreements
3-3-6: Contract With State Tax Commission
3-3-7: State Statutes Incorporated
3-3-8: Additional License Or Reporting Not Required
3-3-9: Effective Date Of Levy
3-3-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the City to adopt the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
Act. (Ord. 97-01, 6-3-1997)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
   CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject
to the municipal energy sales and use tax.
   CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.    A fee:
      1.   Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
      2.   That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
   B.   1. A fee similar to subsection A1 or 2 of this definition; or
      2.   Any combination of subsections A1 or 2 of this definition.
   DELIVERED VALUE: A. The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered
for sale or use in the City and includes:
      1.   The value of the energy itself; and
      2.   Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service
charges or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable
form to each class of customer in the City.
   B.   Delivered value does not include the amount of a tax paid under Utah
Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1 or part 2.
   ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons
supplying a de minimis amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded
by rule promulgated by the State Tax Commission.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract or agreement
granting a franchise.
   FRANCHISE TAX:
   A.    A franchise tax.
   B.   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
   C.   Any combinations of subsection A or B of this definition.
   PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate,
this State, any county, city, municipality, district, or other local
governmental entity of the State, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
   SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise,
in any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
   A.   Installment and credit sales;
   B.   Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
   C.   Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable
energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable
if an outright sale were made.
   STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in Sunset City for any
purpose, except sale in the regular course of business.
   TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity.
   USE:
   A.    The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the
ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy.
   B.   Use does not include the sale, display, demonstration or trial of the
taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale. (Ord. 97-
01, 6-3-1997)
3-3-3: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within the City equaling six percent
(6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax
shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax.
   A.   Calculation: The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the
taxable energy to the consumer.
   B.   Additional Tax: The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on
taxable energy imposed by the City authorized by title 59, chapter 12, part 2
of Utah Code Annotated, the Local Sales and Use Tax Act. (Ord. 98-02, 5-26-
1998; eff. 5-27-1998)
3-3-4: EXEMPTIONS TO TAX:
   A.   No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
except as expressly provided in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-104.
   B.   The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b):
      1.   Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel and special fuels subject
to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
      2.   Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under
Federal law, the United States Constitution or the Utah constitution;
      3.   Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
      4.   Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of
the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a
fuel subject to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
      5.   Taxable energy brought into the State by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the State, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the State by a nonresident living or
working in the State at the time of purchase;
      6.   The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a
fuel or energy; and
      7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the
City.
   C.   The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt
from the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this Chapter, provided:
      1.   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a
municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the
State authorized by Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 3; and
      2.   The City is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other
municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this Chapter, if the
tax due under this Chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality.
(Ord. 97-01, 6-3-1997)
3-3-5: EXISTING FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   No Alteration: This Chapter shall not alter any existing franchise
agreements between the City and energy suppliers.
   B.   Credit Against Tax Due: There is a credit against the tax due from any
consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
      1.   The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the City
pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
      2.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy
supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
      3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 97-01, 6-3-
1997)
3-3-6: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
   A.   Required; Authority Of Mayor: On or before the effective date hereof,
the City shall contract with the State Tax Commission to perform all functions
incident to the administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and
use tax, in accordance with this Chapter. The Mayor is hereby authorized to
enter agreements with the State Tax Commission that may be necessary to the
continued administration and operation of the municipal energy sales and use
tax Ordinance enacted by this Chapter.
   B.   Monthly Payments By Supplier; Conditions: An energy supplier shall pay
the municipal energy sales and use tax revenues collected from consumers
directly to the City monthly, if:
      1.   The City is the energy supplier; or
      2.   a. The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and
use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more; and
         b.   The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use
tax.
   C.   Deduction Of Franchise Fees: An energy supplier paying the municipal
energy sales and use tax directly to the City may deduct any contractual
franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and
remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-307(4). (Ord. 97-01, 6-3-1997)
3-3-7: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED:
   A.   Specified; Exemptions: Except as herein provided, and except insofar as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use
Tax Act, title 10, chapter 1, part 3, as well as this Chapter, all of the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, and
in force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to
sales and use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, and
excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes levied therein, are hereby
adopted and made a part of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein.
   B.   Substitution Of Terms: Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code
Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, the State is named or
referred to as the "taxing agency", the name of the City shall be substituted,
insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Utah Code
Annotated title 10, chapter 1, part 3, as amended. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the City for the word
"State" when that word is used as part of the title of the State Tax
Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the City be
substituted for that of the State in any section when the result of such a
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
Chapter.
   C.   Amendments: Any amendments made to Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, as amended, which would be applicable to the City for the
purposes of carrying out this Chapter are hereby incorporated herein by
reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a
Utah statute. (Ord. 97-01, 6-3-1997)
3-3-8: ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING NOT REQUIRED:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use
tax levied by this Chapter is required, provided the energy supplier collecting
the tax has a license issued under Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106. (Ord.
97-01, 6-3-1997)
3-3-9: EFFECTIVE DATE OF LEVY:
This Chapter is effective June 30, 1997. The municipal energy sales and use tax
shall be levied beginning one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., July 1,
1997. (Ord. 97-01, 6-3-1997)
CHAPTER 3A
UTILITY REVENUE TAX
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Definitions
3-3A-2: Levied; Amounts
3-3A-3: Effective Date
3-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   GROSS REVENUE: The revenue derived from the sale or use of public utility
services within Sunset City.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY: Sunset City and departments thereof.
   PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person or business who sells, delivers, or otherwise
furnishes sewer service or water as a commodity or service to the public for
domestic, commercial or industrial use by means or through the use of any
public street or way, but shall not include Sunset City or any department or
subdivision thereof. (Ord. 2005-06, 3-15-2005)
3-3A-2: LEVIED; AMOUNTS:
   A.   Public Utilities:
      1.   Tax Levied: There is hereby levied upon the business of every person
or company engaged in business in Sunset City, Utah, of supplying for sale
water or sewer utility service as public utilities an annual license tax equal
to six percent (6%) of the gross revenue attributable to the sale and use of
said services delivered within the corporate limits of Sunset City, said fee
being in addition to any franchise fee.
      2.   Remittance Date: Within forty five (45) days after the end of each
month in a calendar year, the public utility taxed hereunder shall file with
the city treasurer of Sunset City a report of its gross revenue attributable to
the sale and use of public utility service in Sunset City as defined herein,
together with a computation of the tax levied hereunder against the utility.
Coincidental with the filing of such report, the utility shall pay to the city
treasurer the amount of the tax due for that calendar month subject to said
report.
   B.   Municipal Utilities:
      1.   There is hereby levied upon the users of municipal utility services
including water and sewer services, a monthly use tax equal to six percent (6%)
of the total amount billed, for the sale and use of said municipal utility
services for each monthly billing period.
      2.   Any municipal utility use tax shall be reduced by an amount equal to
any excess above six percent (6%) if levied in combination with any other
utility tax on the municipal utility service.
   C.   Business In Competition With Municipal Or Public Utilities:
      1.   There is hereby levied upon the business of every person or company
engaged in the business of supplying water or sewer service in Sunset City, in
competition with the municipal or public utilities, an annual license tax equal
to six percent (6%) of the gross revenue attributable to the sale and use of
such competitive services sold, used or delivered within the corporate limits
of Sunset City, said fee being in addition to any franchise fee.
      2.   Within forty five (45) days after the end of each month in a
calendar year, any business taxed hereunder shall file with the city treasurer
of Sunset City a report of its gross revenue attributable to the sale and use
of services specified hereunder rendered in competition with public utilities
in the city, together with a computation of the tax levied hereunder against
such business. Coincidental with the filing of such report, the business shall
pay to the city treasurer the amount of the tax due for the calendar month
which is the subject of the said report. (Ord. 2005-06, 3-15-2005)
3-3A-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter became effective July 1, 2001. The utility revenue tax shall be
levied beginning one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., July 1, 2001.
(Ord. 2005-06, 3-15-2005)
CHAPTER 3B
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE TAX
SECTION:
3-3B-1: Definitions
3-3B-2: Levy Of Tax
3-3B-3: Rate
3-3B-4: Rate Limitation And Exemption
3-3B-5: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3-3B-6: Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of The Tax
3-3B-7: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
3-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
   CUSTOMER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this definition: The person
who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for
telecommunications service received under the contract.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter:
      1.   The person who is obligated under a contract with a
telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received
under the contract; or
      2.   If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this
definition, the end user of telecommunications service.
   C.   Customer does not include a reseller:
      1.   Of telecommunications service; or
      2.   For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an
agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
   END USER: A. The person who uses a telecommunications service.
   B.   For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is
not an individual, the individual who uses the telecommunications service on
behalf of the person who is provided the telecommunications service.
   GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO SUNSET CITY: Those gross receipts from a
transaction for telecommunications services that is located within Sunset City
for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah code title 59, chapter 12,
sales and use tax act and determined in accordance with Utah code section 59-
12-207.
   GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered
except for amounts collected or paid as:
   A.   A tax, fee or charge:
      1.   Imposed by a governmental entity;
      2.   Separately identified as a tax, fee or charge in the transaction
with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
      3.   Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
   B.   Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a
customer under title 59, chapter 12, sales and use tax act; or
   C.   Interest, a fee or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications
provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when
payment is due.
   MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
   MUNICIPALITY: Sunset City.
   PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: A. For telecommunications service other than mobile
telecommunications service, the street address representative of where the
customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall
be:
      1.   The residential street address of the customer; or
      2.   The primary business street address of the customer; or
   B.   For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid:
   A.   If the location described in this subsection A is known, the location
of the telecommunications equipment:
      1.   To which a call is charged; and
      2.   From which the call originates or terminates;
   B.   If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not
known but the location described in this subsection B is known, the location of
the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first
identified by:
      1.   The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
      2.   If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider from its service provider; or
   C.   If the locations described in subsection A or B of this definition are
not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this
definition, a person that:
      1.   Owns, controls, operates or manages a telecommunications service; or
      2.   Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition
for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications
service.
   B.   A person described in subsection A of this definition is a
telecommunications provider whether or not the public service commission of
Utah regulates:
      1.   That person; or
      2.   The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls,
operates or manages.
   C.   "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined
in Utah code section 54-8b-2.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: A. Telephone service, as defined in Utah code
section 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that
originates and terminates within the boundaries of this state; and
   B.   Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah code section 59-
12-102:
      1.   That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state;
and
      2.   Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC section 116 et seq. (Ord. 2004-03, 6-1-2004)
3-3B-2: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality. (Ord.
2004-03, 6-1-2004)
3-3B-3: RATE:
The rate of the tax levy shall be four percent (4%) of the telecommunication
provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed
to Sunset City subject to the following:
   If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than this
municipality then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications
services shall be the lower of: a) the rate imposed by the taxing jurisdiction
in which the transaction is located or b) the rate for nonmobile
telecommunications services shall be the rate imposed by the municipality in
which the customer's service address is located; or for mobile
telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the municipality of the
customer's primary place of use. (Ord. 2004-03, 6-1-2004)
3-3B-4: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION:
The rate of this levy shall not exceed four percent (4%) of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunication service
attributed to Sunset City unless a higher rate is approved by a majority vote
of the voters in Sunset City that vote in:
   A.   A municipal general election;
   B.   A regular general election; or
   C.   A local special election. (Ord. 2004-03, 6-1-2004)
3-3B-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2004, or the first
day of any calendar quarter after a seventy five (75) day period beginning on
the date the commission received notice pursuant to Utah code section 10-1-403
that Sunset City has enacted this chapter. (Ord. 2004-03, 6-1-2004)
3-3B-6: CHANGES IN RATE OR REPEAL OF THE TAX:
On or before the effective date hereof, Sunset City shall enter into the
uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah code
section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement and administration of this
municipal telecommunications license tax. (Ord. 2004-03, 6-1-2004)
3-3B-7: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
Any tax or fee previously enacted by Sunset City under authority of Utah code
section 10-1-203 or Utah code title 11, chapter 26, local taxation of utilities
limitation is hereby repealed.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to repeal any Sunset City
ordinance or fee which provides that Sunset City may recover from a
telecommunications provider the management costs of Sunset City caused by the
activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights of way of Sunset
City, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah code section 72-7-102 and
is not related to Sunset City's loss of use of a highway as a result of the
activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way, or increased
deterioration of a highway as a result of the activities of the
telecommunications provider in a right of way nor does this chapter limit
Sunset City's right to charge fees or taxes on persons that are not subject to
the municipal telecommunications license tax under this chapter and locate
telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah code section 72-7-108, in
Sunset City. (Ord. 2004-03, 6-1-2004)
CHAPTER 3C
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3-3C-1: Purpose
3-3C-2: Definitions
3-3C-3: Tax Levied
3-3C-4: Collection Of Tax
3-3C-5: Remittance
3-3C-6: Notice To State Tax Commission; Contract With State
3-3C-7: Use Of Revenues
3-3C-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of Sunset City to adopt a transient room tax pursuant to and
in accordance with Utah Code Annotated sections 59-12-352 through 59-12-355.
(Ord. 2009-05, 5-19-2009, eff. 10-1-2009)
3-3C-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or entity of
any kind.
   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A place providing temporary sleeping accommodations
that is regularly rented to the public for thirty (30) days or less and
includes:
   A.   Motel;
   B.   Hotel;
   C.   Motor court or recreational vehicle park;
   D.   Inn;
   E.   Bed and breakfast establishment;
   F.   Condominium;
   G.   Resort home; and
   H.   Transient apartment rental.
   RENTS:
   A.    All room charges, exclusive of charges for food and beverages or
related items subject to sales taxation;
   B.   Fees for the occupancy of a dwelling or site; and
   C.   Timeshare fees or dues.
   TRANSIENT: A person who occupies a public accommodation for thirty (30)
consecutive days or less. (Ord. 2009-05, 5-19-2009, eff. 10-1-2009)
3-3C-3: TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby levied a transient room tax in the amount of one percent (1%)
of the rents charged to transients occupying public accommodations within
Sunset City. (Ord. 2009-05, 5-19-2009, eff. 10-1-2009)
3-3C-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
The transient room tax imposed herein shall be levied at the same time and
collected in the same manner as provided in part 2, local sales and use tax
act, including the assessment of penalties and interest rates authorized under
59-1-401 and 59-1-402, Utah Code Annotated or its successor provisions. (Ord.
2009-05, 5-19-2009, eff. 10-1-2009)
3-3C-5: REMITTANCE:
Unless otherwise required under state law or any agreement with the state tax
commission, the tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable to the
city treasurer quarterly on or before the thirtieth day of the month next
succeeding each calendar quarterly period, the first of such quarterly periods
being the period commencing with October 1, 2009. Every person or business
taxed hereunder shall on or before the thirtieth day of the month next
succeeding each calendar quarterly period, file with the license office a
report of its gross revenue for the preceding quarterly period. The report
shall be accompanied by a remittance of the amount of tax due for the period
covered by the report. (Ord. 2009-05, 5-19-2009, eff. 10-1-2009)
3-3C-6: NOTICE TO STATE TAX COMMISSION; CONTRACT WITH STATE:
   A.   Before July 1, 2009, the city shall provide notice to the state tax
commission meeting the requirements of section 59-12-355(2)(b).
   B.   The city may enter into a contract with the state tax commission to
perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this
chapter. (Ord. 2009-05, 5-19-2009, eff. 10-1-2009)
3-3C-7: USE OF REVENUES:
Tax revenues collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used for general fund
purposes. (Ord. 2009-05, 5-19-2009, eff. 10-1-2009)
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
SECTION:
3-4-1: Adoption Of State Statute
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: Licenses Required
3-4-4: Application Procedure
3-4-5: Fee For License
3-4-6: Granting Or Denying License
3-4-7: Expiration Of License
3-4-8: Streamlined Procedure
3-4-9: Alcohol Training And Education Seminar
3-4-10: License Requirements
3-4-11: Local Consent
3-4-12: Rules, Regulations, And Requirements
3-4-13: Prohibited Acts And Activities
3-4-14: Search Of Licensed Premises
3-4-15: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-4-16: Penalty
3-4-1: ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTE:
A.   For purposes of alcoholic beverage control within the corporate limits of
Sunset City, the City incorporates herein the provisions of Utah Code, title
32B, the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, and any subsequent amendments thereto.
B.   All alcohol business licenses shall comply with the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act of the state or its successor provisions, the regulations of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, and this chapter. If the provisions of
this chapter are inconsistent with those of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
or the regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, the more
restrictive provision shall prevail, to the extent permitted by law. (Ord.
2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases defined in this chapter shall be given the following
defined meanings wherever used in this title:
ALCOHOLIC    BEER and LIQUOR, as they are defined herein.
BEVERAGES:
APPLICATION: A formal written request for the issuance of a license.
             A product that contains at least one-half of a percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume,
             but not more than five percent (5%) of alcohol by volume or four percent (4%) by
             weight and are obtained by fermentation, infusion, or decoction of malted grain.
BEER:        BEER may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products. BEER includes a
             product that contains alcohol in the percentages described above and is referred to
             as, BEER, ale, porter, stout, lager or a malt or malted beverage. BEER does not
             include a flavored malt beverage. This definition shall conform to any revised
             definition set forth in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
             The right to engage in the type of conduct hereafter described, as evidenced by a
             written document issued by this City. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall
             be of one of the following types and shall authorize the type of conduct, and only
             the type of conduct, indicated after each designation:
             A.   Off-Premises Beer Retailer License: Authorizes the licensee to sell beer on the
             licensed premises in original containers for consumption off the licensed premises
             in any size not exceeding two liters (2 L) and in strict compliance with the Utah
             Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
             B.   Restaurant License (Includes Beer And Liquor):
                1.   Authorizes the licensee to sell liquor and/or beer on premises occupied by a
             restaurant, in strict compliance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, and
             upon the licensed premises; as defined in Utah Code.
                2.   For the purpose of this chapter restaurant shall include the following:
                   a.   A full-service restaurant;
                   b.   A master full-service restaurant;
                   c.   A limited-service restaurant;
                   d.   A master limited-service restaurant; and
                   e.   A beer only restaurant license.
             C.   Tavern License:
                1.   Authorizes the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises occupied by a
             tavern on draft or in open containers in any size not exceeding two liters (2 L), or
             in the original containers for consumption on the licensed premises and in strict
             compliance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
                2.   For the purpose of this chapter a tavern means an on-premises beer retailer
             who is:
                   a.   Issued a license by the Commission in accordance with Utah Code Annotated
             chapter 5, Retail License Act, and chapter 6, part 7, On-Premises Beer Retailer
             License; and
LICENSE:           b.   Designated by the Commission as a tavern in accordance with Utah Code
             Annotated chapter 6, part 7, On-Premises Beer Retailer License.
             D.   General Liquor License:
                1.   Authorizes the licensee to sell liquor on-premises in strict compliance with
             the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
                2.   For the purpose of this chapter a general liquor license shall include, but
             not be limited to, the following:
                   a.   A bar establishment;
                   b.   An on-premises banquet;
                   c.   A reception center;
                   d.   A hotel; and/or
                   e.   A club.
             E.   On-Premises Beer Retailer License: Authorizes the licensee to sell beer on the
             licensed premises in the original containers for consumption on the licensed
             premises; or in open containers in any size not exceeding two liters (2 L) and in
             strict compliance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. For the purposes of
             this chapter an on-premises beer retailer license shall apply to all recreational
             amenity business establishments as defined by Utah Code Annotated section 32B-6-702.
             All on-premises beer retailers shall be subject to the following:
                1.   Maintain at least seventy percent (70%) of the person's, ("person" as
             defined by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act), total gross revenues from
             business directly related to a recreational amenity on or directly adjoining the
             licensed premises of the beer retailer, except that a person may include gross
             revenue from business directly related to a recreational amenity that is owned or
             operated by a political subdivision if the person has a contract meeting the
             requirements of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act with the political
             subdivision; or
                2.   Have a recreational amenity on or directly adjoining the licensed premises
             of the beer retailer and maintain at least seventy percent (70%) of the person's
             total gross revenues from the sale of food.
             Includes the person, firm, corporation or association to whom the license is issued,
LICENSEE:    and also means and includes the licensee's managers, agents, employees and all other
             persons acting for the licensee with his/her consent or knowledge.
             Alcohol, or any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other liquid, or
             combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or fermented, and all
             other drinks or drinkable liquids that contain at least one-half of one percent
LIQUOR:      (0.5%) of alcohol by volume and is suitable to use for beverage purposes. LIQUOR
             includes heavy beer, wine and flavored malt beverages. LIQUOR does not include beer.
             This definition shall conform to any revised definition set forth in the Alcoholic
             Beverage Control Act.
             Any room, house, building, structure, place or licensed premises, where:
             A.   Alcoholic beverages are manufactured, sold, kept, bartered, stored, given away
             or used contrary to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act or this chapter, or where
             persons resort for drinking alcoholic beverages contrary to the Alcoholic Beverage
             Control Act or this chapter; or
             B.   Intoxicated persons are permitted to loiter about, or profanity, indecent,
NUISANCE:    immoral, loud or boisterous language or immoral or lewd conduct; or
             C.   Persons under the age of twenty one (21) are permitted to purchase or drink
             alcoholic beverages, or are employed in violation of this chapter; or
             D.   Laws or ordinances are violated by licensee or his agents or patrons with or
             without the consent or knowledge of licensee upon such premises; or
             E.   Any condition dangerous to human life or health is permitted to exist, and all
             alcoholic beverages, packages, equipment and other property used in maintaining the
             same.
             Shall be deemed to include cafes, restaurants, public dining rooms, cafeterias,
             taverns and any other place where the general public is invited or admitted for
PLACE OF     business purposes, and shall also be deemed to include clubs, corporations and
BUSINESS:    associations operating under charter or otherwise wherein only the members and their
             guests are invited. Occupied hotel and motel rooms that are not open to the public
             shall not be deemed to be PLACES OF BUSINESS, as herein defined.
RESTAURANT:  Any place of business where a variety of foods are prepared, at which meals are
             served; and that is engaged primarily in serving meals.
RETAILER:    Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages to the
             consumer.
             When used in this chapter in any provision, shall be construed to solicit, or to
             receive any order for, to keep or expose for sale, to deliver for value or
SELL or TO   gratuitously, to peddle, to possess with intent to sell, to traffic in for any
SELL:        consideration proposed or obtained directly or indirectly or under any pretext or by
             any means whatsoever to procure or allow to be procured for any other person, and
             "sale" when so used shall include every act of selling, as herein defined.
             Any person other than a brewer or retailer engaged in importation for sale or in the
WHOLESALER:  sale of alcoholic beverages in wholesale or other quantities. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-
             2019)
 
3-4-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   City License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
any conduct described in the definition of "license", as provided in this
chapter, within the corporate limits of the city, without having first procured
the appropriate license.
   B.   State License: If the license is intended to permit alcohol consumption
or sale of alcohol, a state license is required before sales may take place.
Applicants shall contact the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for
the license. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application:
      1.    All businesses desiring to sell alcohol must submit to the City an
application for an alcohol business license, which is included on the Sunset
City business license application form. All portions of the application shall
be completed in full. The completed application and all attachments, together
with the license fee, shall be submitted at one time; no partial submittals
shall be accepted. The application shall be filed with the City Recorder.
      2.   The City alcoholic beverage license application, as set forth in
this chapter, shall be amended in accordance with applicable state and federal
laws.
   B.   Criminal Background Check: For the initial license, in addition to the
written application, each applicant for an alcohol business license under this
chapter will provide the city with a criminal background check on the
applicant.
      1.   Partnerships: If the applicant is a partnership, the application
shall provide the information required for each partner and a criminal
background check for each partner, which shall be dated no more than six (6)
months prior to the date of submission.
      2.   Corporations: If the applicant is a corporation, the application
shall provide the information required for each director and officer of the
corporation and a criminal background check on each director and officer which
shall be dated no more than six (6) months prior to the date of submission.
   C.   Investigation Of Applicant: The Police Chief or designee shall cause an
examination to be made of all applications and investigate all applicants for
licenses under this chapter. Following such examination and investigation, the
recommendation of the Police Chief shall be made in writing to the City Council
within ten (10) working days from the date the application is filed.
   D.   Qualifications Of Applicants: In determining whether an applicant is
qualified to be considered for the issuance of a liquor or beer license, the
City Council shall weigh the following information on each individual required
to fill out a schedule A: age (for all applicants except those seeking an off-
premises beer retailer license, the application shall be disapproved if an
individual is under the age of 21 years. For applicants who are seeking an off-
premises beer retailer license, the application shall be disapproved if an
individual is under the age of 18 years); citizenship; and moral character,
including whether or not the applicant has been convicted, pleaded guilty or no
contest, or forfeited bail on any felony or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude, or on the violation of any law or ordinance relating to alcoholic
beverages, driving under the influence of intoxicating liquors, drugs, or
keeping a gambling or disorderly house in the six (6) years prior to the date
of the application.
   E.   Considerations By City Council: In determining whether to grant an
alcohol business license to any applicant, the City Council shall give
consideration to the following:
      1.   The locality and neighborhood within which the proposed licensed
premises will be located and the prospective impact of the same upon such
locality and neighborhood.
      2.   The proximity of the proposed licensed premises to existing licensed
premises.
      3.   The extent of present or anticipated tourist traffic within the area
of the proposed licensed premises.
      4.   The proximity of the proposed licensed premises to any school,
church, library, public playground or park.
      5.   The extent to which the application makes a full, complete and
candid disclosure of all information required thereby.
      6.   The integrity, character and reputation of the applicant, its
partners, directors, trustees, officers, lessors, managers and operators.
      7.   The business acumen and experience of the applicant, its partners,
directors, trustees, officers, lessors, managers and operators.
      8.   The prospective impact of the licensed premises upon vehicular
traffic, congestion and parking.
      9.   The number of liquor and beer licenses in existence in the City.
      10.   Whether all employees of an applicant who sells, serves or
furnishes liquor to the public for consumption on the premises have completed
an approved alcohol education and training seminar.
      11.   In the case of an off-premises beer retailer license, unless
otherwise prohibited in Utah Code, a retail licensee may employ a minor who is
at least sixteen (16) years of age to enter the sale at a cash register or
other sales recording device.
      12.   A full-service restaurant licensee, limited-service restaurant
licensee, or beer-only restaurant licensee may employ a minor who is at least
eighteen (18) years of age to bus tables, including containers that contain an
alcoholic product.
      13.   Whether the granting of the requested license is in the greatest
public interest and in the interest of the general health and welfare of the
City's residents.
      14.   Such other facts or circumstances which may be considered material.
(Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-5: FEE FOR LICENSE:
   The license fees for the various licenses provided for in this chapter shall
be set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the City Council. Fees for
alcoholic beverage licenses shall be the same regardless of the issuance date
or the length of time for which the license shall be valid. No refund shall be
made in the event the license is suspended, revoked or voluntarily surrendered.
(Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-6: GRANTING OR DENYING LICENSE:
   Upon receipt of a completed application, all required attachments thereto,
the required license fee, and the investigative report of the Police
Department, and providing the applicant is deemed qualified under the criteria
set forth in this chapter, the City Council may conduct such further
investigations and hold such hearings as it may deem appropriate for the
purpose of determining whether to issue the requested license, taking into
consideration those matters set forth in this chapter, and may either grant or
deny the same, as in the exercise of its discretion it determines best. In the
event the City Council denies the issuance of the license, it shall set forth
in writing delivered to the applicant, the reasons for the denial. (Ord. 2019-
02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-7: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on December 31 of the year for which issued. No license shall
be renewed except upon the filing of a complete application as provided in this
chapter, and then only upon the conditions and procedures set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-8: STREAMLINED PROCEDURE:
   A.   Purpose: The streamlined procedure set forth in this section may be
used only by those applicants who held a valid liquor or beer license on
December 31 of the previous year.
   B.   Procedure: These applicants who are qualified to use this streamlined
procedure in accordance with division A. of this section, may apply for a new
license by submitting the following:
      1.   License fee;
      2.   Maintain an active license with the Utah Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control;
      3.   A new copy of the articles of incorporation or partnership agreement
only if changes have been made thereto;
      4.   A new detailed diagram of the licensed premises only if changes have
been made thereto; and
      5.   A new affidavit signed by the official required to sign the
affidavit for the initial license swearing to the truthfulness of the documents
submitted. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-9: ALCOHOL TRAINING AND EDUCATION SEMINAR:
   A.   Certificate Of Completion Required: No person shall be granted an
alcohol business license unless that person shall show certificates granted by
the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage and Control that each employee of the
business engaging in the serving, selling or furnishing of alcohol has
completed the alcohol training and education seminar as required in Utah Code
Annotated sections 32B-1-701 and 62A-15-401 and any subsequent amendments
thereto.
   B.   Off-Premises Beer Retailer: Any individual who sells or directly
supervises the sale of beer to a patron for consumption off the premises shall
be required to complete an alcohol training and education seminar. The
individual shall complete an alcohol training and education seminar within
thirty (30) days of the day on which the individual becomes staff of an off-
premises beer retailer. It shall be required for all off-premises beer
retailers to have a valid record that the individual completed an alcohol
training and education seminar. The local authority may immediately suspend the
license of an off-premises beer retailer that allows staff to directly
supervise the sale of beer or to sell beer to a patron without having a valid
record that the individual completed alcohol training as required in Utah Code
Annotated sections 32B-1-701 and 62A-15-401, and any subsequent amendments
thereto. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-10: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Display Of License: Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
at all times be conspicuously displayed in the premises for which it is issued.
   B.   Compliance With State Laws: All licensees shall comply with all
applicable state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
   C.   Transfer Of License: No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be transferred to a licensee nor to a licensed premises different from the
licensee or licensed premises referred to in the original license and original
supporting application therefor. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-11: LOCAL CONSENT:
The granting of any alcohol license pursuant to this chapter shall first obtain
the local consent of the City as required by Utah Code Annotated section 11-10
et al. Upon acquiring local consent from the City, the licensee shall complete
all application requirements set forth by the Utah Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-12: RULES, REGULATIONS, AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance By Licensee: All alcohol business licensees shall comply
with the rules and regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act or its
successor provisions, the regulations of the Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control and the requirements covered in this chapter.
   B.   Illumination Of Licensed Premises: The licensed premises shall be kept
brightly illuminated at all times while occupied or open for business. In any
prosecution for violation of this division, if it is shown that there was less
than five (5) foot-candles of light anywhere on said premises at any time while
it was occupied or open for business, except in closets used exclusively for
storage, it shall be presumed that said premises was not sufficiently
illuminated.
   C.   Lawful Hours:
      1.   On-Premises Alcohol License: All licenses for on-premises
consumption of alcohol shall comply with all applicable state laws and
regulations, including, but not limited to, the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
      2.   Off-Premises Beer Retailer License: Beer may not be sold or offered
for sale by any off-premises beer retailer licensee after one o'clock (1:00)
a.m. and before six o'clock (6:00) a.m.
   D.   Employment Of Minors: It is unlawful for any licensee, except a class A
off-premises beer retailer licensee, to permit any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to serve alcohol. A minor may not sell beer on the
licensed premises of an off-premises beer retailer unless the sale is done
under the supervision of a person twenty one (21) years of age or older who is
on the licensed premises and the minor is at least sixteen (16) years of age.
   E.   Gambling Or Gaming Devices: It is unlawful for any licensee hereunder
to have, possess, store or display upon the licensed premises any gambling or
gaming devices or any lottery tickets, or to suffer any such device or tickets
to be brought, kept, possessed, stored or displayed upon the premises for any
purpose whatsoever. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-13: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Compliance Required: All licensees shall comply with all applicable
state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, the regulations of the Utah Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control and the requirements covered in this chapter.
   B.   Frequenting Unlicensed Premises: It is unlawful for any person to
visit, to loiter about, to frequent or to resort to any house, building, room
or premises where any alcoholic beverages are kept, stored, sold, bartered,
offered or exposed for sale in violation of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
or of any ordinance of the City.
   C.   Nuisances: It is unlawful for any person to commit, keep or maintain a
nuisance upon any licensed premises. It is unlawful for any person to suffer a
nuisance to be maintained upon licensed premises owned, occupied, operated or
controlled by him, or which may be in his charge.
   D.   Lookouts: It is unlawful for any person commonly known as a "lookout"
to be stationed or maintained to give warning of the approach of any peace
officer to such premises. It is unlawful to maintain or operate any electrical
or other device which is used or capable of being used to give warning of any
peace officer.
   E.   Failure To Maintain Control By Licensee: It is unlawful for any
licensee hereunder to fail to maintain full control of the conduct of the
business upon the licensed premises, or to fail to inform himself of the manner
in which said business is conducted and of the activities of his agents and
employees in and about the licensed premises. The licensee shall be
responsible, under this chapter, for all of the activities of his agents and
employees in and about the licensed premises, and by accepting a license
hereunder, the licensee unconditionally guarantees to the City that neither he
nor his agents, servants, or employees will violate the terms of this chapter
upon the licensed premises, and for breach of such guarantee the license may be
revoked. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-14: SEARCH OF LICENSED PREMISES:
Every licensee, by accepting a license issued under the provisions of this
chapter, thereby irrevocably consents that any peace officer may at any time
during the effective period of the license freely enter upon and inspect and
search the licensed premises for any alcoholic beverage, or for any other goods
or chattels illegally possessed or kept thereon, or for evidence of any alleged
crime under investigation by such peace officer and further consents to the
seizure of any such alcoholic beverage or any goods, chattels or evidence, or
the property of the licensee, which may be found therein upon such search.
(Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-15: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority: Licenses may be suspended or revoked by the City Council for
the violation on the licensed premises of any provision of this chapter or of
any other applicable ordinance or law relating to alcoholic beverages, or if
the person to whom the license was issued no longer possesses the
qualifications required by this chapter and the statutes of the state.
   B.   Hearing: All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended
by the City Council without a prior hearing. Immediately following any
suspension order issued without a prior hearing, notice shall be given such
licensee, advising him of his right to a prompt hearing, and listing the cause
or causes for such suspension. If cause for the suspension is established at
the hearing, the suspension order may be continued for up to one year in
duration, or may be revoked. However, no license shall be revoked or suspended
beyond the initial hearing without first establishing cause therefor, nor shall
any license be revoked without first giving the licensee an opportunity for a
hearing on the cause specified for revocation. It shall be unlawful for any
licensee to sell or permit any person to possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage on the licensed premises during the period of suspension or after the
revocation of the license. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-2-2019)
3-4-16: PENALTY:
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law. Each day of
any continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2019-02, 7-
2-2019)
CHAPTER 5
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Defined
3-5-2: License Required
3-5-3: Application For License; Approval; Appeal
3-5-4: Bond Required
3-5-5: Hours Of Business
3-5-6: Records Maintained; Right Of Inspection
3-5-7: Restrictions And Obligations
3-5-8: Revocation Of License
3-5-9: Penalty
3-5-1: DEFINED:
Any person who lends money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or deals
in the purchase or possession of personal property on the condition of selling
the same back again to the vendor or pledgor at a stipulated price, or who
purchases or takes any personal property with an agreement or understanding to
resell at any time for a stipulated or any price to the vendor, or who takes
such personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed, or who lends
or advances money on personal property and takes or receives such personal
property in their possession, are hereby declared to be pawnbrokers. (1989 Code
§ 5-5-1, 3-6-1990)
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to carry on the business of pawnbroker without
first having obtained the license required by this title and having paid the
business license fee as required in section
3-1-11 of this title. (1989 Code § 5-5-2, 3-6-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
3-5-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; APPROVAL; APPEAL:
All applications for a license to carry on the business of a pawnbroker shall
be submitted to the city council and shall be accompanied by a petition, signed
by at least ten (10) owners of real property in the city certifying to the good
character of the applicant. The city council has the authority to grant or deny
the license. In the event of a denial, the applicant may appeal the denial to
the justice court. (1989 Code § 5-5-4, 3-6-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
3-5-4: BOND REQUIRED:
Prior to the issuance of any license for the business of a pawnbroker, the
applicant therefor shall file with the city recorder a bond as provided in the
fee schedule. (1989 Code § 5-5-3, 3-6-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
3-5-5: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any goods by way of pawn or pledge
before the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.,
or on Sunday. (1989 Code § 5-5-8, 3-6-1990)
3-5-6: RECORDS MAINTAINED; RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
   A.   Book Of Loans And Receipts: Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which
shall be written in ink, in the English language, at the time of each loan or
receipt of personal property, an accurate account and description of the goods,
articles or things pawned or received, which shall include the number and make
of all articles, where such articles have a number or are manufactured by any
particular manufacturer, the amount loaned or advanced thereon, the time, both
day and hour, of pawning or receiving such goods, articles or things, the true
name and residence of the person pawning or delivering the goods, articles or
things, and the thumbprint of said individual. No entry made in said book shall
be erased, obliterated or defaced, and said book, as well as every article or
thing pawned, pledged or deposited, shall be open to the inspection of any
police officer at all reasonable times. (1989 Code § 5-5-9, 3-6-1990)
   B.   Receipts For Personal Property: It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to
receive or accept any article of personal property as a pawn or pledge, or upon
which money is lent or advanced, without issuing and delivering to the person
delivering such article a receipt for the same, which shall bear the date, both
day and hour, when such goods are received and a description of the article so
pawned or deposited with the pawnbroker, as set out in subsection A of this
section, and the pawnbroker shall keep on file in his office a duplicate of
said receipt, which shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at
all reasonable times. Such receipts shall be numbered and a record kept
thereof. (1989 Code § 5-5-10, 3-6-1990)
   C.   Pawn Tickets For Pledged Articles: When a pledge is redeemed, the
pawnbroker shall place and keep on file the returned pawn ticket or receipt for
such pledge, which ticket or receipt shall at all times be open to the
inspection of any police officer. In the event of the loss of the pawn ticket
or receipt by the pledgor of any pledge, the pawnbroker, before allowing a
redemption of the pledge, shall require the pledgor to summon a police officer
in whose presence the pledge shall be redeemed and restored to the pledgor.
(1989 Code § 5-5-11, 3-6-1990)
3-5-7: RESTRICTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   Ordinances Posted: It is unlawful for any person to conduct or transact
a pawnbroking business unless he shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in
his place of business a copy of all ordinances relating to pawnbrokers. (1989
Code § 5-5-7, 3-6-1990)
   B.   Liable For Employee Acts: The holder of a pawnbroker's license is
liable for any and all acts of his employees and for any violation by them of
any of the provisions of this chapter. (1989 Code § 5-5-6, 3-6-1990)
   C.   Employment Of Persons Under Sixteen: It is unlawful for any pawnbroker
to employ any clerk or person under the age of sixteen (16) years to receive
any pledge or make any loan. (1989 Code § 5-5-14, 3-6-1990)
   D.   Forfeited Articles: It is unlawful, in all cases in which articles
pledged have been forfeited, for a sale or other disposition thereof to be made
by the pledgee within the period of thirty (30) days after such forfeiture.
(Ord. 2003-03, 3-18-2003)
   E.   Person From Whom Pawn May Not Be Taken: It is unlawful for any
pawnbroker to receive any goods, articles or things in pawn or pledge from a
person who is intoxicated or known to be a habitual drunkard, a thief or a
mentally deficient person or from a person under the age of eighteen (18).
(1989 Code § 5-5-13, 3-6-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
   F.   Receiving Goods From Minors: No person licensed as set forth in this
chapter shall take or receive any bond or pledge for money loaned, any
property, bonds, notes or securities, articles or other valuable things, or
purchase any such property, from any person under eighteen (18) years of age or
the ownership of which is in or is claimed by any minor, or which may be in the
possession of, or under the control of, any minor, without the written consent
or authority of the parent or guardian of said minor. (1989 Code § 5-5-15, 3-6-
1990)
3-5-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to report to the city council any
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The city council may
revoke any pawnbroker's license for good cause after notice and a hearing, or
without notice or hearing upon conviction of any violation of the provisions of
this chapter from which an appeal has not been taken. (1989 Code § 5-5-5, 3-6-
1990)
3-5-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 5-5-16, 3-6-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 6
RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose
3-6-2: Definitions
3-6-3: No Other City License Or Approval Required
3-6-4: Exemptions From Chapter
3-6-5: Solicitation Prohibited
3-6-6: Registration Of Solicitors
3-6-7: Application Form
3-6-8: Written Disclosures
3-6-9: When Registration Begins
3-6-10: Issuance Of Certificates
3-6-11: Form Of Certificate And Identification Badge
3-6-12: Maintenance Of Registry
3-6-13: Nontransferability Of Certificates
3-6-14: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of A Certificate Of Registration
3-6-15: Appeal
3-6-16: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
3-6-17: "No Solicitation" Notice
3-6-18: Duties Of Solicitors
3-6-19: Time Of Day Restrictions
3-6-20: Buyer's Right To Cancel
3-6-21: Penalties
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Residents of the city have an inalienable interest in their personal
safety, well being, and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability
to provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief,
political or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in
commerce. The city has a substantial interest in protecting the well being,
tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the
ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property.
The city also has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or
otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.
   B.   There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the city
and its citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this chapter on the
rights of those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of city
officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and
property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens
regarding door to door solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement
officers and those affected by door to door canvassing and solicitation, as
well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional
protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in door to door
solicitation, the city adopts this chapter to promote the city's substantial
interests in:
      1.   Respecting citizen's decisions regarding privacy in their
residences;
      2.   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
      3.   Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious
belief, political position, or charitable activities; and
      4.   Permitting truthful and nonmisleading door to door solicitation
regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
   C.   The city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in
this chapter are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the city interests
referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those
regulated. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ADVOCATING: Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support
religious belief, political position, or charitable activities.
   APPEALS OFFICER: The city council or designee of the city responsible for
receiving the information from the city and appellant regarding the denial or
suspension of a certificate and issuing a decision as required by this chapter.
   APPELLANT: The person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a
certificate, either personally as an applicant or registered solicitor, or on
behalf of the applicant or registered solicitor.
   APPLICANT: An individual who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and not a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity who
applies for a certificate permitting door to door solicitation.
   APPLICATION FORM: A standardized form provided by the city to an applicant
to be completed and submitted as part of registration.
   BCI: An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to the date of the application, of either: a) a Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification verified criminal history report
personal to the applicant; or b) verification by the Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification that no criminal history rising to the
level of a disqualifying status exists for the applicant.
   BUSINESS: A commercial enterprise licensed by the city as a person or entity
under this title, having a fixed or temporary physical location within the
city.
   CERTIFICATE: A temporary, annual, or renewal certificate permitting door to
door solicitation in the city applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of
this chapter.
   CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES: Advocating by persons or entities that either are, or
support, a charitable organization.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Includes any person, joint venture, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, association, group, or other entity:
   A.   That is:
      1.   A benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane,
patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public
health, environmental or conservation, or civic organization;
      2.   For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter
fraternal association; or
      3.   Established for any charitable purpose; and
   B.   That is tax exempt under applicable provisions of the internal revenue
code of 1986 as amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible
contributions from the public for charitable purposes.
   C.   Charitable organization includes a chapter, branch, area, or office, or
similar affiliate or any person soliciting contributions within the state for a
charitable organization that has its principal place of business outside the
city or state of Utah 1 .
   COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL: A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen
(18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage
in rational thought, conversation, and conduct.
   COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application form, a BCI, two (2)
copies of the original identification relied on by the applicant to establish
proof of identity, and the tendering of fees.
   CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of
no contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not
been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal
conviction is that offense of which the applicant or registered solicitor was
convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the charge after completion
of conditions of probation or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in
abeyance or diversion agreement.
   DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this chapter as
requiring the denial or suspension of a certificate, and any of the following:
   A.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of:
1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a
minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual
assault of any kind;
   B.   Criminal charges currently pending against the applicant or registered
solicitor for: 1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or
exploiting a minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4)
sexual assault of any kind;
   C.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of
a felony within the last ten (10) years;
   D.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been incarcerated in a
federal or state prison within the past five (5) years;
   E.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of
a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: 1) moral
turpitude, or 2) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
   F.   A final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant or
registered solicitor within the last five (5) years indicating that: 1) the
applicant or registered solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of the applicant or registered solicitor
was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)
(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
   G.   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently on parole or
probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including
being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
   H.   The applicant or registered solicitor has an outstanding arrest warrant
from any jurisdiction; or
   I.   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently subject to a
protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The practice of engaging in or attempting to
engage in conversation with any person at a residence, whether or not that
person is a competent individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate
a home solicitation sale, or attempting to further the sale of goods and/or
services.
   ENTITY: Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or
other lawful entity, organization, society or association.
   FEES: The cost charged to the applicant or registered solicitor for the
issuance of a certificate and/or identification badge, which shall not exceed
the reasonable costs of processing the application and issuing the certificate
and/or identification badge.
   FINAL CIVIL JUDGMENT: A civil judgment that would be recognized under state
law as a judgment to which collateral estoppel would apply.
   GOODS: One or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise,
perishables of any kind, subscriptions, or manufactured products offered,
provided, or sold.
   HOME SOLICITATION SALE: To make or attempt to make a sale of goods or
services by a solicitor at a residence by means of door to door solicitation,
regardless of:
   A.   The means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
   B.   The time of delivery of the goods or services; or
   C.   The previous or present classification of the solicitor as a solicitor,
peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or similar designation.
   LICENSING OFFICER: The city employee(s) or agent(s) responsible for
receiving from an applicant or registered solicitor the completed application
and either granting, suspending, or denying the applicant's certificate.
NO SOLICITATION SIGN: A reasonably visible and legible sign that states "No
Soliciting", "No Solicitors", "No Salespersons", "No Trespassing", or words of
similar import.
   POLITICAL POSITION: Any actually held belief, or information for, against,
or in conjunction with any political, social, environmental, or humanitarian
belief or practice.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has been issued a current certificate
by the city.
   REGISTRATION: The process used by the city licensing officer to accept a
completed application and determine whether or not a certificate will be
denied, granted, or suspended.
   RELIGIOUS BELIEF: Any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or
in conjunction with, any theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption,
presumption or position, or religious doctrine, dogma, or practice regardless
of whether or not the belief or information is endorsed by any other person or
public or private entity.
   RESIDENCE: Any living unit contained within any building or structure that
is occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the
city, together with the lot or other real property on which the living unit is
located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or public rights of
way.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY: That person or entity responsible to provide
the following to an applicant, registered solicitor, and the competent
individual in a residence to whom a sale of goods or services is made or
attempted to be made by means of a home solicitation sale:
   A.   Maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax
number, computing the sales taxes owing from any sale of goods or services,
paying the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or reports;
   B.   Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to
cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
   C.   Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those
persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights
or law.
   SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES: The conduct and agreement of a solicitor and the
competent individual in a residence regarding a particular good(s) or service
(s) that entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three (3) days under
any applicable federal, state, or local law.
   SERVICES: Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided, or
sold to a competent individual of a residence.
   SOLICITING OR SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities:
   A.   Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or
consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase
insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications;
   C.   Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value
for the benefit of any person or entity;
   D.   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or
services;
   E.   Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence for the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding
religious belief, political position, charitable conduct, or a home
solicitation sale;
   F.   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of
soliciting, such as hawking or peddling.
   SOLICITOR OR SOLICITORS: A person(s) engaged in door to door solicitation.
   SUBMITTED IN WRITING: The information for an appeal of a denial or
suspension of a certificate, submitted in any type of written statement to the
city offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery
confirmation mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
   SUBSTANTIATED REPORT: An oral, written, or electronic report:
   A.   That is submitted to and documented by the city;
   B.   By any of the following:
      1.   A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or
other city employees with publicly available identification of their name,
address, and any other reliable means of contact;
      2.   City law enforcement or licensing officer; or
      3.   Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level
of government;
   C.   That provides any of the following information regarding a registered
solicitor:
      1.   Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying
status of a registered solicitor;
      2.   Probable cause that the registered solicitor has committed a
disqualifying status which has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying
status;
      3.   Documented, eyewitness accounts that the registered solicitor has
engaged in repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrates failure by the
registered solicitor to adhere to the requirements of this chapter; or
      4.   Probable cause that continued licensing of the registered solicitor
creates exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety, or welfare of
any individuals or entities within the city.
   WAIVER: The written form provided to applicant by the city wherein applicant
agrees that the city may obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on
the applicant for licensing purposes under this chapter, and which contains
applicant's notarized signature. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-3: NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration need not
apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the city
to engage in door to door solicitation.
   B.   Any business licensed by the city under another city ordinance that
uses employees, independent contractors, or agents for door to door
solicitation in an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the
business, shall be required to have such solicitors obtain a certificate,
unless otherwise exempt from registration.
   C.   Those responsible persons or entities associated with registered
solicitors need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or
registration from the city, provided they do not establish a temporary or fixed
place of business in the city.
   D.   Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other
requirement of federal, state, or other local government law regarding any
license, permit, or certificate that a registered solicitor is otherwise
required to have or maintain. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. Charitable solicitation act UCA § 13-22-2(1)(a), (b).
3-6-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER:
The following are exempt from registration under this chapter:
   A.   Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent individual
prior to the time of the person's arrival at the residence;
   B.   Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the
state of Utah permits them to engage in door to door solicitation to offer
goods or services to an occupant of the residence;
   C.   Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously made
order, or persons providing services at a residence pursuant to a previously
made request by a competent individual;
   D.   Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any religious belief, or political position regardless of
whether goods, services, or any other consideration is offered or given, with
or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or purchase;
and
   E.   Persons representing a charitable organization. The charitable
exemption shall apply to students soliciting contributions to finance
extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs,
provided that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the school
administration, and that such student solicitors carry current picture student
identification from the educational institution for which they are soliciting.
Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties and
prohibitions outlined in sections
3-6-17,
3-6-18 and
3-6-19 of this chapter while advocating or soliciting. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-5: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this chapter, the practice of being in and upon a private
residence within the city by solicitors, for the purpose of home solicitation
sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-6: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS:
Unless otherwise exempt under this chapter, all persons desiring to engage in
door to door solicitation within the city, prior to doing so, shall submit a
completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a certificate. (Ord.
2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-7: APPLICATION FORM:
The licensing officer shall provide a standard application form for use for the
registration of solicitors. Upon request to the licensing officer, or as
otherwise provided, any person or entity may obtain in person, by mail, or
facsimile, a copy of this application form. Each application form shall require
disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following information,
documentation, and fee:
   A.   Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has
received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this chapter.
   B.   Contact Information:
      1.   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former names
or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
      2.   Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address, if
different;
      3.   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone
number of the responsible person or entity; and
      4.   The address by which all notices to the applicant required under
this chapter are to be sent.
   C.   Proof Of Identity: An in person verification by the licensing officer
of the applicant's true identity by use of any of the following which bear a
photograph of said applicant:
      1.   A valid driver's license issued by any state;
      2.   A valid passport issued by the United States;
      3.   A valid identification card issued by any state;
      4.   A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States
military.
Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to
establish proof of identity shall be returned to the applicant.
   D.   Proof Of Registration With Department Of Commerce: The applicant shall
provide proof that either the applicant, or the responsible person or entity,
has registered with the Utah state department of commerce.
   E.   Special Events Sales Tax Number: The applicant shall provide a special
events sales tax number for either the applicant, or for the responsible person
or entity for which the applicant will be soliciting.
   F.   Marketing Information:
      1.   The goods or services offered by the applicant, including any
commonly known, registered or trademarked names;
      2.   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits,
registrations, or other qualifications required by federal or state law to
promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered goods or services.
   G.   BCI Background Check: The applicant shall provide:
      1.   An original or a copy of a "BCI" background check as defined in
section
3-6-2 of this chapter; and
      2.   A signed copy of a waiver whereby applicant agrees to allow the city
to obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on applicant for purposes
of enforcement of this chapter 1 .
   H.   Responses To Questions Regarding "Disqualifying Status": The applicant
shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the
application form:
      1.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of: a) felony homicide,
b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, c) the sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual assault of any kind;
      2.   Are any criminal charges currently pending against the applicant
for: a) felony homicide, b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting
a minor, c) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual
assault of any kind;
      3.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a felony within the
last ten (10) years;
      4.   Has the applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison
within the past five (5) years;
      5.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within
the past five (5) years involving a crime of: a) moral turpitude, or b) violent
or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
      6.   Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant within
the last five (5) years indicating that: a) the applicant had either engaged in
fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or b) that a debt of the applicant was
nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4),
(a)(6), or (a)(19);
      7.   Is the applicant currently on parole or probation to any court,
penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest
or subject to a tracking device;
      8.   Does the applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any
jurisdiction; or
      9.   Is the applicant currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   I.   Fee: The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the
city, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application
and issuing the certificate and/or identification badge.
   J.   Execution Of Application: The applicant shall execute the application
form, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on
the present knowledge and belief of the applicant, the information provided is
complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 53-10-108(1)(b).
3-6-8: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the
applicant of the following:
   A.   The applicant's submission of the application authorizes the city to
verify information submitted with the completed application including:
      1.   The applicant's address;
      2.   The applicant's and/or responsible person's or entity's state tax
identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
      3.   The validity of the applicant's proof of identity;
   B.   The city may consult any publicly available sources for information on
the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding
warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments;
   C.   Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is
allowed;
   D.   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant
with a completed application;
   E.   The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed
application;
   F.   To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, the applicant's
BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not
available for public inspection;
   G.   The city will maintain copies of the applicant's application form,
proof of identity, and identification badge. These copies will become public
records available for inspection on demand at the city offices whether or not a
certificate is denied, granted, or renewed;
   H.   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial, or suspension of a
certificate under the provisions of this chapter;
   I.   That a request for a temporary certificate will be granted or denied
the same business day that a completed application is submitted. (Ord. 2006-01,
9-5-2006)
3-6-9: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS:
The licensing officer shall not begin the registration process unless the
applicant has submitted a completed application. The original identification
submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned after the licensing
officer verifies the applicant's identity. A copy of the identification may be
retained by the licensing officer. If an original BCI background check is
submitted by the applicant, the licensing officer shall make a copy of the BCI
and return the original to the applicant. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-10: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES:
The licensing officer shall review the completed application submitted by the
applicant and issue a certificate in accordance with the following:
   A.   Temporary Certificate:
      1.   A temporary certificate shall issue allowing the applicant to
immediately begin door to door solicitation upon the following conditions:
         a.   Applicant's submission of a completed application;
         b.   Applicant's submission of the required fee;
         c.   Applicant establishes proof of identity;
         d.   The applicant's representations on the application form do not
affirmatively show a disqualifying status;
         e.   The BCI does not affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
         f.   The applicant has not previously been denied a certificate by the
city, or had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
      2.   A temporary certificate will automatically expire after twenty five
(25) calendar days from issuance, or upon grant or denial of an annual
certificate, whichever period is shorter.
   B.   Annual Certificate: Within twenty five (25) calendar days of the
issuance of a temporary certificate the city shall:
      1.   Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the
truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted by the applicant,
including, but not limited to, those disclosed with the application form.
      2.   Issue written notice to the applicant and the responsible person or
entity, if any, that the applicant either:
         a.   Will be issued an annual certificate, eligible for renewal one
year from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate; or
         b.   Will not be issued an annual certificate for reasons cited in
section
3-6-14 of this chapter.
   C.   Renewal Certificate: An annual certificate shall be valid for one year
from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate and shall expire at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the anniversary date of issuance. Any annual
certificate that is not suspended, revoked, or expired may be renewed upon the
request of the registered solicitor and the submission of a new completed
application and payment of the fee, unless any of the conditions for the
denial, suspension or revocation of a certificate are present as set forth in
section
3-6-14 of this chapter, or a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-
5-2006)
3-6-11: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
   A.   Certificate Form: Should the licensing officer determine that the
applicant is entitled to a certificate, the licensing officer shall issue a
certificate to the applicant. The certificate shall list the name of the
registered solicitor and the responsible person or entity, if any, and the date
on which the certificate expires. The certificate shall be dated and signed by
the licensing officer. The certificate shall be carried by the registered
solicitor at all times while soliciting in the city.
   B.   Identification Badge: With both the temporary and annual certificates,
the city shall issue each registered solicitor an identification badge that
shall be worn prominently on his or her person while soliciting in the city.
The identification badge shall bear the name of the city and shall contain: 1)
the name of the registered solicitor; 2) address and phone number of the
registered solicitor, or the name, address, and phone number of the responsible
person or entity is provided; 3) a recent photograph of the registered
solicitor; and 4) the date on which the certificate expires. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-
5-2006)
3-6-12: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The licensing officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a
copy or record of every completed application received and the certificate or
written denial issued by the city. The applicant's BCI background check shall
remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public
inspection. The licensing officer may furnish to the head of the city's law
enforcement agency a listing of all applicants, those denied, and those issued
a certificate. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-13: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATES:
Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and shall list
the responsible party or entity, if any. The certificate shall be
nontransferable. A registered solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to
facilitate home solicitation sales with different: a) goods or services; or b)
responsible person or entity, from those designated in the originally submitted
completed application, shall submit a written change request to the licensing
officer. A new certificate based on the amended information shall issue for the
balance of time remaining on the solicitor's previous certificate before the
amendment was filed. Before the new certificate is given to the registered
solicitor, the registered solicitor shall obtain a revised identification badge
from the city, after payment of the fee for the identification badge. (Ord.
2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-14: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   Denial: Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a
certificate to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Denial Of Temporary Certificate:
         a.   The application form is not complete;
         b.   The applicant fails to: 1) establish proof of identity, 2)
provide a BCI or 3) pay the fees;
         c.   The completed application or BCI indicates that the applicant has
a disqualifying status; or
         d.   The applicant has previously been denied a certificate by the
city, or has had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
      2.   Denial Of Annual Certificate:
         a.   The information submitted by the applicant at the time of the
granting of the temporary certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         b.   Since the submission of the completed application, the applicant
is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
         c.   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         d.   Since the submission of the application, the city has received a
substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of the applicant;
         e.   Since the submission of the application, the city or other
governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a civil
injunction against the applicant for violating this chapter or similar federal,
state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying
status; or
         f.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of
the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523
(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
      3.   Denial Of Annual Certificate Renewal:
         a.   The information submitted by the applicant when seeking renewal
of a certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         b.   Since the submission of the renewal application, the applicant is
subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
         c.   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         d.   Since the submission of the application or granting of a
certificate, the city has received a substantiated report regarding the past or
present conduct of the solicitor;
         e.   The city or other governmental entity has either criminally
convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the applicant for violating
this chapter or similar federal, state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to
the level of a disqualifying status; or
         f.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of
the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523
(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a
certificate when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a certificate
occurs.
   C.   Notice Of Denial Or Suspension: Upon determination of the licensing
officer to deny an applicant's completed application or to suspend a registered
solicitor's certificate, the city shall cause written notice to be sent to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the method indicated in the completed
application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or suspension,
the documentation or information the city relied on to make the decision, the
availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon one business day
notice to the city, and the date upon which the denial or suspension of the
certificate shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant or
registered solicitor shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the
notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or suspension of
the certificate shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from
the date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of exigent
circumstances outlined in subsection C4 of the definition of "substantiated
report" in section
3-6-2 of this chapter, in which case, the suspension is effective immediately.
The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and until the order is
rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be contrary to
equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a certificate automatically
results in its revocation. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-15: APPEAL:
An applicant or registered solicitor whose certificate has been denied or
suspended shall have the right to appeal to the city council or its designee.
Any appeal must be submitted by either the applicant, the responsible person or
entity, or legal counsel for either who: a) documents the relationship with the
applicant or responsible person or entity; or b) is licensed or authorized by
the state of Utah to do so, and makes the assertion of an agency relationship.
The following procedures and requirements shall apply:
   A.   Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the city recorder with a
copy to the licensing officer within ten (10) business days of the decision
from which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature
of the appeal, the action complained of and the grounds for appeal.
   B.   Upon request of the applicant or registered solicitor, within one
business day, the city will make available any information upon which it relied
in making the determination to either deny or suspend the certificate.
   C.   The appeals officer shall review, de novo, all written information
submitted by the applicant or registered solicitor to the licensing officer,
any additional information relied upon by the licensing officer as the basis
for denial, suspension or revocation, and any additional information supplied
by the city, applicant or registered solicitor. Any additional information
submitted by any party to the appeal to the appeals officer shall be
simultaneously submitted to the opposing party. If desired, any party shall
have three (3) business days to submit rebuttal documentation to the appeals
officer regarding the additional information submitted by the opposing party.
   D.   The appeals officer will render a decision no later than fifteen (15)
calendar days from the date the appeal was taken, unless an extension of time
is agreed upon by the parties. In the event that any party to the appeal
submits rebuttal information as allowed in subsection C of this section, the
fifteen (15) calendar days shall be extended to include the additional three
(3) days for rebuttal.
      1.   The denial or suspension of the certificate shall be reversed by the
appeals officer if upon review of the written appeal and information submitted,
the appeals officer finds that the licensing officer made a material mistake of
law or fact in denying or suspending the applicant's or registered solicitor's
certificate.
      2.   If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that the
licensing officer properly denied or suspended the certificate of the applicant
or registered solicitor, the denial or suspension of the certificate shall be
affirmed and constitute a determination that the suspended certificate is
revoked.
      3.   The decision of the appeals officer shall be delivered to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the means designated in the completed
application, or as otherwise agreed upon when the appeal was filed.
   E.   After the ruling of the appeals officer, the applicant or solicitor is
deemed to have exhausted all administrative remedies with the city.
   F.   Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the applicant's,
solicitor's, or city's right to seek relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-16: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   B.   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to
face solicitation: 1) the name of the solicitor; 2) the name and address of the
entity with whom the solicitor is associated; and 3) the purpose of the
solicitor's contact with the person and/or competent individual. This
requirement may be satisfied through the use of the badge and an informational
flyer.
   C.   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   D.   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the
granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement by the city
of the solicitor's goods or services or of the individual solicitor. (Ord.
2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-17: "NO SOLICITATION" NOTICE:
   A.   Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a "No Solicitation" sign which shall be posted on or
near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the
sidewalk leading to the residence.
   B.   The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute
notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence
for the presence of any such notice.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors who are
exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-18: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for
any "No Soliciting" sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a
solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, "No
Solicitation" signs. If such sign or placard is posted such solicitor shall
desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall
immediately depart from such property. Possession of a certificate of
registration does not in any way relieve any solicitor of this duty.
   B.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person soliciting or
advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner
attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "No
Solicitation" sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or
attempting to engage in advocating, a home solicitation sale, door to door
soliciting, or soliciting.
   C.   It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor through ruse,
deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take action
calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
   D.   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence or
dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.
   E.   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical
contact with, or touch another person without the person's consent.
   F.   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their
explicit consent.
   G.   The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person
and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their
lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
   H.   The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 2006-
01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-19: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a
residence before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the
resident to do so. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-20: BUYER'S RIGHT TO CANCEL:
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer's signature to a written
statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third
business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of "buyer's
right to cancel" shall be in the form required by section 70C-5-103, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, or a current version thereof or any state or federal law
modifying or amending such provision. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
3-6-21: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a jail sentence of not to exceed six (6)
months. (Ord. 2006-01, 9-5-2006)
CHAPTER 7
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Title
3-7-2: Purpose Of Provisions
3-7-3: Application Of Provisions
3-7-4: Definitions
3-7-5: Obscenity; Statutory Provisions
3-7-6: Location And Zoning Restrictions
3-7-7: Business License Required
3-7-8: Criminal Background Checks
3-7-9: Exemption From License Requirements
3-7-10: Business Categories; Number Of Licenses
3-7-11: Employee Licenses
3-7-12: License Application; Disclosures Required
3-7-13: License; Fees
3-7-14: License; Premises Location And Name
3-7-15: Issuance Of License
3-7-16: License Term
3-7-17: License; Notice Of Change Of Information
3-7-18: License; Transfer Limitations
3-7-19: License; Display
3-7-20: License; Statement In Advertisements
3-7-21: General Regulations
3-7-22: Outcall Services; Operation Requirements
3-7-23: Design Of Premises
3-7-24: Nude Entertainment Business; Design Of Premises
3-7-25: Nude Entertainment Business; Location Restriction
3-7-26: Nude Dancing Agencies
3-7-27: Performers; Prohibited Activities
3-7-28: Patrons; Prohibited Activities
3-7-29: Nudity; Defenses To Prosecution
3-7-30: Hours Of Operation
3-7-31: Inspection Of Premises
3-7-32: Existing Businesses; Compliance Time Limits
3-7-33: Violation; Injunction When
3-7-34: Violation; License Suspension Or Revocation
3-7-35: Effect Of License Revocation
3-7-36: Appeal Procedure
3-7-37: Violation; Penalty
3-7-1: TITLE:
The ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be known and may be referred to as
the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 98-07,
9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-2: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
It is the purpose and object of this Chapter that the City establish reasonable
and uniform regulations governing the time, place and manner of operation of
sexually oriented businesses and their employees in the City. This Chapter
shall be construed to protect the governmental interest recognized by this
Chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional protection provided by the
United States and Utah constitutions. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This Chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain
business activities, which are characterized as sexually oriented businesses,
and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually oriented
business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions require,
this Chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances. This
Chapter shall not apply to any business premises licensed or required to be
licensed by the State or the City for the sale or consumption of alcohol. (Ord.
98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment:
   A.   Which excludes minors from more than fifteen percent (15%) of the
retail floor or shelf space of the premises; or
   B.   Which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental, for
any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: books, magazines,
periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations,
the central theme of which depicts or describes "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas"; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which
are designated for use in connection with "specified sexual activities", except
for legitimate medically recognized contraceptives.
   ADULT BUSINESS: An adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore or adult
video store.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment which:
   A.   Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions;
repeated showings of any single presentation shall not be considered a
consecutive exhibition; or
   B.   As its principal business, features persons who appear in live
performances in a state of nudity or which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
   BUSINESS LICENSE AUTHORITY: The city's business license coordinator or
designee.
   CONVICTION OR CONVICTED: Disposition by any court of a criminal charge or
information based upon a finding or plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere,
pleas in abeyance or entering into a diversion agreement.
   EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary compensation in any other
form of compensation, whether such person is hired on the payroll of the
employer, as an independent contractor, as an agent, or in any other form of
employment relationship.
   ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes,
visits, consorts with or accompanies or offers to date, consort, socialize,
visit or accompany another or others about social affairs, entertainment or
places of amusement, or within any place of public or private resort or any
business or commercial establishment or any private quarters. Escort shall not
be construed to include persons who provide business or personal services such
as licensed private nurses, aides for the elderly or handicapped, social
secretaries or similar service personnel whose relationship with their patron
is characterized by a bona fide contractual relationship a duration of more
than twelve (12) hours and who provide a service not principally characterized
as dating or socializing. Escort shall also not be construed to include persons
providing services such as singing telegrams, birthday greetings or similar
activities characterized by appearances in a public place, contracted for by a
party other than the person for whom the service is being performed and of a
duration not longer than one hour.
   ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary
compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service,
escort or patron by contracting or meeting with escort services, escorts or
patrons at any location within the city, whether or not such third person is
employed by such escort service, escort, patron, or by another business, or is
an independent contractor or self-employed.
   ESCORT SERVICES: An individual or entity who, for pecuniary compensation,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce
patrons to escorts.
   NUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation, partnership, or
any other entity or individual which offers to furnish, book or otherwise
engage the service of a professional dancer licensed pursuant to this chapter
for performance or appearance at a business licensed for nude entertainment, or
adult theaters.
   NUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a
state of nudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a nude entertainment
business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
   NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers
less than the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, or the male or female genitals, pubic region or anus.
   OUTCALL SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually oriented
business employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually oriented
business, including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers or other
similar employees.
   PATRON: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or
escort or the customer of any business licensed pursuant to this chapter.
   PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire,
profit, reward, or any other form of consideration.
   PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership or
other legal entity.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: "Nude entertainment business", sexually oriented
"outcall services", adult businesses and nude dancing agencies, as defined
herein.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the
premises of the sexually oriented business in activities related to the
sexually oriented portion of the business. This includes all managing
employees, dancers, escorts, models or other similar employees whether or not
hired as employees, agents or as independent contractors. Employees shall not
include individuals whose work is unrelated to the sexually oriented portion of
the business, such as janitors, bookkeepers and similar employees. Sexually
oriented business employees shall not include cooks, serving persons, and
similar employees, except where they may be managers or supervisors of the
business. All persons making outcall meetings under this chapter, including
escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs and other similar
employees, shall be considered sexually oriented business employees.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human male or female pubic area or anus with
less than a full opaque covering, or the human female breast from the beginning
of the areola, papilla or nipple to the end thereof with less than full opaque
covering.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.    Acts of:
      1.   Masturbation;
      2.   Human sexual intercourse;
      3.   Sexual copulation between a person and a beast;
      4.   Fellatio;
      5.   Cunnilingus;
      6.   Bestiality;
      7.   Pederasty;
      8.   Buggery; or
      9.   Any copulation between a human male and another human male, human
female, or beast.
   B.   Manipulating or caressing or fondling by any person of:
      1.   The genitals of a human;
      2.   The pubic area of a human;
      3.   The uncovered female nipple and areola.
   C.   Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a
mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-
1998, eff. 9-16-1998; amd. Ord. 2007-01, 4-17-2007)
3-7-5: OBSCENITY; STATUTORY PROVISIONS:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of any matter which
is contrary to the provisions of this code, or other applicable federal or
state statutes prohibiting obscenity. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-6: LOCATION AND ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business at any
location within the city not zoned for such business. Sexually oriented
businesses licensed as adult businesses, nude entertainment businesses, outcall
services and nude dancing agencies pursuant to this chapter shall only be
allowed in areas zoned for their use. (Ord. 2004-01, 3-16-2004)
3-7-7: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business, as
specified below, without first obtaining a sexually oriented business license.
The business license shall specify the type of business for which it is
obtained. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-8: CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS:
Every owner (regardless of the percentage or type of ownership), or any
investor of or in any sexually oriented business shall only qualify such
business for a license in Sunset City upon proof that each such owner or
investor is "free from criminal activity" (defined as having no conviction for
any class B misdemeanor or more serious offense). Before a business license may
be issued, each such owner or investor shall give consent to Sunset City to do
a criminal background check, and provide the city adequate information to
conduct the evaluation. If a company, corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, or limited partnership is an investor or owner as described
above, each shareholder, general partner, member, or limited partner in such
entity shall be required to submit to the background check provided by this
section. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-9: EXEMPTION FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex therapist or similar
individual licensed by the state to provide bona fide sexual therapy or
counseling, licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, psychiatrist,
psychologist, nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the state for
activities in the classroom.
   A.   Legitimate Artistic Modeling:
      1.   The city does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit
legitimate modeling which may occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected
by the first amendment or similar state protection. The city does intend to
prohibit prostitution and related offenses occurring under the guise of nude
modeling. Notwithstanding the provisions of section
3-7-2 of this chapter, a licensed outcall employee may appear in a state of
nudity before a customer or patron providing that a written contract for such
appearance was entered into between the customer or patron and the employee and
signed at least twenty four (24) hours before the nude appearance. All of the
other applicable provisions of this chapter shall still apply to such nude
appearance.
      2.   In the event of a contract for nude modeling or appearance signed
more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of the modeling or appearance, the
individual to appear nude shall not be required to obtain a license pursuant to
this chapter. During such unlicensed nude appearance, it is unlawful to:
         a.   Appear nude in the presence of persons under the age of eighteen
(18);
         b.   Allow, offer or agree to any touching of the contracting party or
other person by the individual while appearing in a state of nudity;
         c.   Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or committing activities harmful to a
minor;
         d.   Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sex act as validly defined
by city ordinances or state statute;
         e.   Allow, offer or agree to the contracting party or other person
masturbating in the presence of the individual contracted to appear nude;
         f.   Allow, offer or agree for the individual appearing nude to be
within three feet (3') of any other person while performing, modeling or
appearing in a state of nudity. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-10: BUSINESS CATEGORIES; NUMBER OF LICENSES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be licensed for
more than one category of sexually oriented business, except that a business
may have a license for both outcall services and nude dancing agency on the
same premises.
   B.   The categories of sexually oriented businesses are:
      1.   Outcall services;
      2.   Adult businesses;
      3.   Nude entertainment businesses;
      4.   Nude dancing agency. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-11: EMPLOYEE LICENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented businesses to employ or for any
individual to be employed by a sexually oriented business in the capacity of a
sexually oriented business employee, unless that employee first obtains a
sexually oriented business employee license. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-
1998)
3-7-12: LICENSE APPLICATION; DISCLOSURES REQUIRED:
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually oriented business or
as a sexually oriented business employee pursuant to this Chapter, the
applicant shall submit, on a form to be supplied by Sunset City business
license coordinator, the following:
   A.   The correct legal name of each applicant, corporation, partnership,
limited partnership or entity doing business under an assumed name.
   B.   If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or limited partnership
or individual or entity doing business under an assumed name, the information
required below for individual applicants shall be submitted for each partner
and each principal of an applicant and for each officer, director of a
corporation, and any shareholder (corporate or personal) of more than fifty
percent (50%) of the stock of any applicant. Any holding company or any entity
holding more than fifty percent (50%) of an applicant shall be considered an
applicant for purposes of disclosure under this Chapter. In the case of an
outcall service license the shareholders' disclosure requirements shall apply
to any shareholder of more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the
applicant.
   C.   For all applicants or individuals, the application must also state: any
other names or aliases used by the individual; the age, date and place of
birth; present business address and telephone number; present residence and
telephone number; Utah driver's license or identification number; and social
security number.
   D.   Written proof that any individual is at least eighteen (18) years of
age.
   E.   Attached to the form as provided above, two (2) color photographs of
the applicant clearly showing the individual's face and the individual's
fingerprints on a form provided by the City Police Department. For persons not
residing in the City, the photographs and fingerprints shall be on a form from
the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides. Fees for the
photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant directly to the
issuing agency.
   F.   For any individual applicant required to obtain a sexually oriented
business employee license as an escort or as a nude entertainer, a certificate
from the County Health Department or a physician licensed by the State, stating
that the individual has, within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date
of the application, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or
communicable diseases.
   G.   All previous residence addresses, if any, of each individual applicant
for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application.
   H.   A statement detailing the business license and permit history of the
applicant for the five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of the
filing of the application for any license or permit identical to or similar to
those regulated by this Chapter; and whether the applicant, previously
operating or seeking to operate such business or engaging in such occupation in
this or in any other county, city or state, has ever had a license or permit
denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction,
and state in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension.
   I.   All criminal convictions or pleas nolo contendere, except those which
have been expunged, for the applicant, individual or other entity subject to
disclosure under this Chapter for five years prior to the date of application.
This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance violations,
excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony
shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place,
nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere and sentence of each
conviction or other disposition, identifying the convicting jurisdiction.
   J.   In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real
property upon which the business or proposed business is or is to be, the
applicant shall furnish the name, address, and phone number of the owner of
record of the property.
   K.   A description of the services to be provided by the business with
sufficient detail to allow reviewing authorities to determine what business
will be transacted on the premises, together with a schedule of usual fees for
services to be charged by the licensee, and any rules, regulations or
employment guidelines under or by which the business intends to operate. This
description shall also include:
      1.   The hours that the business or service will be open to the public,
and the methods of promoting the health and safety of the employees and patrons
and preventing them from engaging in illegal activity;
      2.   The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in
acts of prostitution or other related criminal activities;
      3.   The methods of supervising employees and patrons to prevent
employees and patrons from charging or receiving fees for services or acts
prohibited by this Chapter or other statutes or ordinances;
      4.   The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote
the health and safety of employees and customers and prevent the transmission
of disease, and prevent the commission of acts of prostitution or other
criminal activity. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-13: LICENSE; FEES:
   A.   Each applicant for a sexually oriented business or employee license
shall be required to pay regulatory license fees pursuant to the following
schedule:
      1.   Yearly business regulatory license fees:
 
a. Adult businesses            $250.00
b. Outcall businesses          300.00
c. Nude dancing agencies       100.00
d. Nude entertainment business 300.00
 
       2.   For each business applicant, an initial investigation fee of twenty
dollars ($20.00) for each applicant required to submit a separate disclosure
application;
      3.   Yearly sexually oriented business employee license fees:
 
a. Any employee providing outcall business services away from the       $150.00
premises of the outcall business.
b. Adult business employees, outcall business employees requiring a
license but not performing any services outside the licensed premises,
nude entertainment business employees requiring a license but not       50.00
individually providing nude entertainment services to patrons and
employees of nude dancing agencies requiring licenses but who are not
performers.
c. Employees of nude entertainment businesses personally providing nude 150.00
entertainment to patrons.
 
   B.   Any individual applying for more than one license at the same time
shall pay the higher of all applicable fees and an additional twenty dollars
($20.00) for each additional license requested.
   C.   These fees shall be in addition to the other licenses and fees required
to do business in the City. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-14: LICENSE; PREMISES LOCATION AND NAME:
   A.   It is unlawful to conduct business under a license issued pursuant to
this Chapter at any location other than the licensed premises. Any location to
which telephone calls are automatically forwarded by such business shall
require a separate license.
   B.   It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business in the
City under any name other than the business name specified in the application.
(Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-15: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The City business license coordinator shall approve the licenses application
within thirty (30) business days after receipt of an application, unless the
business license coordinator finds one or more of the following:
   A.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
   B.   The required fees, taxes, or late penalties assessed in relation to the
sexually oriented business or employee license have not been paid.
   C.   The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request for
information as authorized by this Chapter.
   D.   The applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this
Chapter within two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the
application; however, the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the denial.
   E.   The premises to be used for the business have been disapproved by the
County Health Department, the City Fire Department, the City Police Department
and the City building officials or the City zoning officials as not being in
compliance with the applicable laws and ordinances of the City.
If any of the foregoing reviewing agencies cannot complete their review within
the thirty (30) day approval or denial period, the agency or department may
obtain from the City business license official an extension of time for their
review of no more than fifteen (15) days. The total time for the City to
approve or deny a license shall not exceed forty five (45) days from the
receipt of an application. Businesses located outside of the corporate
boundaries of the City, but requiring a license under this Chapter, may be
denied a license pursuant to this Chapter if the business does not have a valid
business license to conduct business at the business location from the
appropriate jurisdiction for that location.
      1.   Upon receipt of an application all departments required to review
the application shall determine within seven (7) days whether or not the
application is incomplete in items needed for processing. Incomplete
applications shall immediately be returned to the applicant with a
specification of the items which are incomplete.
      2.   The time for processing applications specified in this Section shall
begin to run from the receipt of a complete application.
      3.   In the event that a license for a nude entertainment business, a
nude dancing agency or an adult business has not been disapproved within thirty
(30) days or the forty five (45) days allowed after an extension, the City
shall issue the license pending completion of the City's review.
      4.   Any license issued pursuant to subsection E3 of this Section may be
revoked by the City pursuant to the revocation procedures of Sections
3-7-32 through
3-7-35 of this Chapter if the completed review determines that the license
should have been denied.
   F.   An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in
compliance with this Chapter.
   G.   An applicant has been convicted of or pled nolo contendere to a crime:
      1.   Involving prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated
promotion of prostitution; solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire;
compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution; sale, distribution or display of
material harmful to minors; sexual performance by minors; possession of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; any crime involving sexual
abuse or exploitation of a child; sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault;
rape; forcible sodomy; forcible sexual abuse; incest; harboring a runaway
child; criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the
foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements from any jurisdiction
regardless of the exact title of the offense:
         a.   For which:
            (1)   Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of
conviction, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense, or less than five
(5) years, if the convictions are two (2) or more misdemeanors within the five
(5) years; or
            (2)   Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the date of
conviction if the offense is a felony.
      2.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification pursuant to this Section. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-
16-1998)
3-7-16: LICENSE TERM:
Sexually oriented business employee licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter
shall be valid from the date of issuance through January 1 of each succeeding
year. The license fees required under Section
3-7-13 of this Chapter shall not be prorated for any portion of the year, but
shall be paid in full for whatever portion of the year the license is applied
for. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-17: LICENSE; NOTICE OF CHANGE OF INFORMATION:
Any change in the information required to be submitted under this Chapter for
either a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business
employee license shall be given, in writing, to the business license authority
and the Police Department within fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord.
98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-18: LICENSE; TRANSFER LIMITATIONS:
Sexually oriented business licenses granted under this Chapter shall not be
transferable. It is unlawful for a license held by an individual to be
transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a corporation, partnership or
other noncorporate entity to transfer any part in excess of fifty percent (50%)
thereof, without filing a new application and obtaining prior City approval.
Any transfer of the controlling interest in a business shall not operate until
a separate new license has been properly issued by the City as provided in this
Chapter. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-19: LICENSE; DISPLAY:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business location within the
boundaries of the City to fail to display the license granted pursuant to this
Chapter in a prominent location within the business premises. It is unlawful
for any individual licensed pursuant to this Chapter to fail to, at all times
while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate boundaries of the
City, carry their employee license on their person. If the individual is nude,
such license shall be visibly displayed within the same room as the employee is
performing. When requested by police, City licensing, or other enforcement
personnel or health official, it is unlawful to fail to show the appropriate
licenses while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate boundaries
of the City. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-20: LICENSE; STATEMENT IN ADVERTISEMENTS:
It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually oriented business or
employee to fail to state that the business or employee is licensed by the City
and shall include the City license number. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-
1998)
3-7-21: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business
employee to:
   A.   Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years on the licensed
premises, except that in adult businesses which exclude minors from less than
all of the business premises, minors shall not be permitted in excluded areas.
   B.   Allow, offer or agree to conduct any outcall business with persons
under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   C.   Allow, offer or agree to allow any alcohol being stored, used or
consumed on or in the licensed premises.
   D.   Allow the outside door to the premises to be locked while any patron or
customer is on or in the licensed premises.
   E.   Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed premises.
   F.   Allow, offer or agree to any sexually oriented business employee
touching or for any sexually oriented business employee to touch specified
anatomical areas of any patron or customer, whether clothed or unclothed.
   G.   Allow any sexually oriented business employee to perform or appear on
the premises of a nude entertainment business in a state of nudity or for the
employee to perform or appear in a state of nudity on such premises except on a
stage designed and separated as required in subsections
3-7-23A3 and B of this Chapter.
   H.   Allow, offer or agree to illegal possession, use, sale or distribution
of controlled substances on the licensed premises.
   I.   Allow sexually oriented business employees to possess, use, sell, or
distribute controlled substances while engaged in the activities of the
business.
   J.   Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitations of a minor or committing activities harmful to a
minor to occur on the licensed premises or, in the event of an outcall employee
or business, the outcall employee committing, offering or agreeing to commit
prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting prostitution,
soliciting a minor, or committing activities harmful to a minor.
   K.   Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sex act as validly defined by City
ordinances or State statute in the presence of any customer or patron.
   L.   Allow, offer or agree to any outcall employee appearing before any
customer or patron in a state of nudity.
   M.   Allow, offer or agree to allow a patron or customer to masturbate in
the presence of the sexually oriented business employee or on the premises of a
sexually oriented business.
   N.   Engage or allow any employee to engage in activity for the purpose of
soliciting, beckoning, requesting or suggesting to any person(s) to enter such
premises as a patron within twenty five feet (25') of any sexually oriented
business.
   O.   Allow an employee to act in a capacity of what is commonly known as a
"lookout" to be stationed or maintained to give warning of the approach of any
police officer to the premises of a sexually oriented business or to maintain
or operate any electrical or other device which is used or capable of being
used to give warning to persons within the premises of a sexually oriented
business of the approach of any police officer. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-
16-1998)
3-7-22: OUTCALL SERVICES; OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any business or employee providing outcall services
contracted for in Sunset City, to fail to comply with the following
requirements:
   A.   All businesses licensed to provide outcall services pursuant to this
Chapter shall provide to each patron a written contract in receipt of pecuniary
compensation for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of
services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed,
the total amount such services shall cost the patron, and any special terms or
conditions relating to the service to be performed. The contract need not
include the name of the patron. The business licensee shall keep and maintain a
copy of each written contract entered into pursuant to this Section for a
period of not less than one year from the date of provision of services
thereunder. The contract shall be numbered and entered into a register listing
the contract number, date, names of all employees involved in the contract and
pecuniary compensation paid.
   B.   All outcall businesses licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall maintain
an open office or telephone at which the licensee or licensee's designated
agent may be personally contacted during all hours outcall employees are
working. The address and phone number of the license's location shall appear
and be included in all patron contracts and published advertisements. For
outcall businesses which premises are licensed within the corporate limits of
the City, private rooms or booths where the patrons may meet with the outcall
employee shall not be provided at the open office or any other location by the
service, nor shall patrons meet outcall employees at the business premises.
   C.   Outcall services shall not advertise in such a manner that would lead a
reasonably prudent person to conclude that specified sexual activities would be
performed by the outcall employee. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-23: DESIGN OF PREMISES:
   A.   In addition to the general requirements of disclosure for a sexually
oriented business, any applicant for a license as an adult business or nude
entertainment business shall also submit a diagram of the premises of the
license. The design and construction, which must be completed prior to granting
a license or opening for business, shall conform to the following provisions:
      1.   The interior of the premises of an adult business shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from the
manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
      2.   Restrooms of an adult business may not contain any video
reproduction equipment or any of the business merchandise. Signs shall be
posted requiring only one person be allowed in the restroom per stall, and only
one person in any stall at a time, and requiring that patrons shall not be
allowed access to manager's station areas.
      3.   For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all
windows, doors and other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or
otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the
inside of the premises. Businesses which exclude minors from less than all of
the premises shall be designed and constructed so that minors may not see into
the area from which they are excluded. The above restriction shall not apply to
a reception area or foyer where no depictions or displays of specified sexual
anatomical areas can be seen while standing within said foyer area.
      4.   The diagram required shall not necessarily be a professional
engineer's or architect's blueprint; however, the diagram must show marked
internal dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures, and ratings for
illumination capacity.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees to
ensure that the views from the manager's station in subsection A1 of this
Section remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
any other materials, at all times that any patron is present in the premises,
and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
   C.   The premises shall at all times be equipped and operated with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-
candle, measured at floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee and the
licensee's employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-24: NUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS; DESIGN OF PREMISES:
   A.   In addition to the requirements in Section
3-7-22 of this Chapter, it is unlawful for any nude entertainment business
premises licensed under this Chapter to:
      1.   Permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item in any room on the
premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the
public or in any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in
an adult theater such items may be on the stage as part of the performance.
      2.   Allow any door on any room used for the business, except for the
door to an office to which patrons shall not be admitted, outside doors and
restroom doors, to be lockable from the inside.
      3.   Provide any room for "private performances" without a separation by
a solid wall at least three feet (3') high and six inches (6") wide. The patron
or patrons shall remain on one side of the wall and the employee or employees
shall remain on the other side of the wall during all times the performer is in
a state of nudity. "Private performances" as used herein means the nude
performance or appearance by an employee or employees for a patron while the
patron is in an area not accessible during such performance to all other
patrons in the establishment.
   B.   Nude entertainment businesses, including adult theaters, shall also
require that any performance area be on a stage raised at least two feet (2')
from the level of the main floor separated from the patrons by a minimum of
three feet (3'), which separation shall be delineated by a physical barrier at
least three feet (3') high. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-25: NUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS; LOCATION RESTRICTION:
It is unlawful for any business licensed for nude entertainment to be located
within three hundred thirty feet (330') of a business licensed for the sale or
consumption of alcohol. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-26: NUDE DANCING AGENCIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book, or
otherwise engage the services of a professional dancer, model or performer to
appear in a state of nudity for pecuniary compensation in, or for, any nude
entertainment business or adult theater licensed pursuant to this Chapter
unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this Chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage or permit any person to perform as a professional dancer,
model or performer in a state of nudity, either gratuitously or for
compensation, in, or for, any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter,
unless such person is licensed pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-
1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-27: PERFORMERS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model or performer, while
performing in any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter:
   A.   To touch in any manner any person while the performer is in a state of
nudity or to touch any specified anatomical area of another performer;
   B.   To throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
   C.   To accept any money, drink or any other object directly from any
person; or
   D.   To allow a patron to touch such performer while in a state of nudity or
to place any money or object on the performer or within the costume or person
of the performer. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-28: PATRONS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any person, or any patron of any nude entertainment business
to touch in any manner any performer while in a state of nudity; to place any
money or object on or within the costume or person of any performer; to cross
over the barrier separating the patrons from the stage during a nude
performance; to bring into the premises any alcoholic beverage for on-premise
consumption; or to give or offer to give to any such performer any drinks,
money or object while such performer is performing; except that money may be
placed on the stage which shall not be picked up by the performer except by
hand. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-29: NUDITY; DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION:
It is a defense to prosecution for violation under this Chapter that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   A.   By a proprietary school licensed by the State, or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
   B.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. (Ord. 98-07, 9-
15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-30: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No nude entertainment business shall provide nude entertainment between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. (Ord. 98-07, 9-
15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-31: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
A police officer or other authorized officer may during the hours that the
establishment is open for business, upon presentation of proper identification,
inspect those portions of any premises in which a sexually oriented business
regulated under this Chapter is conducted that are open to or frequented by
patrons and the records kept on the premises as required by subsection
3-7-21A of this Chapter. Such inspection shall be limited in scope to that
necessary to determine compliance with the regulatory provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-32: EXISTING BUSINESSES; COMPLIANCE TIME LIMITS:
   A.   The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date hereof, and regardless of
whether such persons and businesses are currently licensed to do business in
the City.
      1.   All such persons and businesses requiring outcall service licenses
shall have forty five (45) days from the effective date hereof, or until their
current license expires, whichever is first in time, to comply with the
provisions of this Chapter.
      2.   All nude entertainment businesses shall have one hundred five (105)
days from the effective date hereof, or until their current license must be
renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   For the year 1998 all businesses required by this Chapter to be
licensed as sexually oriented businesses shall be credited against the fees
required by this Chapter with the regulator license fees paid for the current
1998 license. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-33: VIOLATION; INJUNCTION WHEN:
An entity or individual who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business without a valid license or who employs or is employed as an
employee of a sexually oriented business, or who operates such a business or
functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions of this Chapter,
is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to the civil and criminal
violations provided herein and any other remedy available at law or in equity.
(Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-34: VIOLATION; LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
   A.   The City may issue a notice suspending or revoking a sexually oriented
business or employee license granted under this Chapter if a licensee or an
employee of the licensee has:
      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter;
      2.   Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually
oriented business specifically authorized by this Chapter, or by any other
statute or ordinance;
      3.   Knowingly provided materially false or misleading information in
obtaining the license;
      4.   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business or worked under the employee license during the period when the
business license or employee licensee's license was suspended;
      5.   A licensee has committed an offense which would be grounds for
denial of a license for which the time period required has not elapsed;
      6.   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a
person or persons committed in or on, or solicited for in or on the licensed
premises, or an outcall employee solicited or committed on or off the premises,
an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the persons were employees, whether or not
licensed, of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were
committed;
   B.   Suspension or revocation shall take effect within ten (10) days of the
issuance of notice, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this Chapter.
   C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the license. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-35: EFFECT OF LICENSE REVOCATION:
When a license issued pursuant to this Chapter is revoked, the revocation shall
continue for one year from its effective date, and the licensee shall not be
issued a sexually oriented business or employee license for one year from the
date of such revocation. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-36: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   If the license is denied or approved with qualifications, or if a
notice of suspension or revocation is given, the applicant or licensee may file
an appeal with the business licensing authority.
   B.   Filing of an appeal must be within ten (10) days of the date of service
of the notice of any denial, qualified approval, suspension or revocation. Upon
receiving the notice of such appeal, the business licensing authority shall
schedule a hearing before a designated hearing officer within twenty (20) days
from the date of the appeal unless such time shall be extended for good cause.
   C.   The hearing officer shall hold a public hearing on the record, and take
such facts and evidence as necessary to determine whether the denial, qualified
approval, suspension or revocation was proper under the law.
   D.   The burden of proof shall be on the City.
   E.   After the hearing, the hearing officer shall have seven (7) working
days, unless extended for good cause, in which to render findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and recommended decision to the Mayor and Council.
   F.   Either party may object to the recommendation of the hearing officer by
filing the party's objection and reasons, in writing to the Mayor and Council
within seven (7) days following the recommendation. In the event the hearing
officer recommends upholding a suspension or revocation, the license shall be
immediately suspended and shall remain suspended until any subsequent appeal is
decided. If no objections are received within the seven (7) days, the Mayor and
Council may immediately adopt the recommendation of the hearing officer.
   G.   If objections are received, the Mayor and Council shall have ten (10)
working days to consider such objections before issuing the Mayor and Council's
final decision. The Mayor and Council may, in the Mayor and Council's
discretion, take additional evidence or require written memorandum on issues of
fact or law. The standard by which the Mayor and Council shall review the
decision of the hearing officer is whether substantial evidence exists in the
record to support the hearing officer's recommendation.
   H.   An applicant aggrieved by the Mayor and Council's decision shall have
judicial review of such decision pursuant to rule 65.B, Utah Rules of Civil
Procedure, or any other applicable ordinance, statute or ruling providing for
such review. (Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
3-7-37: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In addition to revocation or suspension of a license as provided in this
Chapter, the violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be a Class B
misdemeanor. Each day of a violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 98-07, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
CHAPTER 8
TEMPORARY BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definition
3-8-2: License Required
3-8-3: Application For License
3-8-4: Rules And Regulations
3-8-5: Revocation Or Denial Of License
3-8-6: Penalty
3-8-1: DEFINITION:
"Temporary business" shall be defined as any person conducting business within
the city for a limited duration of ninety (90) consecutive days or less. Any
entity intending to do business in excess of ninety (90) days must fully meet
the licensing requirements of chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2012-05, 10-16-
2012)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any temporary
business, without first having obtained the license required by this title and
having paid the business license fee as required in section
3-1-11 of this title. (Ord. 2012-05, 10-16-2012)
3-8-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   All applications for license under this chapter shall be made in
writing upon forms provided by the city.
   B.   The applicant shall be responsible for all fees incurred in processing
the request.
   C.   Sunset City or its designee shall have the right to request any
investigation by the city fire and/or police departments, as deemed necessary
by the city.
   D.   In addition to the information required by chapter 1 of this title, an
application for a temporary license shall also show:
      1.   A copy of a valid lease or written permission from the property
owner allowing the temporary vendor to conduct business on the property.
      2.   Written permission granting use of an existing restroom facility on
or nearby the property within three hundred feet (300') of the business
location, which shall be available during all hours of operation.
      3.   A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the property and its existing
features (i.e., buildings, parking stalls, drive aisles, sidewalks, fire
hydrants); the exact location of the vendor in relation to buildings,
sidewalks, roadways, driveways, fire hydrants and other important features on
the property; all components of the business with sizes/dimensions (i.e.,
temporary structure, storage bin, trash receptacle).
      4.   If power is required for the business, an electrical plan showing
the power source, how it is connected to the temporary structure, how it is
protected from the elements, wire size and location. If it is a new power
source, an electrical permit must be obtained from the city. (Ord. 2012-05, 10-
16-2012)
3-8-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Maximum Time Limit: Each temporary business shall be limited to a
period of not more than ninety (90) consecutive days on any property or parcel
of land in the city within a nine (9) month period. Within any nine (9) month
period no more than one temporary vendor selling a product or type of product
shall be permitted on any site or parcel of real property. This regulation
shall not apply to temporary businesses participating in a city sponsored event
or activity.
   B.   Hours Of Operation: No temporary vendor shall conduct business before
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. This regulation shall
not apply to temporary businesses participating in a city sponsored event or
activity.
   C.   Location: The temporary business shall be located on private property.
The business shall not be located on public property (including public
sidewalks, public streets, public parking areas or other public places as
defined by the city) or on residentially used property, regardless of the land
use zone. This regulation shall not apply to temporary businesses participating
in a city sponsored event or activity.
   D.   Clientele: Temporary vendors shall serve walk-up traffic only; drive-up
window service shall be prohibited.
   E.   Structures: All aspects of a temporary or seasonal merchant or mobile
food vendor shall be temporary in nature with no permanent facilities
constructed on site, with the exception of the required permanent power source
and shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   The structure shall have a maximum outside display area of one
hundred forty four (144) square feet.
      2.   The structure shall be secured to or placed on the ground so as to
be stable in a seventy five (75) mile per hour wind.
      3.   When applicable, the structure shall have appropriate utility
connections, inspected for compliance to city codes.
      4.   When applicable, a temporary business structure shall have written
acceptance of the operation from the Davis County health department.
      5.   No temporary business structure shall be located closer than fifty
feet (50') to any residentially zoned property.
      6.   In no event shall the temporary business be located within the clear
vision area as identified in section
10-10-2 of this code, nor shall it be located in any way as to obstruct the
clear vision of traffic ingress or egress from the site.
   F.   Parking: The temporary vendor's stand, booth, cart or vehicle must be
so located so as to provide adequate parking for his/her customers off the
traveled portion of the street, to prevent congestion on public ways and, if
applicable, not to create a parking shortage for existing businesses on the
site.
   G.   Maintenance Of Property: All property must be kept weed and junk free.
   H.   Cleanup Deposit: A cleanup deposit in the amount established from time
to time by resolution of the city council shall be required of the licensee to
assure the removal of unsold goods, stand, booth, cart, vehicle and related
debris remaining on the property. The applicant shall provide, at its own
expense, for the restoration of the site of said use to its original condition,
including such cleanup, washing and replacement of facilities as may be
necessary. Said cleanup and restoration must be completed within three (3) days
from the day offering for sale goods, wares, merchandise or food stops or from
the date the temporary license expires, whichever is sooner. The deposit shall
be refunded to the licensee, provided the property is left clean and free of
said unsold goods and related debris as determined by inspection.
   I.   Noise, Light Or Glare: The temporary business shall not cause noise,
light or glare which adversely impacts surrounding uses.
   J.   Signs: One sign shall be allowed on the sales booth, table, stand or
other sales structure for any licensed temporary business. No movable signs,
banners or off premises signs shall be allowed.
   K.   Number Of Businesses On Site: Only one temporary business at a time
shall be allowed on any given site, unless it can be shown that adequate
ingress, egress and parking would be available for additional temporary
businesses. This regulation shall not apply to temporary businesses
participating in a city sponsored event or activity.
   L.   Compliance With Code Regulations: Each temporary business must meet all
other safety, fire, and health code regulations provided by federal, state or
local laws. (Ord. 2012-05, 10-16-2012)
3-8-5: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Violation Of Provisions; Hearing: The city council may revoke any
license granted hereunder upon the violation of any provision of this chapter
by licensee. Prior to revocation, the licensee shall be served with a written
notice of the violation and to appear before the next regular city council
meeting and show cause why said license should not be revoked. The decision of
the city council shall be rendered at such meeting, unless tabled for later
consideration. If tabled, final decision shall be at subsequent council
meeting, with ten (10) days' notice to licensee.
   B.   Written Notice Of Denial: If a license under the provisions of this
chapter is denied, the applicant therefor shall be given written notice.
   C.   Reissuance Of License: No person who has been denied a license, or
whose license has been revoked under the provisions of this chapter, shall
thereafter be granted a license under the provisions of this chapter for six
(6) months after such denial or revocation. (Ord. 2012-05, 10-16-2012)
3-8-6: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-05, 10-16-2012)
CHAPTER 9
AMUSEMENT HALLS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: License; Required, Conditions, Posting
3-9-3: Closing Hours
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   AMUSEMENT HALL: A building, portion of a building or enclosed area used for
recreation purposes by the public for a fee and includes, but is not limited
to, an arcade, billiard hall, card room, public dance hall, motion picture
theater or other theater, shooting gallery or skating rink.
   ARCADE: A place of business containing more than three (3) automatic
amusement devices.
   AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES: Each machine which, upon the insertion of a
coin, trade-token, slug or similar object, operates, or may be operated, as a
game or contest of skill or amusement of any kind or description and which
contains no automatic payoff for the return of money to the player. An
automatic amusement device is hereby further defined as any machine, apparatus,
or contrivance which is used, or which may be used, as a game of skill and
amusement wherein, or whereby, the player initiates, employs or directs any
force generated by the machine, but specifically excludes a musical mechanical
device as hereinafter defined.
   BILLIARD HALL: A place of business containing more than three (3) tables on
which billiards, bagatelle or pool is played by the public for a fee.
   BOWLING ALLEY: An amusement hall where bowling and related activities are
played by the public for a fee.
   CARD ROOM: Any room where there is played any backgammon, cards, checkers,
chess or other games of similar nature, or any game played with beans, buttons,
dice or similar devices, or to keep, maintain or operate in the city any table
on which said games are played, where charge is made for the use of the room,
use of the tables or for the privilege of playing on such tables or in such
room.
   DANCE STUDIO: A place where people are taught to dance with or without the
payment of a fee.
   JUKEBOX OR MUSICAL MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Is, and shall include, each
machine vending recorded music, or a period of radio or television
entertainment in return for the insertion or deposit therein of a coin, trade-
token, slug or similar object provided. However, that does not include coin-
operated radios or television sets in private quarters.
   MECHANICAL BULL: An automatic amusement device that is ridden by the public.
   PREMISES: Any room, house, building, structure or place licensed by or
defined in this chapter.
   PUBLIC DANCE: As used in this chapter, any dance, whether conducted in a
building or outside, to which admission can be had by paying a fee, or by the
purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token in which a charge is
made for caring for clothing or other property, or by the payment of a fee for
music for said dance, or any other dance to which the public generally may gain
admission, with or without payment of fees.
   PUBLIC DANCE HALL: An amusement hall where people may dance for a fee, not
including cabarets.
   SHOOTING GALLERY: A place of business where shooting of any kind is done,
including a shooting range.
   SKATING RINK: A place of business where a fee is charged for any type of
skating.
   THEATERS: Places of business where an outdoor or indoor motion picture or
theatrical performance is given to the public for admission to which a fee is
charged. (Ord. 2000-02, 4-4-2000)
3-9-2: LICENSE; REQUIRED, CONDITIONS, POSTING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to hold or conduct business in any amusement hall
or other place within the limits of Sunset City until such amusement hall or
other place in which the same may be held shall first have been duly licensed.
   B.   No license for an amusement hall shall be issued until it shall be
found that the place for which it is issued complies with and conforms to all
laws, codes, ordinances, health and fire regulations applicable thereto, and is
properly ventilated and supplied with separate and sufficient toilet
conveniences for each sex, and is a safe and proper place for the purpose for
which it shall be used. Every person to whom an amusement hall license is
issued shall post the same in a conspicuous place in the amusement hall covered
by such license. (Ord. 2000-02, 4-4-2000)
3-9-3: CLOSING HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting or maintaining an amusement
hall, or having control thereof, to conduct, carry on, or permit any business
activity therein between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day. However, dances may continue for one
additional hour from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight until one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. each night, but no additional patrons may be admitted after twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight. (Ord. 2000-02, 4-4-2000)
CHAPTER 10
RENTAL DWELLING LICENSE
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definitions
3-10-2: License Required For Rental Dwellings
3-10-3: License Application
3-10-4: Real Property Maintenance
3-10-5: License Fees
3-10-6: License Issuance Restriction
3-10-7: Investigation By City
3-10-8: Investigation By Fire Department And/Or Building Inspector
3-10-9: Limitation Of Reinspections
3-10-10: Issuance Of License
3-10-11: Effect Of License Issuance
3-10-12: Adoption Of Rules And Regulations
3-10-13: Enforcement; Violation; Penalty
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter
the following definitions shall apply:
   BUSINESS: The rental of one or more residential units within the City.
   DISPROPORTIONATE RENTAL FEE: A fee adopted by the City to recover its
disproportionate costs of providing Municipal services to residential rental
units compared to similarly situated owner occupied housing.
   DISPROPORTIONATE RENTAL FEE REDUCTION: A reduction of a disproportionate
rental fee as a condition of complying with the requirements of the City's Good
Landlord Program.
   DWELLING: A building or portion thereof used or designated for residential
occupancy and which includes kitchen and bathroom facilities. The term
"dwelling" includes fraternity, sorority, rooming, and boarding houses, but
excludes hotels, motels, bed and breakfast establishments, and apartment
hotels.
   EXEMPT BUSINESS: The rental of a residential unit within a single structure
that contains:
   A.   No more than four (4) residential units; and
   B.   One unit occupied by the owner.
   GOOD LANDLORD TRAINING PROGRAM: A program offered by the City to encourage
business practices that are designed to reduce the disproportionate cost of
Municipal services to residential rental units by offering a disproportionate
rental fee reduction for any landlord who:
   A.   Completes a Landlord Training Program provided by the City; or
   B.   Is an exempt landlord;
   C.   Implements measures to reduce crime in rental housing as specified in a
City ordinance or policy; and
   D.   Operates and manages rental housing in accordance with an applicable
City ordinance.
   LANDLORD: A person, persons, and/or legal entity, or a landlord's agent who
rents to tenants one or more legally established dwelling units.
   OWNER: The person having ownership. Person includes any individual, group of
individuals, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
   RENTAL DWELLING: A building or portion of a building that is:
   A.   Used or designated for use as a dwelling by one or more persons and:
      1.   Available to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out for a period of
one month or longer; or
      2.   Arranged, designed, or built to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired
out for a period of one month or longer, whether or not an owner, agent, or
rental manager is in residence. (Ord. 2017-12, 11-21-2017)
3-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED FOR RENTAL DWELLINGS:
   A.   Business License Requirement: It is unlawful for any person, as owner,
lessee, or agent thereof to keep, conduct, operate, or maintain any rental
dwelling within the limits of the City, or cause or permit the same to be done,
unless such person holds a current, unrevoked business license for such
dwelling.
An owner of multiple rental dwellings or multiple buildings containing rental
dwellings is required to obtain only one regulatory business license for the
operation and maintenance of all such rental dwellings.
   B.   Evaluation: An evaluation will be conducted for each rental dwelling to
determine eligibility for a rental dwelling business license. Eligibility for a
rental dwelling license will be determined on the basis of the following
criteria:
      1.   Rental dwelling(s) is located within zoning districts which allow
the same type of occupancy and residential uses, and
      2.   A business license shall be issued to the owner when all application
and eligibility requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances
have been fulfilled.
   C.   Nontransferable: A rental dwelling business license is not transferable
between persons or structures, and persons holding such licenses shall give
notice in writing within forty eight (48) hours to the License Office after
having transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal or equitable control of
any premises licensed under these provisions. Such notice of transferred
interest shall include the name and contact information regarding persons
succeeding to the ownership or control of the premises.
   D.   Owner Is Liable: If there is more than one owner, including purchases
under contract, each owner shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the
business license fee and the variable fees as set forth in the consolidated fee
schedule.
   E.   Exception: A business license for a rental dwelling unit shall not be
required for a rental dwelling unit which is ordinarily owner occupied but is
temporarily rented because:
      1.   The owner is placed in a hospital, nursing home, assisted living
facility, or other similar facility; or
      2.   The owner has a bona fide, temporary absence of three (3) years or
less for activity such as temporary job assignments, sabbaticals, or voluntary
service. Indefinite periods of absence from the dwelling shall not qualify for
this exemption.
      3.   As used in this subsection, "owner occupancy" means:
         a.   A retired person who possesses fifty percent (50%) ownership or
more in the dwelling and said dwelling is the primary residence of such person;
or
         b.   A family trust created for the primary purpose of estate planning
by a trustor who created the trust, placing the dwelling in such trust, and
whose primary residence is such dwelling. (Ord. 2017-12, 11-21-2017)
3-10-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
An application for a rental dwelling business license shall be made to the
License Office of the City, and shall include the following information:
   A.   Tax parcel number, street address, type of building and number of units
for each rental building owned by a landlord within the City.
   B.   History of previous violations/criminal activity at rental dwellings.
   C.   An option to participate in the Good Landlord Program.
   D.   Requirements for businesses which are exempt from the disproportionate
rental fee.
   E.   Requirements for landlords who are exempt from the City's approved
landlord training class.
   F.   Fee calculation based on the number of rental units and the
disproportionate rental fee per unit.
   G.   A certification by the owner, or owner's agent, that to the best of
such person's knowledge or belief, the premises comply with Code requirements
shown on a checklist provided by the City as part of a rental dwelling license
application.
   H.   The signature of the owner of the premises, or the owner's agent,
agreeing to comply with applicable ordinances and to authorize inspections and
provide access to rental premises as provided in this chapter.
   I.   Property ownership information which shall include the following:
      1.   The name, address, telephone number, and valid e-mail of each of the
following, if applicable:
         a.   The owner of the fee title interest,
         b.   The owner of any equitable interest,
         c.   The manager/local operating agent, residing in the State of Utah,
who is authorized by the owner for service of process, and
         d.   The agency the manager/local operating agent is employed by.
      2.   The owner(s) shall also provide a government issued form of
identification that bears a photograph.
      3.   The business entity type (corporation, partnership, LLC, etc.).
   J.   Attached self-inspection form(s) that includes a signed statement
certifying, to the best of the owner's or manager's knowledge or belief that
the use and occupancy of all such rental dwellings comply with safety,
building, and other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 2017-12, 11-21-2017)
3-10-4: REAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General Requirements: All real property used for a rental dwelling unit
must have proper landscaping, regular cleaning, securing, ongoing repair, and
maintenance of the premises in a manner that will:
      1.   Prevent fire hazards.
      2.   Prevent insect, rodent and other vermin harborage.
      3.   Prevent introduction of hazardous pollutants into the air.
      4.   Prevent spreading of vegetation that threatens the public health,
safety, or welfare.
      5.   Abate weeds, junk, unsightly objects, dilapidated structures, and
solid waste.
      6.   Promptly and properly repair and maintain buildings, improvements,
and landscaping.
      7.   Enhance the appearance of property, increase property values and
encourage neighborhood creation and maintenance within the City.
      8.   Foster or improve the City's image, property values, and
neighborhood success.
      9.   Lawfully dispose of cuttings from grass, weeds or solid waste.
      10.   Effectively secure any vacant structure.
      11.   Prevent the continued existence of and lawfully dispose of any
unsightly or deleterious objects or structures upon property resulting from
lack of maintenance, repair or cleaning.
   B.   Property Maintenance Requirement: It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of any rental dwelling unit in the City to fail:
      1.   To properly maintain real property including, but not limited to,
concrete, fencing, lighting, nonattached structure items, retaining walls,
sheds, or mailboxes.
      2.   To maintain, repair or replace fencing and to clear any weeds or
other noxious plant material that is growing through and around, under or up
into fences.
      3.   To maintain any fencing that is falling down, hazardous, being used
as a retaining wall or is unsightly.
      4.   To park any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, camper, trailer or
boat on any landscaped area or other non-approved or no parking location.
   C.   Maintenance Of Structures: It shall be unlawful for any person owning
or operating a rental dwelling unit in the City to fail to:
      1.   Maintain all buildings and other structures to the minimum standards
required by the applicable Code.
      2.   Maintain each exterior window of a building with an intact and
unbroken windowpane with an appropriate screen that shall remain in place at
all times.
      3.   Provide each exterior doorway with an appropriate door as required
by Code.
      4.   Provide and maintain weatherproofing on all exterior surfaces that
protect the building such as paint, masonry, siding, stucco, roof coverings,
rain gutters, garage doors, and carports as required by the applicable Code.
      5.   Provide a carbon monoxide detector in each residential dwelling
unit.
   D.   Property To Be Clean And Secured: It shall be unlawful for any person
owning or operating a rental dwelling unit in the City to:
      1.   Allow the growth of injurious and noxious weeds on the property.
      2.   Fail to lawfully dispose of cuttings from weeds or solid waste.
      3.   Fail to effectively secure any vacant structure.
      4.   Fail to maintain or repair any unsightly or deleterious objects or
structures on the premises.
      5.   Fail to lawfully dispose of any unsightly or deleterious objects or
structures.
      6.   Fail to promptly remove or erase graffiti on any structure located
on the premises.
   E.   Property Maintenance Code: The owner or operator of any rental dwelling
unit in the City shall conform to the most current edition of the International
Property Maintenance Code, which is adopted and incorporated herein by this
reference.
   F.   General Landscaping: All rental dwelling units in the City shall have
and maintain the following landscaping:
      1.   Landscaping shall be installed in front yards between the front line
of the rental dwelling and the sidewalk on the entire width of the lot
excluding the driveway. On corner lots, landscaping shall be installed in all
areas between the sidewalk and the side line of the rental dwelling between the
front property line and the rear property line which are visible from the
public right-of-way.
      2.   Landscaping shall be a combination of lawn, shrubs or ground cover.
Ground cover may include vegetative vines, low spreading shrubs, or annual or
perennial flowering or foliage plants. Ground cover may also include hard or
nonliving organic permeable material in not more than fifty percent (50%) of
the net landscaped area. Hard ground cover may include such materials as rocks,
boulders, gravel, or brick over sand. The City encourages low water use
landscaping where appropriate.
   G.   Parkway Maintenance: All parkways relating to residential dwelling
units shall be maintained as follows:
      1.   Landscaping or concrete shall be installed in all parkways.
      2.   The owner or operator of any rental dwelling unit for any parcel
adjacent to a street that includes a parkway shall be responsible for:
         a.   The landscaping or concrete installation within the parkway; and
         b.   The maintenance of the parkway unless the City has entered into a
written agreement or development agreement to maintain the parkway.
   H.   Violations For Failure To Properly Maintain Real Property:
      1.   Jurisdiction: All real property maintenance, structure maintenance,
cleaning, landscaping, weed control, and graffiti removal enumerated in this
chapter shall be subject to the direction and control of the applicable
authority.
      2.   Notice: The applicable authority shall notify property owner or
operator of any violation.
         a.   Contents Of Notice: Notice of any violation shall be in writing
and:
            (1)   Set forth the address of the property where the violation
exists.
            (2)   Cite the specific violation on the premises and section
violated (which may include photographs of the violation and property).
            (3)   Set forth an outline of the remedial action or require a
corrective action plan from the owner or operator.
            (4)   Set a reasonable time for the performance of any required
remedial act.
         b.   City To Serve Notice: The City shall serve notice upon the owner
or operator of the property in violation. Service shall be deemed complete if
the notice is served in one of the following ways:
            (1)   In Person: Served in person.
            (2)   Mail: Sent by regular or certified mail, postage prepaid, to
the mailing address for the property as indicated on the records of the Davis
County Recorder's Office.
            (3)   One Written Notice Sufficient For Each Calendar Year: Only
one notice need be served upon the owner or operator during any calendar year
directing the cutting or removal of weeds.
      3.   Failure To Comply: If the owner or operator of a rental dwelling
unit fails to comply with this chapter the City may, in addition to other
remedies allowed by law:
         a.   Undertake or cause the required maintenance to be made at the
expense of the owner or operator.
         b.   Repair, replace, or maintain landscaping that exists or is
required to exist.
      4.   Cost Recovery: The City is entitled to full cost recovery from the
owner or operator for failure to comply with this section in accordance with
law.
         a.   Collection: Upon completion of any work to correct a violation,
the City shall prepare an itemized statement of all costs, including
administrative expenses, which shall be sent to the owner or operator of the
rental dwelling unit who shall immediately reimburse the City.
         b.   Alternative Methods Of Collection: If the owner or operator of
the rental dwelling unit fails to make full payment within twenty (20) days of
the date of mailing of the itemized statement of costs, the appropriate
authority may either:
            (1)   Collect By Lawsuit: Collect the expenses through the court by
filing suit and obtaining a judgment for all expenses, together with reasonable
attorney fees, interest, and court costs. The City may execute or levy any
judgment obtained in the manner provided by law.
            (2)   Collect Through Taxes: Refer collection to the City Treasurer
for inclusion in the tax notice of the real property owner based upon the
itemized statement of all expenses incurred who shall deliver the appropriate
number of copies of said statement to the County Treasurer pursuant to State
law. (Ord. 2017-12, 11-21-2017)
3-10-5: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fee Schedule: There is hereby imposed upon the owner of any rental
dwelling, other than an exempt business, a disproportionate rental fee based
upon a study conducted by the City in accordance with State Statute.
   B.   Disproportionate Rental Fee: The disproportionate rental fee shall be
adopted by resolution as part of the City's consolidated fee schedule only
after completion of a study in accordance with State law and updated
accordingly as required by State law. No disproportionate rental fee shall be
collected by the City until such study is complete and adopted as provided in
this subsection. A disproportionate rental fee shall not be charged for an
"exempt business" as defined in section
3-10-1 of this chapter.
   C.   Fee: The license fee for a rental dwelling business license shall be as
shown on the City consolidated fee schedule, including any applicable
disproportionate rental fee for each rental dwelling per annum or any portion
thereof as provided therein.
   D.   Time Of Payment: An owner of any rental dwelling shall pay the business
license fee and disproportionate per rental unit fees set forth in the City's
consolidated fee schedule at the time of application for a new or renewal
license.
   E.   Failure To Make Payment: Failure to timely make a payment required
pursuant to a payment plan as described above may result in the suspension or
revocation of the license and the imposition of penalty fees as set forth in
this title.
   F.   Fee Discount: A disproportionate rental fee reduction shall be
available to landlords that choose to participate in and are in compliance with
the Good Landlord Program as set forth in section
 3-11-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-12, 11-21-2017)
3-10-6: LICENSE ISSUANCE RESTRICTION:
No business license shall be issued or renewed for a rental dwelling unless the
owner, or the owner's agent, agrees as a condition precedent, by signing the
license application, to such initial inspections or inspections for cause as
the City may require pursuant to section
3-10-7 et seq., of this chapter, or its successor, to determine whether the
rental dwelling is in compliance with applicable requirements. The failure of
the owner, or the owner's agent, to consent to such inspections shall be
grounds for the denial and/or revocation of the renewal of a regulatory
license. (Ord. 2017-12, 11-21-2017)
3-10-7: INVESTIGATION BY CITY:
   A.   Inspection Upon Complaint: City officials shall be permitted to make an
inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or any other
applicable statute or ordinance if the rental dwelling has a recorded and valid
complaint. Complaints may be submitted by any person including a City employee.
City officials may enter any rental dwelling or may enter upon any premises
during regular business hours; or, if there are no regular business hours, the
officers or their authorized representatives shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the
rental dwelling or premises and request entry. The owner or other responsible
person shall inform the occupant(s) of the rental dwelling of the appointed
time of inspection.
      1.   If an appointment cannot be arranged after a reasonable effort or if
the appointment is not attended by the owner or other responsible person, an
inspector or other authorized agent of the City may enter the building or may
enter upon the premises during regular business hours if an occupant consents
to the inspector entering the property.
      2.   If the property owner or other responsible person refuses to allow
the enforcement officers to enter and inspect the property, the officer may
obtain and execute a search warrant.
   B.   Rental Dwelling Business License Inspection: An original application
for a rental dwelling business license shall be referred for approval to the
Police Department. The Police Department shall determine, based on the self-
certification provided by an applicant under subsection
3-10-3J of this chapter and any other relevant information, if an inspection is
needed by the Fire Department and/or building inspector to determine whether or
not applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations pertaining to life/fire
safety, fire protection and prevention, and applicable codes have been and are
being complied with.
   C.   Entry Upon Proper Request: No owner, occupant or any other person
having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or
neglect, after proper request or warrant is made, to properly permit entry
therein by the City officer for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of
this title. (Ord. 2017-12, 11-21-2017)
3-10-8: INVESTIGATION BY FIRE DEPARTMENT AND/OR BUILDING INSPECTOR:
   A.   Investigation: An original application for a license for a rental
dwelling may be referred to the Fire Department and/or Building Department for
investigation as to whether or not applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations
pertaining to life/fire safety, fire protection and prevention and building
safety have been and are being complied with. Within a reasonable time, the
Fire Department and/or Building Department shall report to the License Office
as to the fitness of the applicant regarding compliance with said laws.
   B.   Inspection: After a license has been granted, the Fire Department and/
or Building Department shall inspect the licensed premises should the City
subsequently have cause to believe that the licensed premises no longer comply
with the pertinent codes or that any fire or building related law or ordinance
has been violated. Upon confirming that such is the case, the Fire Department
and/or Building Department shall report that fact to the License Office, at
which time such office will inform the Mayor and take action in regards to the
revocation of the license as the Mayor deems just and proper in light of the
facts of the case and applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-12, 11-
21-2017)
3-10-9: LIMITATION OF REINSPECTIONS:
If the City inspects a rental dwelling and thereafter approves a rental
dwelling business license, the City may not subsequently inspect that rental
dwelling unless reasonable cause exists to believe that a condition in the
rental dwelling is in violation of an applicable law or ordinance. (Ord. 2017-
12, 11-21-2017)
3-10-10: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The Mayor, after receiving recommendations from the Police Department and/or
Fire Department and the building inspector, shall act upon a rental dwelling
license application with respect to granting or denying the same, as provided
under chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2017-12, 11-21-2017)
3-10-11: EFFECT OF LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The issuance of a rental dwelling business license shall not have the effect of
changing the legal status of a rental dwelling, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Legalizing an illegally created rental dwelling or other circumstance,
or
   B.   Recognizing the existence of a legal nonconforming use, noncomplying
structure, or other nonconformity. (Ord. 2017-12, 11-21-2017)
3-10-12: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The License Officer may adopt rules and regulations, approved by the Mayor and
Council, to implement the provisions of this chapter. Such rules and
regulations shall not conflict with this chapter or other law. (Ord. 2017-12,
11-21-2017)
3-10-13: ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Action On A License: The City may, without a hearing, deny, revoke, or
suspend a license for the reasons provided in chapter 1 of this title or in
this chapter. Any suspension or revocation shall take effect only after any
appeal period has elapsed.
   B.   Investigation: The City may, on its own initiative or in response to
complaints from the general public, investigate and gather evidence of
violations of this chapter or other circumstances which may give rise under
chapter 1 of this title or this chapter to a denial, suspension or revocation
of a business license.
   C.   Additional Grounds For License Denial, Revocation, Or Suspension: A
business license for the owner of one or more rental dwelling units in the City
may be denied, revoked, or suspended for any one of the following reasons:
      1.   The applicant does not meet the qualifications for a licensee as
provided under this title.
      2.   Applicant's failure to pay:
         a.   Applicable license and per rental unit fees; and
         b.   Late fees or other penalties that may apply.
      3.   A returned check is given by an owner for the required license fees,
plus any late fees or other penalties that may apply as a result of nonpayment
of a returned check.
      4.   Noncompliance with any requirement or condition set by the City's
Planning Commission, a Land Use Authority, the Appeal Authority, the City
Manager, Mayor, City Council, or other governing authority defined by this
title.
      5.   For an existing license, the licensee has allowed the licensed
premises to be occupied, operated or maintained in a manner contrary to the
conditions set forth in the license, this title, or any other law.
      6.   Violation of the terms of site plan approval, conditional use
permit, variance, development agreement, or similar approval.
      7.   Noncompliance with applicable Health Department regulations, or any
City, State, or Federal law governing the applicant's business.
      8.   The applicant or licensee has obtained or aided another person to
obtain a license by fraud or deceit.
      9.   An application contains false or incomplete information.
      10.   The applicant or licensee has refused authorized representatives of
the City to make an inspection, or has interfered with such representatives in
making such inspection in accordance with the provisions of section
3-10-8 of this chapter.
      11.   As a result of vicarious liability resulting in a violation of this
title or other governing law by an agent or employee of the applicant or
licensee.
      12.   Any other reason expressly provided for in this title.
   D.   Class B Misdemeanor: Notwithstanding any other provision in this
chapter, any person or party who violates any provision of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor for each violation and upon
conviction thereof may be punishable. Each day a violation continues
constitutes a separate offense. In addition, the City also hereby imposes the
following civil penalties:
      1.   Administrative penalties for a notice of violation (NOV) and letter
of noncompliance, per violation, per calendar year:
         a.   First NOV, per violation: No penalty.
         b.   Second NOV, per violation, per day: Two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
         c.   Letter of noncompliance includes the accrued penalties of the
second NOV, plus per violation, per day: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   E.   Adverse Action: For any violation of this chapter, the City may take
adverse action and issue a notice of violation (NOV), and/or criminal citation
in accordance with the penalties prescribed in this Code. When taking adverse
action the City may consider:
      1.   Whether owner or licensee participates in the Good Landlord Program.
      2.   The severity of the violation(s).
      3.   The history of prior violation(s) or adverse action(s) connected
with the owner or licensee.
      4.   The conduct and demeanor of the individual or entity involved.
      5.   The likelihood of obtaining compliance by the specific contemplated
action.
      6.   Any other information obtained as part of enforcement or
investigation relating to the violation(s). (Ord. 2017-12, 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 11
GOOD LANDLORD PROGRAM
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: Purpose And Intent
3-11-3: Establishment Of Program
3-11-4: Good Landlord Program Participation Requirements
3-11-5: Rental Dwelling Management Agreement
3-11-6: Landlord Training
3-11-7: Completion Of Training Program
3-11-8: Landlord Disqualifications And Penalty
3-11-9: Appeals
3-11-10: Retroactive Application Of Discount
3-11-11: Rental Dwellings Brought Into Compliance
3-11-12: Adoption Of Rules And Regulations
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter
the following definitions shall apply:
   BUSINESS: The rental of one or more residential units within the City.
   DISPROPORTIONATE RENTAL FEE: A fee adopted by the City to recover its
disproportionate costs of providing Municipal services to residential rental
units compared to similarly situated owner occupied housing.
   DISPROPORTIONATE RENTAL FEE REDUCTION: A reduction of a disproportionate
rental fee as a condition of complying with the requirements of the City's Good
Landlord Program.
   DWELLING: A building or portion thereof used or designated for residential
occupancy and which includes kitchen and bathroom facilities. The term
"dwelling" includes fraternity, sorority, rooming, and boarding houses, but
excludes hotels, motels, bed and breakfast establishments, and apartment
hotels.
   EXEMPT BUSINESS: The rental of a residential unit within a single structure
that contains:
   A.   No more than four (4) residential units; and
   B.   One unit occupied by the owner.
   EXEMPT LANDLORD: A residential landlord who demonstrates to the City the
timely completion of any live Good Landlord Training Program provided by any
other Utah city that offers a Good Landlord Training Program.
   GOOD LANDLORD TRAINING PROGRAM: A program offered by the City to encourage
business practices that are designed to reduce the disproportionate cost of
Municipal services to residential rental units by offering a disproportionate
rental fee reduction for any landlord who:
   A.   Completes a Landlord Training Program approved by the City; or
   B.   Is an exempt landlord;
   C.   Implements measures to reduce crime in rental housing as specified in a
City ordinance or policy; and
   D.   Operates and manages rental housing in accordance with an applicable
City ordinance.
   LANDLORD: A person, persons, and/or legal entity, or a landlord's agent who
rents to tenants one or more legally established dwelling units.
   OWNER: The person having ownership. Person includes any individual, group of
individuals, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
   RENTAL DWELLING: A building or portion of a building that is:
   A.   Used or designated for use as a dwelling by one or more persons and:
       1. Available to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out for a period of
one month or longer; or
       2. Arranged, designed, or built to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired
out for a period of one month or longer, whether or not an owner, agent, or
rental manager is in residence. (Ord. 2017-13, 11-21-2017)
3-11-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The City Council finds:
      1.   A significant portion of the City's housing stock consists of rental
dwellings;
      2.   Proper management of rental dwelling housing is important to the
health, safety, and welfare of persons residing in such housing as well as to
City residents generally; and
      3.   A rental dwelling owner, or the owner's agent, who manages the
owner's rental dwellings in accordance with applicable provisions of the Good
Landlord Program, thereby reducing demand for City services to such dwellings,
shall receive a reduction in the disproportionate rental fee payable under
subsection
3-10-5B of this title.
   B.   The purpose of the Good Landlord Program is to provide a financial
incentive to landlords who implement the objectives of the Good Landlord
Training Program, keep their rental dwellings and surrounding premises free of
criminal activity, and also maintain their rental dwellings and surrounding
premises free of certain Code violations.
   C.   The Good Landlord Program authorizes a discount toward disproportionate
impact fees assessed on rental dwellings under the City's business licensing
regulations. Disproportionate impact fees are assessed based on the
disproportionate amount of police, fire, and other Municipal services provided
to rental dwellings, as an overall business licensing classification.
   D.   The discount is provided to landlords who help the City in attempting
to reduce such disproportionate services, by implementing the objectives of the
Landlord Training Program to control and prevent criminal activities occurring
on rental properties and keep their properties free of Code violations.
   E.   No discount shall be provided to any landlord unless and until the
Business License Division certifies that the requirements of this section and
all other requirements of the Good Landlord Program have been met. (Ord. 2017-
13, 11-21-2017)
3-11-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM:
There is hereby established a voluntary program, to be known as the Good
Landlord Program wherein disproportionate rental fees payable under subsection
3-10-5B of this title will be reduced for any owner of a rental dwelling who
meets the requirements of this chapter.
   A.   All applicants for a rental dwelling license shall be informed of the
availability of the program.
   B.   The costs that constitute disproportionate costs and the amounts that
are reasonably related to the costs of services provided by the City shall be
as set forth in a disproportionate costs study adopted by the City Council by
ordinance. (Ord. 2017-13, 11-21-2017)
3-11-4: GOOD LANDLORD PROGRAM PARTICIPATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Plan Participation: Any landlord, or authorized designee, of a rental
dwelling unit may choose to participate in the Good Landlord Program as part of
the rental dwelling license application in section
3-10-3 of this title. The rental dwelling license application shall be
completed by each landlord, or his or her authorized representative, and shall
identify all rental dwellings owned by the landlord within the City. Provision
of false information in the rental dwelling license application will result in
disqualification from the Good Landlord Program.
If admitted into the program, the landlord shall receive a disproportionate
rental fee reduction as shown on the City's consolidated fee schedule.
   B.   Program Requirements:
      1.   Completion of rental dwelling license application along with
associated self-inspection forms. Landlord must indicate on the license
application their desire to participate in the program;
      2.   The landlord, or the landlord's bona fide agent for all aspects of
property management, and all managers of the landlord responsible for the day
to day management of the rental dwellings shall complete four (4) hours of a
landlord training class, approved by the City, unless the landlord, or
authorized designee, is an "exempt landlord" as defined in section
3-11-1 of this chapter;
      3.   The landlord, or the landlord's bona fide agent for all aspects of
property management, and all managers of the landlord responsible for the day
to day management of the rental dwellings shall complete two (2) hours of a
landlord training class, approved by the City, every two (2) years after
completion of the initial four (4) hour class.
      4.   Execution of a written, binding rental dwelling management agreement
with the City regarding the management of the landlord's rental dwellings as
provided in section
3-11-5 of this chapter.
   C.   Compliance: A landlord shall be considered in compliance with this
section if a violation is corrected in the time required under any notice of
violation issued by the City.
   D.   Continuing Compliance: The disproportionate rental fee reduction
authorized under this chapter is conditioned upon the rental dwelling owner's
compliance with the requirements of the Good Landlord Program during the term
of the licensing year for which the reduction is granted. No disproportionate
rental fee reduction shall be given to any owner of a rental dwelling unless
the City finds the requirements of this chapter have been met. (Ord. 2017-13,
11-21-2017)
3-11-5: RENTAL DWELLING MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT:
A rental dwelling management agreement referred to in section
3-11-4 of this chapter is to be entered into between the City and the landlord
and shall include the following provisions:
   A.   Rental Dwelling Requirements: Participants in the Good Landlord Program
shall operate and manage dwelling units in accordance with the following
requirements:
      1.   Landlord agrees to comply with City and other Code provisions
applicable to the premises, including, but not limited to, Building, Fire
Safety, Mechanical, and Plumbing Codes, noise, zoning, unit legalization, snow
removal, and weed control.
      2.   Landlord acknowledges that in addition to criminal disturbances,
zoning violations such as inadequate landscaping, inadequate landscaping
maintenance, and improper outdoor storage may also be considered a nuisance.
      3.   Landlord agrees to maintain the property in a neat, orderly, and
safe condition in compliance with City's zoning regulations.
      4.   The rental dwellings are an allowed or otherwise legal use
(permitted, conditional, nonconforming, or conforming legal) under the City's
zoning ordinances.
      5.   The landlord obtains and keeps current all business licenses and
licensing fees applicable to all of the landlord's rental dwellings.
      6.   The rental dwellings and the surrounding premises are owned and
maintained in compliance with City, County or State codes affecting the use,
care or maintenance of real property (zoning ordinances, property maintenance
regulations, Utah Fit Premises Act regulations, Property Maintenance Code,
housing codes, health codes, etc.), and the premises are kept free of any
public nuisance as defined by City ordinance or State law. A landlord will be
considered to be in compliance with this requirement if violations are
corrected within any time frame required for compliance under any notice of
violation.
      7.   The landlord has paid any outstanding civil penalties assessed
against the landlord for failing to correct a notice of violation applicable to
the landlord's rental dwelling.
      8.   Provide at least one operable sink, toilet, tub, and shower, free
from leaks and in a sanitary condition with hot water of at least one hundred
ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F) and cooking oven or stove.
      9.   Provide at least one operable smoke detector for each room that is
occupied or intended for sleeping purposes.
      10.   Provide operable heating facilities sufficient to adequately heat
the rental dwelling unit to a temperature of at least seventy two degrees
Fahrenheit (72°F).
      11.   Provide and maintain windows in working order with operable locks
and free from cracks or breaks in the glass. Windows shall fit the window
openings and be weather-tight.
      12.   Assure that the rental dwelling unit is free from insects,
termites, and rodents and be responsible for pet control measures when
necessary.
      13.   Provide adequate locks to all exterior doors.
      14.   Provide and maintain appropriate garbage receptacles.
      15.   Maintain paint, siding, stucco, brick, etc., in good repair, free
from peeling, holes, or cracks.
      16.   Maintain sidewalks, driveways, and walkways in good repair, free
from unsafe conditions.
      17.   Maintain fences in good repair, free from graffiti, peeling paint,
damage, and able to stand upright as designed without propping or additional
support.
      18.   Provide at least two (2) hard surface off street parking spaces for
each rental dwelling unit. Such off street parking shall not be on landscaping.
   B.   Tenant Interaction: Require the rental dwelling owner, or owner's
agent, to:
      1.   Provide the owner's tenants with a telephone number and e-mail
address which tenants may use to contact the owner, or the owner's agent,
regarding any tenant question or concern.
      2.   Landlord shall respond to any tenant question or concern within a
reasonable time.
      3.   Meet in person with the owner's tenants at least once annually to
discuss any tenant questions or concerns.
      4.   Provide to tenants in each rental dwelling unit the internet address
to Utah Legal Services (http://www.utahlegalservices.org/public/self-help-
webpages) where issue specific information is posted to help tenants and
landlords meet their responsibilities and maintain good working relationships.
      5.   Provide tenants with a signed copy of the management agreement.
Given the importance of compliance with this agreement, landlord may include
any item from this agreement in a tenant lease agreement.
   C.   Fair Housing And Nondiscrimination: Require nondiscrimination and fair
housing as provided in local, State, and Federal law, including the following:
      1.   Landlord agrees to maintain a record of all occupancy denials and
evictions for a minimum period of eighteen (18) months and further agrees to
provide City reasonable access to these records and to the property whenever
the City determines such access is necessary for enforcement purposes.
      2.   Landlord shall not take, encourage, or permit any act of retaliation
against any tenant who reports to City a violation of: a) the Good Landlord
Program, b) rental dwelling management agreement, c) a lease agreement, or d)
this Code.
      3.   Landlord agrees to maintain and operate the property in compliance
with local, State, and Federal laws governing nondiscrimination and fair
housing.
   D.   Recordkeeping:
      1.   Landlord is required to retain documentation related to any criminal
or nuisance activity by tenant.
      2.   Landlord agrees to maintain records of landlord/tenant meetings or
communications for at least eighteen (18) months and such records shall be made
available for City inspection as reasonably requested by City.
      3.   Landlord shall keep the rental application on file for the full term
of the lease.
      4.   Landlord shall keep all criminal histories on file for the full term
of the lease.
      5.   Landlord shall copy a driver's license or State identification card
for each prospective tenant and keep on file for the full term of the lease.
      6.   Landlord shall keep the credit application on file for the full term
of the lease.
      7.   The landlord must agree to provide the City with reasonable access
to their rental records.
   E.   Tenant Screening: Landlord shall perform all of the following tenant
screening requirements for all tenants prior to move in:
      1.   Application: Landlord shall require each prospective tenant and for
any adult occupying the premises to complete a rental application, which
landlord shall keep on file for the full term of the lease. At a minimum, the
rental application shall request the following tenant information:
         a.   Full name, including middle initial.
         b.   Date of birth.
         c.   Driver's license number or State ID card.
         d.   Social security number.
         e.   Names, dates of birth, and relationship to tenant of all people
who will occupy the premises.
         f.   Name, address, and phone number of previous landlords.
         g.   Income and employment history.
         h.   Asks the applicant whether he or she has ever been convicted of
an offense involving the sale or manufacturing of illegal drugs.
         i.   The application provides that any false information provided on
the application will be grounds for denial or eviction.
      2.   Criminal Background Check: Landlord shall obtain a criminal history
for each prospective tenant over the age of eighteen (18) years, including
information from the Utah Sex Offender Registry to verify whether or not the
tenant or occupants are registered sex offenders. Such criminal history check
shall be received from a law enforcement agency or a reputable agency providing
the service. Landlord shall keep all criminal histories on file for the full
term of the lease.
      3.   Driver's License Or State Identification: Landlord shall require
every prospective tenant over the age of eighteen (18) years, to provide a
driver's license or State identification card to verify the identity of the
applicant. Landlord shall copy the driver's license or State identification
card and keep on file for the full term of the lease.
      4.   Credit Check: Landlord shall obtain a credit history from a valid
provider of such service for every prospective tenant over the age of eighteen
(18). Landlord shall keep the credit application on file for the full term of
the lease.
      5.   Income/Employment Verification: Landlord shall obtain income/
employment verification from every prospective tenant.
      6.   Rental References: Landlord shall obtain contact information for all
previous landlords within the last three (3) years. Landlord shall contact
previous landlords and inquire about any lease violations or damage to
property.
   F.   Tenant Selection: Landlord shall consider the following criteria, at a
minimum, for tenant selection:
      1.   Tenant provided false information to the landlord on the application
or otherwise.
      2.   Tenant has been convicted of any drug or alcohol related crime; any
crime related to any threat or damage to property or person, prostitution,
violence of any kind, assault, crimes that involve weaponry of any kind, or any
crime which, had it been committed on the landlord's premises, would have
disturbed the peaceful enjoyment of other tenants. This shall include the sale,
manufacture or distribution of any controlled substance.
      3.   Tenant appears on the Utah Sex Offender Registry.
   G.   Lease Agreement:
      1.   Landlord shall execute a valid, written lease agreement with each
tenant, which shall include the provisions set forth in this chapter.
      2.   Landlord shall provide in lease or rental agreements that tenant
agrees that landlord has the right to be notified by the City regarding any
criminal activity or Code violations by a tenant.
      3.   The landlord advises tenants they may be evicted if they engage in
illegal activities and includes the following provisions in the leases or
rental agreements, or adds as a crime free lease addendum, to be executed
between and agreed upon by landlord and tenant:
         a.   Resident, any members of the resident's household or a guest or
other person under the resident's control shall not engage in illegal activity,
including drug related illegal activity or possession of drug paraphernalia, on
or near the said premises. "Drug related illegal activity" means the illegal
manufacture, sale, distribution, purchase, use or possession with intent to
manufacture, sell, distribute, or use of a controlled substance (as defined in
the Utah Controlled Substance Act).
         b.   Resident, any member of the resident's household or a guest or
other person under the resident's control shall not engage in any act intended
to facilitate illegal activity, including drug related illegal activity, on or
near the said premises.
         c.   Resident or members of the household will not permit the dwelling
to be used for, or to facilitate illegal activity, including drug related
illegal activity, regardless of whether the individual engaging in such
activity is a member of the household.
         d.   Resident or members of the household will not engage in the
manufacture, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs at any locations, whether
on or near the dwelling unit premises or otherwise.
         e.   Resident, any member of the resident's household, or a guest or
other person under the resident's control shall not engage in acts of violence
or threats of violence, including, but not limited to, the unlawful discharge
of firearms, prostitution, criminal street gang activity, intimidation, or any
other breach of the rental agreement that otherwise jeopardizes the health,
safety or welfare of the landlord, his agents or tenants.
         f.   Violation of the above provisions shall be a material violation
of the lease and good cause for termination of tenancy. A single violation of
any of the provisions of this added addendum shall be deemed a serious
violation and material noncompliance with the lease. It is understood and
agreed that a single violation shall be good cause for termination of the
lease. Unless otherwise provided by law, proof of violation shall not require
criminal conviction, but shall be by the preponderance of the evidence.
         g.   In case of conflict between the provisions of the crime free
lease addendum and any other provisions of the rental lease, the provisions of
the crime free lease addendum shall govern.
         h.   A statement that the crime free lease addendum is incorporated
into the lease between owner and resident.
         i.   Signatures from both the landlord and tenant.
         j.   A statement that the tenant(s) acknowledges receipt of the crime
free lease addendum by signature of the document.
   H.   Property Management:
      1.   Landlord agrees to provide City adequate contact information as
required by subsection
3-10-3I1 of this title in order for City to provide notice of any criminal or
nuisance behavior reported to City which relates to the property.
      2.   Landlord agrees that the rental dwellings and the surrounding
premises shall be owned and maintained in compliance with City ordinances
affecting the use, care, or maintenance of real property (zoning ordinance,
nuisance ordinances, etc.), and the premises kept free of any nuisance as
defined by City ordinance or State law; provided, however, that a landlord will
be considered to be in compliance with this requirement if violations are
corrected in the time frame required under any notice of violation. A nuisance
may be caused by criminal acts, loud parties, aggravated behavior, physical
violence, and matters that require police response.
      3.   Landlord agrees to take action to correct any recurring nuisance,
disturbance, police response, or events causing a nuisance. Such action shall
include notifying the offending tenant of the problem, establishing timely
corrective action, and evicting the tenant if corrective action is not taken
after a reasonable time.
   I.   Consent To Enter: Upon reasonable cause, the City or its authorized
representative shall investigate reports of violations to the provisions of the
Good Landlord Program. Submitting an application to participate in the Good
Landlord Program constitutes irrevocable consent to the City and its authorized
representatives to enter such rental dwelling units and make an inspection to
enforce provisions of this chapter. The City or authorized representative shall
provide the property owner or property owner's representative a minimum of
twenty four (24) hours' prior notice before the inspection. Prior notice shall
be in writing and delivered via certified mail.
   J.   Landlord Disqualification: The rental dwelling owner will be excluded
from the Good Landlord Program upon noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter or the rental dwelling management agreement. (Ord. 2017-13, 11-21-2017)
3-11-6: LANDLORD TRAINING:
   A.   Content: The training program required under section
3-11-4 of this chapter shall advise rental dwelling owners about steps that may
be taken to reduce crime, including, but not limited to, actions recommended by
the Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) Program. The program
also may provide training regarding Best Management Practices, Fair Housing
Law, applicable City ordinance requirements, and any other subject which is
consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
   B.   Trainers: The training program required under section
3-11-4 of this chapter may be taught by persons or entities, as determined by
the Governing Body. (Ord. 2017-13, 11-21-2017)
3-11-7: COMPLETION OF TRAINING PROGRAM:
   A.   First Time Participants: Unless an exempt landlord under section
3-11-1 of this chapter, a first time participant in the Good Landlord Program
shall, upon application, be allowed to pay the discounted disproportionate cost
fee but shall complete the obligations of the program within two (2) months or
shall pay the remaining rental dwelling disproportionate cost fee. Failure by
the rental dwelling owner, the owner's agent, and all those responsible for day
to day property management to timely complete the program shall be grounds for
disqualifying the owner from participating in the program.
   B.   New Rental Properties: A rental dwelling owner who acquires one or more
new rental properties may request a review for admission by the License Office.
The License Office shall review all such requests and make a determination of
admission within thirty (30) days after a review request is received.
   C.   Joint Or Common Owners: If the dwelling unit is held in joint or common
ownership only one of the owners need apply and qualify under the program.
   D.   Change In Management: Notice shall be furnished to the City within
thirty (30) days of a change in the person or persons responsible for the
management of a rental dwelling. (Ord. 2017-13, 11-21-2017)
3-11-8: LANDLORD DISQUALIFICATIONS AND PENALTY:
   A.   License Office Duties: If the License Office receives evidence that a
rental dwelling owner or the owner's agents have violated the provisions of the
Good Landlord Program or the owner's rental dwelling management agreement with
the City, the License Supervisor shall:
      1.   By certified mail, notify the rental dwelling license holder of the
violation and the basis for such action.
      2.   Assess the rental dwelling license holder for any disproportionate
rental fees reduced under this chapter for the currently applicable license
period.
      3.   Assess the rental dwelling license holder any other penalties
provided by this chapter for breach or violation.
   B.   Finding Of Noncompliance: If it is determined that a rental dwelling
owner, or any of the owners' rental dwelling units, have not complied with the
requirements of the Good Landlord Program during any portion of the licensing
period for which a reduction was provided, the owner, together with all of the
owner's rental dwelling units owned and licensed during the licensing year,
shall be disqualified from the program, and the disproportionate rental fee
reduction shall be disallowed for the entirety of the term of such license. The
rental dwelling owner shall pay the full disproportionate rental fee for every
rental dwelling unit listed on the owner's license application for that year,
which shall be due upon termination from the program.
In the event of termination of participation in the program, a landlord shall
not be relieved of liability to the City for damages sustained by virtue of any
breach of the program agreement by landlord.
   C.   Additional Penalties: In addition to the disallowance of the
disproportionate rental fee reduction in subsection
3-11-2A3 of this chapter, civil penalties for violations of the agreement for
the Good Landlord Program shall be as outlined in subsection
3-10-13D1 of this title.
   D.   Readmission: After disqualification, the rental dwelling owner may
qualify for readmission to the Good Landlord Program in the next licensing year
or at the expiration of twelve (12) months from the anniversary of the finding
of noncompliance only if the owner has corrected the problems leading to
disqualification and has paid all amounts due in the prior year or trailing
twelve (12) months. (Ord. 2017-13, 11-21-2017)
3-11-9: APPEALS:
An appeal procedure is hereby made available affording due process of law to a
landlord who is denied a disproportionate rental fee reduction.
   A.   Any person denied admission to or disqualified under the program may
appear before a Hearing Officer by filing a written application in the Office
of the City Recorder for a hearing and present and contest such denial or
disqualification before a Hearing Officer. Such application shall be filed
within thirty (30) days of the denial or disqualification and shall include the
required twenty five dollar ($25.00) filing fee.
   B.   Unless the City has contracted with a Hearing Officer for the hearing
of such appeals, the Governing Body is hereby designated to hear such appeals.
   C.   Upon receipt of the appeal request the City Recorder shall set a date
for a public meeting to consider the request.
   D.   The burden of proving qualifications or compliance shall be on the
appellant.
   E.   The Hearing Officer, or Governing Body, after proper review of the
decision by the license official, may affirm, reverse, or alter the decision of
the license official. (Ord. 2017-13, 11-21-2017)
3-11-10: RETROACTIVE APPLICATION OF DISCOUNT:
If approved by the Governing Body, the discount provided under the Good
Landlord Program may be applied retroactively under the following conditions:
   A.   The landlord obtained a rental dwelling license immediately after
acquiring a new rental property and was not an owner of a rental dwelling
during the same or immediately preceding licensing year;
   B.   The landlord qualifies for the Good Landlord Program either within six
(6) months of obtaining such license or before the end of the licensing year,
whichever occurs first; and
   C.   The landlord applies for the retroactive application of the discount
and a refund of the excess payments within six (6) months of obtaining the
license or before the end of the licensing year, whichever occurs first. (Ord.
2017-13, 11-21-2017)
3-11-11: RENTAL DWELLINGS BROUGHT INTO COMPLIANCE:
If a rental dwelling has been disqualified because of an owner's failure to
correct a Code violation, a Hearing Officer may extend the discount to an
otherwise qualifying landlord if the Hearing Officer finds that:
   A.   All outstanding Code violations have now been corrected; and
   B.   Either:
      1.   Good cause existed for the failure to correct the violations in a
timely manner; or
      2.   It has been determined that the current landlord could not
reasonably be held responsible for the failure to correct. (Ord. 2017-13, 11-
21-2017)
3-11-12: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The License Officer may adopt rules and regulations, approved by the Mayor, to
implement the provisions of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall not
conflict with this chapter or other law. (Ord. 2017-13, 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 12
FOOD TRUCKS
SECTION:
3-12-1: Adoption Of State Statute
3-12-2: Definitions
3-12-3: Mandatory Minimum Requirements For Granting Any Food Truck Permit
3-12-4: First Time Food Truck Application Procedure
3-12-5: Reciprocity Food Truck Permit Application Procedure
3-12-6: General Use Regulations
3-12-7: Penalty
3-12-1: ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTE:
A.   Sunset City incorporates herein the provisions set forth in Utah Code,
title 11, chapter 6 "Food Truck Licensing and Regulation Act".
B.   All provisions of this local chapter not precluded by the Utah Food Truck
Licensing and Regulation Act shall supersede the Act, provided the local
regulations do not conflict with the provisions of the Act. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-
16-2019)
3-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUSINESS     The original municipality, or political subdivision, within the State of Utah,
LICENSE      for which the business collects and pays sales tax.
ORIGIN:
EVENT        A permit that a political subdivision issues to the organizer of a public food
PERMIT:      truck event located on public property.
FIRST TIME   An application for a mobile food truck business that does not already possess a
FOOD TRUCK   business license with another municipality or political subdivision within the
APPLICATION: State of Utah.
             A.   A fully encased food service establishment:
                1.   On a motor vehicle or on a trailer that a motor vehicle pulls to
             transport; and
FOOD TRUCK:     2.   From which a food truck vendor, standing within the frame of the
             vehicle, prepares, cooks, sells, or serves food or beverages for immediate
             human consumption.
             B.   Food truck does not include vending carts or mobile ice cream vendors.
FOOD TRUCK   An event where an individual has ordered or commissioned the operation of a
EVENT:       food truck at a private or public gathering.
FOOD TRUCK   A person who manages, controls, or who has the duty to manage or control, the
OPERATOR:    operation of a food truck.
FOOD TRUCK   A person who owns and/or holds the actual title to the food truck vehicle.
OWNER:
             A private or public parcel of land where two (2) or more mobile food businesses
FOOD TRUCK   congregate to:
RALLY:       A.   Prepare, cook, sell, or serve food or beverages for human consumption.
             B.   Food truck rally shall not include special events.
RECIPROCITY  An application for a mobile food truck business within the Sunset City boundary
FOOD TRUCK   limits, that already has an active license with another municipality, or
PERMIT       political subdivision, located within the State of Utah.
APPLICATION:
             A.   An actual or reasonably anticipated assembly of five hundred (500) or more
TEMPORARY    people that continues, or reasonably can be expected to continue, for two (2)
MASS         or more hours per day; or
GATHERING:   B.   An event that requires a more extensive review to protect public health
             and safety because the event's nature or conditions have the potential of
             generating environmental or health risks. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-16-2019)
 
3-12-3: MANDATORY MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTING ANY FOOD TRUCK PERMIT:
A.   A business license to operate a food truck in a political subdivision
within the state;
B.   A current Health Department food truck permit from a local Health
Department within the state; and
C.   A current approval of a political subdivision within the state that shows
that the food truck passed a fire safety inspection that the other political
subdivision conducted in accordance with Utah Code Annotated subsection 11-56-
104(4)(a).
D.   Current compliance with all local, state and federal laws and
requirements. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-16-2019)
3-12-4: FIRST TIME FOOD TRUCK APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
All first-time licensee mobile food truck applications shall be made in writing
to the Sunset City Business License Clerk and shall be subject to the
provisions of chapter 1, "General Business License Provisions", of this title.
(Ord. 2019-03, 7-16-2019)
3-12-5: RECIPROCITY FOOD TRUCK PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
All mobile food truck businesses that engage in business within the Sunset City
limits, who have an existing business license with another municipality, or
political subdivision, within the State of Utah, shall be required to submit
the following:
A.   Reciprocity mobile food truck permit application;
B.   Pay reciprocity application fee;
C.   Copy of the active business of origin license;
D.   Copy of the active local Health Department permit; and
E.   Copy of the active fire inspection. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-16-2019)
3-12-6: GENERAL USE REGULATIONS:
All food truck businesses shall adhere to the following regulations:
A.   All food truck businesses shall conduct business on private property,
except in the following cases:
   1.   In conjunction with a City sponsored event; or
   2.   In conjunction with a City approved special event.
B.   The food truck shall be occupied by the owner, food truck operator or
employee, at all times.
C.   All mobile food truck businesses shall adhere to following location and
parking requirements:
   1.   Parking: All mobile food trucks shall park on a hard surface of either
asphalt or concrete, unless otherwise allowed by ordinance.
   2.   Traffic Hazard: No mobile food truck, or customer of a mobile food
truck, may block or obstruct a driveway or an entrance of an existing building,
or be parked in such a manner that results in a traffic hazard.
   3.   Circulation: No mobile food truck shall interfere with the internal
parking lot circulation that creates a hazard or dangerous situation.
   4.   Public Right-Of-Way: No mobile food truck shall use the public right-
of-way, unless otherwise allowed by ordinance.
   5.   Auxiliary Power: Any auxiliary power required for the operation of the
mobile food truck shall be self-contained.
   6.   Portable Structures: No use of any tents, tables or other portable
structures are allowed if it restricts the flow of pedestrians or vehicular
traffic.
   7.   Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate the premises shall be installed
in such manner that the source of light shall be suitably screened to avoid
annoying illumination of lands outside said premises. No lighting may be used
in any way which will penetrate onto any adjoining property used for
residential purposes, or in any manner constituting a nuisance.
   8.   Sound: No person shall operate or aid in the operation of private
radios, stereophonic or sound amplification devices at a greater operating
level than
   eighty six (86) decibels measured at a distance of twenty five feet (25')
from such radios or devices or exceed a noise level of sixty two (62) decibels
except by permit in designated areas or as defined and enforced under the
City's nuisance ordinance or permit policy.
   9.   Others: All other local, state or federal law, rule or regulation.
D.   All mobile food truck businesses shall adhere to the following business
license standards.
   1.   Reciprocity permits shall be renewed annually; with the date of
expiration being the same date as the business license origin.
   2.   Reciprocity permits are non-transferable and shall be issued to the
mobile food truck owner(s) as identified on the reciprocity food truck permit.
   3.   No signage shall be allowed except those painted or affixed directly on
the mobile food truck.
   4.   All mobile food trucks shall maintain a valid Utah vehicle
registration.
   5.   All mobile food trucks shall be responsible for the trash within the
proximity of their parked food truck. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-16-2019)
3-12-7: PENALTY:
Any food truck business that fails to comply with any City, county, state and/
or federal laws shall be subject to the revocation of the business license and/
or permit as outlined in section 3-1-6. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-16-2019)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Creation
4-1-2: Appointment Of Fire Chief
4-1-3: Powers And Duties Of Fire Chief
4-1-4: Appointment, Conduct And Removal
4-1-5: Compensation
4-1-6: Responsibilities, Rights And Restrictions
4-1-7: Cost Recovery For Hazardous Materials Emergencies
4-1-1: CREATION:
For the purpose of preventing and extinguishing fires and to protect life and
property within the city, there is hereby created a department to be known as
the Sunset City fire department. The city shall own, equip and maintain such
firefighting equipment and lifesaving equipment as the city council deems
necessary and adequate and within the financial ability of the city so to
provide. (1989 Code § 12-1-1, 11-20-1990)
4-1-2: APPOINTMENT OF FIRE CHIEF:
There shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, a
chief of the fire department who shall be selected and appointed on the basis
of his qualifications and experience in the field of firefighting direction and
the supervision of personnel and firefighting equipment. (1989 Code § 12-1-2,
11-20-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
4-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF:
The fire chief shall be responsible and have under his direction, control and
supervision the continual maintenance and operation of all fire department
equipment. He shall have the duty of directing the fire department personnel in
the extinguishing of fires and protection of life and property within the city
and elsewhere when so authorized. He may divide the city into fire districts
and make such rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the city
council, for the government of all officers and members of the department as he
may deem expedient. He may make suitable regulations under which the officers
and members of the department shall be required to wear an appropriate uniform
or badge, by which, in case of fire and at other times, their authority and
position in the fire department may be known. The chief shall have sole and
entire command over all officers and members of the department at fires. He
shall adopt such measures as he shall deem expedient for the extinguishment of
fires, the protection of property, the preservation of order, the observance of
the laws of the state and the duties required of him by law and the ordinances
of the city. It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to
examine the condition of all houses and to inspect engines, hoses and hook and
ladder equipment of the city fire department, and to ensure said equipment is
in proper working order. (1989 Code § 12-1-3, 11-20-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
4-1-4: APPOINTMENT, CONDUCT AND REMOVAL:
This department shall consist of sufficient officers and members necessary to
operate available fire equipment as determined by the fire chief. Appointment,
conduct and removal of officers and members shall be in accordance with the
constitution, state law, ordinances of the city and the rules and regulations
of the fire department now in existence and as hereafter amended, with the
approval of the mayor and city council. (1989 Code § 12-1-4, 11-20-1990; amd.
1997 Code)
4-1-5: COMPENSATION:
The salary of the chief of the fire department and the members of the fire
department shall be fixed by resolution of the city council from time to time,
and shall be paid from the funds of the city upon warrants drawn upon the city.
(1989 Code § 12-1-5, 11-20-1990)
4-1-6: RESPONSIBILITIES, RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Apparatus: All engines, hoses and other fire equipment shall be kept at
such place or places as the city council shall provide and designate, and shall
be kept in proper condition for immediate use. (1989 Code § 12-1-6, 11-20-1990)
   B.   Right To Enter Upon Premises: The fire chief, and any of his assistants
or firefighters shall, at any time, have the right to enter upon any premises
for the purpose of investigating, extinguishing or controlling fires, and they
may at any reasonable hour enter any premises for the purpose of inspecting the
same. (1989 Code § 12-1-10, 11-20-1990)
   C.   Right Of Way: It is hereby provided that emergency vehicles of the city
shall have the right of way over all other vehicles of every kind in the city
and it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to drive or
operate the same ahead of emergency vehicles at a distance less than one
hundred feet (100') or to follow the same at a distance closer than one hundred
feet (100'). (1989 Code § 12-1-7, 11-20-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
   D.   Removal Of Obstructions: The chief of the fire department may order the
removal or destruction of any fence, building or structure, when it may be
deemed necessary for the purpose of checking the progress of a fire. All
persons present at any fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer in
charge. (1989 Code § 12-1-8, 11-20-1990)
   E.   Investigation After Fire: The fire chief, or in his absence, his
assistants in charge of the fire shall, after its extinguishment, make a prompt
and thorough investigation of the cause of the fire, the time of breaking out,
the amount of loss and insurance, a description of the affected buildings and
premises, and shall secure all other useful information and data available, and
record the same in a record book kept for that purpose in the office of the
department and shall report the same to the city council at such times as it
may direct. (1989 Code § 12-1-9, 11-20-1990)
4-1-7: COST RECOVERY FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCIES:
   A.   Purpose: This section shall provide procedures for recovering costs
incurred by the city for city assistance in hazardous materials emergencies
pursuant to title 53, chapter 2, section 105(3) of the Utah Code Annotated
(1953). (Ord. 2002-02, 1-15-2002)
   B.   Definitions:
   AGGRAVATED FIRE EMERGENCY:
      1.    A fire proximately caused by the owner or occupier of the property
or a structure, which presents a direct and immediate threat to public safety
and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat and the fire.
           a. Is caused or contributed to by the failure to comply with an
order from state, county or local agency, department or official; or
           b. Occurs as a direct result of a deliberate act in violation of
state law or the ordinance or regulations of the county or other local agency.
      2.   A fire that constitutes arson or reckless burning as defined by the
Utah code.
   EXPENSES: The actual labor costs of government and volunteer personnel,
including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative
overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials,
costs of disposal and the cost of any contract labor and materials as outlined
in the standard table of costs approved by the Fire Officers Association.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY: A sudden and unexpected release of any
substance that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public
safety or the environment, and requires immediate action to mitigate the
threat. Ord. 2002-02, 1-15-2002; amd. Ord. 2010-07, 6-15-2010)
   C.   Recovery Authorization And Procedure: The city is empowered to recover,
from any person, corporation, partnership or other individual or entity whose
negligent or intentional actions cause the hazardous material emergency,
expenses incurred by city agencies directly associated with a response to a
hazardous materials emergency pursuant to the following procedure:
      1.   The city shall determine responsibility for the emergency and notify
the responsible party by mail of the city's determination of responsibility and
the costs to be recovered.
      2.   The notice shall specify that the party determined responsible may
appeal the city's decision before a hearing officer designated by the mayor and
establish a date by which the notice of appeal shall be filed. The appeal date
shall be no less than fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice.
      3.   In the event the party determined responsible appeals the
determination, the hearing officer shall hold a public hearing to consider any
issues raised by the appeal, at which hearing the appealing party and the city
shall be entitled to present evidence in support of their respective positions.
      4.   The hearing officer shall, after the hearing, make a recommendation
to the mayor, who shall issue a decision assessing responsibility and costs.
   D.   No Admission Of Liability: The payment of expenses determined owing
under this chapter does not constitute an admission of liability or negligence
in any legal action for damages.
   E.   Action To Recover Costs: In the event parties determined to be
responsible for the repayment of hazardous material emergency costs fail to
make payment to the city within thirty (30) days after a determination of any
appeal by the mayor or thirty (30) days from the deadline for appeal in the
event no appeal is filed, the city may initiate legal action to recover from
the parties determined responsible the costs determined to be owing, including
the city's reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 2002-02, 1-15-2002)
CHAPTER 2
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-2-1: Statutes Adopted By Reference
4-2-1: STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The following sections of Utah Code Annotated, as amended, are hereby adopted:
 
Section          Title
11-3-1 et seq.   Fireworks Act
53-7-201 et seq. Fire Prevention and Fireworks Act
 
(1997 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SOLID WASTE, GREEN WASTE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Franchise
4-3-3: Collection Of Solid Waste, Green Waste And Recyclable Materials
4-3-4: Service Charge
4-3-5: Method Of Payment Of Service Charges
4-3-6: Containers
4-3-7: Closing Of Garbage Containers Required
4-3-8: Time And Place Of Pick Up
4-3-9: No Accumulation Of Garbage
4-3-10: Burning Of Refuse Prohibited
4-3-11: Dumping Refuse Prohibited
4-3-12: Limitations Upon Dumping
4-3-13: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
   APPROVED CONTAINERS (SOLID WASTE GARBAGE, GREEN WASTE OR RECYCLING): Shall
be designed specifically for automated collection equipped with wheels for easy
movement by residential users and containing permanently attached, tightfitting
lids, or as approved by the city.
   BULKY WASTES: Wastes that are not capable of being stored in the approved
automated refuse containers and cannot be picked up by normally used collection
vehicles, including items such as appliances, furniture, large tree branches,
lawn sod, Christmas trees, etc.
   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE, GREEN WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Garbage,
rubbish, trash, food wastes, recyclable materials, green waste, etc., resulting
from the normal and incidental activities of commercial users.
   COMMERCIAL USER: An enterprise, not a residence, such as a business,
association, corporation, manufacturer, hotel, motel, resort, commercial
entity, church, governmental or public entity other than the city, etc.
   FOOD WASTES: Animal, vegetable or mineral matter derived from the
preparation or packaging of foodstuffs.
   GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND TRASH: All solid waste except hazardous waste,
including, but not limited to, combustibles such as paper, wood, yard
trimmings, etc., and noncombustibles such as meal, glass, stone, etc.
   GREEN WASTE: Those green waste materials which can be recovered or otherwise
diverted from waste stream, such as lawn cuttings, clippings from bushes and
shrubs, leaves and other similar green yard waste, but not including dirt or
yard materials with thorns, as mutually agreed upon and determined by the
contractor and the city.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE: Materials and wastes that are hazardous by
reason of their pathological, explosive, radiological or toxic character,
including any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is
designated by the United States environmental protection agency, the state of
Utah department of environmental quality or Davis County health department to
be "hazardous" as that term is defined by or pursuant to federal, state or
local law.
   NONPROCESSIBLE WASTE: Goods and materials which are not residential and/or
are prohibited by the disposal facility, including, but not limited to, the
following:
      Animal or human body parts or remains.
      Any item exceeding two feet by two feet by five feet (2' x 2' x 5') in
dimensions.
      Any loads the majority of which consist of combustible material.
      Any material that is on fire, i.e., "hot load".
      Any material that when incinerated clearly includes electricity.
      Any materials the majority of which is liquid.
      "Bulky wastes", as defined herein.
      Commercial solid waste, as defined herein.
      Construction debris of unprocessible proportions.
      Explosives.
      "Hazardous materials and waste", as defined herein.
      Hazardous waste of any kind.
      Large appliances.
      Large metal objects of any kind.
      Large sealed containers of any kind.
      Medical or pathological wastes.
      Motor vehicles or related parts.
      Wood having a cross section exceeding nine inches (9") or five feet (5')
in length.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Those materials which can be recovered from or
otherwise diverted from the waste stream for the purpose of recycling, such as
metals, paper and plastics as mutually agreed upon and determined by the
contractor and the city.
   RESIDENCE: An occupied dwelling unit such as a home or multi-family dwelling
of four (4) or less units, not including hotels or motels. Each unit of a
multi-family dwelling shall be considered a separate residence for purpose of
billing. A dwelling unit may be considered not occupied if the persons living
therein are absent for over ninety (90) continuous days.
   RESIDENTIAL GREEN WASTE: Green waste resulting from the normal and
incidental activities of residences.
   RESIDENTIAL RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Recyclable materials resulting from the
normal and incidental activities of residences.
   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE: Garbage, rubbish, trash, food wastes, etc.,
resulting from the normal and incidental activities of residences. (Ord. 2013-
01, 3-5-2013)
4-3-2: FRANCHISE:
   A.   Independent Contractor: The city shall grant a franchise to an
independent contractor to operate solid waste, green waste and recyclable
material collection and sanitary disposal pick up routes within the city upon
the terms and conditions and under such rules and regulations as the city
council may require and establish.
   B.   Complaints; Hearing: The holder of such franchise shall be directly
answerable to the mayor and city council for the conduct and operation of such
garbage disposal franchise. In the event of complaint upon the part of any user
of the garbage collection system, the owner of the franchise shall be entitled
to a hearing before the mayor and city council prior to the revocation of any
such franchise. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-5-2013)
4-3-3: COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE, GREEN WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
   A.   Unless otherwise provided herein, the city, its agent or contractor,
shall collect, remove and dispose of all residential solid waste and recyclable
materials. The city shall also offer an optional green waste collection
service. Solid waste and recyclable materials shall be collected, removed and
disposed of with such frequency and in such manner as the city council may from
time to time establish by regulation or contract.
   B.   Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no solid
waste, refuse, green waste or recyclable materials shall be removed or hauled
away or transported upon the streets or public ways of the municipality except
by the municipality, its agent or contractor and except by authorized persons
hauling commercial solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials as
hereinafter provided. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person,
except as permitted in this chapter, to haul or remove garbage or refuse in the
municipality.
   C.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude persons from hauling
their own solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials over the streets and
rights of way of the municipality as the city council may authorize.
   D.   This service is for Sunset residents only. No person shall bring into
the city from beyond the corporate boundaries thereof any refuse, trash,
garbage or other debris and intend to have it picked up and disposed of by the
city municipal trash and garbage collection department. The franchise holders
shall immediately report to the city officials any evidence of such practice.
(Ord. 2013-01, 3-5-2013; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2024)
4-3-4: SERVICE CHARGE:
   A.   Monthly Fee: All residences within the municipality shall pay monthly
solid waste and recycling service charges as more particularly set forth in the
fee schedule as adopted by the city council. Residents may additionally opt to
receive green waste collection services for an additional fee. The charges,
rates, penalty fees for delinquency in payment and other charges incidental to
solid waste, green waste and recycling services shall be set forth in the fee
schedule and may be amended from time to time by the resolution of the city
council.
   B.   Participation: All residences and new residential customers shall be
required to participate in the city’s solid waste and recycling collection
programs. Green waste collection is optional and available to residents who
choose to subscribe to the service.
   C.   Use Of Green Waste Containers: Residents who subscribe to green waste
collection may use green waste containers from April 1 through November 30 of
each year, green waste containers shall only be used for authorized green waste
disposal and collection by subscribers to the service.
   D.   Commercial Users: All commercial users shall individually negotiate and
contract with private garbage and refuse disposal companies for the frequent
and proper removal and disposal of garbage or other refuse. Commercial users
shall accordingly pay no garbage collection fee to the city. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-
5-2013; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
4-3-5: METHOD OF PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGES:
The residential solid waste and recycling service charges shall be collected in
a bundled monthly fee, the optional green waste service charges, shall be
billed and collected in the same manner as water and sewer service charges are
billed and collected. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-5-2013; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
4-3-6: CONTAINERS:
   A.   All residential solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials to be
collected by the city, its agents or contractors, from residential users shall
be placed only in suitable and sufficient garbage receptacles. Residential
solid waste shall be placed by residential users only in containers issued to
them and the use of containers issued to others for garbage disposition is
prohibited.
   B.   Title to containers furnished by the city, its agents or contractors,
shall be retained by the city and the payment made by residents therefor shall
be rental for the use thereof.
   C.   Users renting containers furnished by the city, or having custody
thereof, shall keep the container free from destructive or decorative markings,
shall maintain the original color thereof and shall keep the inside of said
containers clean and free from buildup of fungus or bacteria or any other type
of contaminant that causes odors or facilitates deterioration of the inside or
outside of such container.
   D.   Residential users shall report to the city any damage to or
malfunctioning containers that limit their usefulness for receipt of garbage or
refuse so that the same may be returned to the supplier for repair or
replacement pursuant to the supplier's warranty covering the same.
   E.   Residential solid waste, green waste or recycling containers lost or
missing through no fault of the user thereof shall be replaced by the city
without charge, but users shall exercise due care to protect containers against
loss through theft or misappropriation.
   F.   Containers furnished by the city are issued to specific users by number
and are nontransferable. Upon discontinuance of use by a resident, containers
shall be returned to the city. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-5-2013)
4-3-7: CLOSING OF GARBAGE CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
Approved containers shall not be overfilled to the extent that the contents may
be spilled during the process of pick up and dumping into the solid waste,
green waste or recyclable materials collection vehicle. All solid waste, green
waste or recyclable materials not deposited for pick up by the city shall be
placed in rainproof and flyproof receptacles of the type herein required and
the receptacle shall be tightly closed in such a manner as to prevent offensive
odors or flies. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-5-2013)
4-3-8: TIME AND PLACE OF PICK UP:
   A.   All solid waste, green waste and recyclable material containers subject
to collection by the city shall be placed on the edge of the street at least
five feet (5') from other automated containers and obstructions such as trees,
mailboxes, etc., and fifteen feet (15') away from parked vehicles, and with the
container's wheels as close to the curb as reasonably possible, with the hinge
thereof to curbside and the lid opening facing toward the street. When snow or
street construction prevents placing of the container against the curb, the
container shall be placed not over two feet (2') from the edge of said snow or
construction and in a manner that will not obstruct traffic or unduly impede
the snowplowing activities of the city.
   B.   Containers shall not be placed or permitted to block driveways or
through traffic.
   C.   Until otherwise provided by regulation, containers must not be set out
upon the street for collection prior to the day before collection and must be
set out prior to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on the day of collection.
   D.   All empty containers must be removed from the street as soon as
practicable after being emptied, and in every case, must be removed from the
street within twenty four (24) hours after collection.
   E.   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle upon a public street within the
city during the hours of solid waste and recycling service pick up on said
street in a manner that interferes with access thereto by the solid waste,
green waste or recyclable materials collection vehicle. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-5-
2013)
4-3-9: NO ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate solid waste, refuse, green
waste or recyclable materials or cause solid waste, refuse, green waste or
recyclable materials to be deposited upon any street or right of way. (Ord.
2013-01, 3-5-2013)
4-3-10: BURNING OF REFUSE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste, garbage, manure, green
waste or other refuse or rubbish in the open air or in any furnace or stove
within the municipality. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-5-2013)
4-3-11: DUMPING REFUSE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump solid waste,
garbage, ashes, paper boxes, cartons, trade waste, manure, green waste or any
other refuse upon any lot within the municipality whether such lot is occupied
or vacant and whether such person so placing, depositing or dumping such refuse
is the owner, tenant, occupant or lessor thereof or has the same under his
jurisdiction and control. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-5-2013)
4-3-12: LIMITATIONS UPON DUMPING:
Dumping solid waste, green waste, recyclable materials and garbage shall be
permitted only in such places as are designated by the city council. Dumping
shall be subject to such rules and regulations as may be formulated by the city
council. Until changed by city ordinance, all processible waste generated
within the city shall be delivered to the Wasatch integrated waste management
district facilities, as said district shall direct. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-5-2013)
4-3-13: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or any rules or
regulations adopted by the city council to implement this chapter shall be a
class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction of any charge of such violation, the
offender shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-5-2013)
CHAPTER 4
WEEDS, JUNK AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Unlawful Acts
4-4-2: Classic Or Antique Vehicle Restoration Permit
4-4-3: Violation; Notice
4-4-4: Abatement
4-4-5: Remedies Not Exclusive
4-4-6: Penalty
4-4-1: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   A.   Existence Within City: It is unlawful to allow the growth of injurious
and noxious or undesirable weeds, dead or dying trees or shrubs, garbage,
refuse, unsightly objects or structures to exist on any yard, lot or piece of
property within the City.
   B.   Refrigerators: It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to
remain outside on any property in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an
airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be
released from the inside, without first removing the door, lid or locking
device.
   C.   Abandoned Vehicles And Building Materials: It is unlawful for any
person to cause, permit or allow scrap metal, wastepaper products, discarded
building materials or any abandoned vehicle or vehicle parts, machinery or
machinery parts or other waste material to be in or upon any yard, lot or piece
of property within the City. For purposes of this chapter, a vehicle shall be
prima facie presumed abandoned if such vehicle:
      1.   Is not registered and inspected thirty (30) days after the date on
which such registration and inspection is required by law; or
      2.   Is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or otherwise rendered
inoperable for a period of more than one hundred twenty (120) days.
      3.   Exceptions to subsections C1 and C2 of this section 1  are
recreational vehicles stored in a licensed recreational vehicle storage lot.
   D.   Obstruction Of Sidewalks: It is unlawful to allow the obstruction of
sidewalks resulting in the restriction of pedestrian traffic by:
      1.   Allowing the growth of weeds, shrubs, trees or overhanging limbs to
protrude onto or over the sidewalk.
      2.   Leaving any garbage (other than for pick up), other objects,
structures, materials or vehicles on the sidewalk or in the road or right-of-
way. (Ord. 2018-03, 8-7-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-4-2 of this chapter.
4-4-2: CLASSIC OR ANTIQUE VEHICLE RESTORATION PERMIT:
"Classic" vehicles are defined as between twenty (20) and forty nine (49) years
old and "antique" vehicles are defined as fifty (50) years old or older. A two
(2) year written permit may be issued by the Police Department to an owner
allowing the undriveable vehicle to be stored in the side yard or rear yard of
the owner's premises for the purpose of repair and restoration for a period not
to exceed two (2) consecutive years. Succeeding six (6) month permit extensions
are available only if the owner has been actively working on the vehicle during
the previous two (2) years. The owner must fully comply with the requirements
listed on the classic or antique vehicle restoration permit application. Only
two (2) vehicle restoration permits will be allowed at a time per household or
dwelling site. (Ord. 2018-03, 8-7-2018)
4-4-3: VIOLATION; NOTICE:
A City official will make careful examination of the property to ensure there
is a violation. He is authorized to notify the owner of the property to
properly dispose of any such violation. Notification may be verbal, written or
by court summons. Any such notice will allow the owner not less than ten (10)
days to comply. (Ord. 2018-03, 8-7-2018)
4-4-4: ABATEMENT:
If the owner or occupant of lands described in such notice fails or neglects to
eradicate such violation in accordance with the notice, a City official, at the
expense of the City, may employ necessary assistance to cause the condition to
be corrected. An itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the correction
shall be mailed by registered mail, addressed to the property owner's last
known address. Should the owner fail to make payment of the amount set forth in
the statement to the City within twenty (20) days, a City official may cause
suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law or may refer the matter for
charge to the owner of such property on the next tax bill. (Ord. 2018-03, 8-7-
2018)
4-4-5: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies for the eradication of such violations shall not be exclusive, but
shall be cumulative to any other remedies the City may have with respect
thereto. (Ord. 2018-03, 8-7-2018)
4-4-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Individual Violation: Any violation of this chapter is an infraction
and is punishable as such. Any person found guilty of violating this chapter
shall be punished as follows:
      1.   Upon a first conviction, a minimum fine of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) shall be imposed.
      2.   Upon a second conviction, a minimum fine of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) shall be imposed.
      3.   Upon a third conviction, a minimum fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) shall be imposed.
      4.   Upon a fourth conviction, a minimum fine of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed.
      5.   Upon a fifth or subsequent conviction, a minimum fine of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed.
For purposes of this subsection A, the present conviction must be within five
(5) years of the prior conviction.
   B.   Corporation Violation: A corporation, association, partnership, or
governmental instrumentality found guilty of violating this chapter shall be
punished as follows:
      1.   Upon a first conviction, a minimum fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) shall be imposed.
      2.   Upon a second conviction, a minimum fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) shall be imposed.
      3.   Upon a third conviction, a minimum fine of one thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00) shall be imposed.
      4.   Upon a fourth conviction, a minimum fine of two thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($2,750.00) shall be imposed.
      5.   Upon a fifth or subsequent conviction, a minimum fine of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be imposed.
For purposes of this subsection B, the present conviction must be within five
(5) years of the prior conviction.
   C.   Mandatory Appearance: If a uniform summons and citation is issued and
filed with the court, a mandatory appearance is required. (Ord. 2018-05, 10-2-
2018)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL FIRE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Unlawful Interference
4-5-2: Limits To Vicinity Of Fire
4-5-3: Buildings And Structures
4-5-4: Accumulation Of Waste
4-5-5: Vehicle Restrictions
4-5-6: False Alarms
4-5-7: Penalty
4-5-1: UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully hinder any officer or
firefighter in the discharge of his duty at a fire, or in any manner injure,
deface or destroy, or interfere with the operation of any engines, hose or
other fire apparatus belonging to the City, or wilfully break or injure any
water pipe, or in any way interfere with the water or its source of supply, or
who may use or in any way interfere with any of the fire apparatus without the
consent of the Chief of the Fire Department. (1989 Code § 12-2-2, 11-20-1990;
1997 Code)
4-5-2: LIMITS TO VICINITY OF FIRE:
The Chief of Police, in conjunction with the fire officer in charge, may
prescribe the limits in the vicinity of the fire within which no person, except
members of the Fire Department or police, or those admitted by order of the
officer in charge, shall be permitted to come. (1989 Code § 12-2-3, 11-20-1990)
4-5-3: BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Properly Secured And Enclosed: Whenever any unoccupied building is not
properly secured or enclosed, the Fire Chief, or his deputies, shall
immediately visit the premises and notify the owner or person having control of
the same forthwith to secure or enclose the same, and the person so notified
shall comply therewith within forty eight (48) hours. (1989 Code § 12-2-6, 11-
20-1990)
   B.   Defective Or Unsafe: Whenever, in the judgment of the Fire Chief, any
building or structure, or any portion thereof, or any appurtenances or fixtures
thereto, or any chimney, smokestack, stove, oven, furnace or wiring or thing
connected with such building or premises is deemed defective or unsafe, and
such defective or unsafe condition is such as to create a danger of fire; or
whenever the owner or occupant of such building or structure or part thereof
keeps or stores any explosive, combustible, inflammable material, waste or
rubbish of any description in such a manner that the same creates a danger of
fire, the Fire Chief or his deputies shall give the owner or person having
control of such building or structure not exceeding five (5) days' notice of
required changes, alterations or repairs necessary to render the same safe to
life and property from fire. (1989 Code § 12-2-7, 11-20-1990)
4-5-4: ACCUMULATION OF WASTE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land or property to allow
accumulation of waste, paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter, or combustible
or inflammable waste or rubbish of any kind upon any roof or in any court,
yard, vacant lot, or open space, and all weeds, grass, vines or other growth,
when the same endangers property or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down
and removed by the owner or occupant of the property. The Fire Chief or his
deputies shall give the owner, or person having control of such land or
property, not exceeding five (5) days' notice of the action necessary to render
said land or property safe from fire. (1989 Code § 12-2-8, 11-20-1990)
4-5-5: VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Driving Over Fire Hose: It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in
charge or control of any motor vehicle to drive the same over any fire hose on
any street in the City. (1989 Code § 12-2-4, 11-20-1990)
   B.   Parking Near Fire Hydrant: It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of any vehicle to stop or park the same within a distance of five feet
(5') of any fire hydrant within the City. (1989 Code § 12-2-5, 11-20-1990)
4-5-6: FALSE ALARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to, without cause, give an alarm of fire by
outcry, or ringing of bells or otherwise. (1989 Code § 12-2-1, 11-20-1990; 1997
Code)
4-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person refusing or neglecting to comply with notice given pursuant to
subsection
4-5-3B or Section
4-5-4 of this Chapter, or any person violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section
 1-4-1 of this Code. (1989 Code § 12-2-9, 11-20-1990; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 6
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Permits Required
4-6-3: Community Waste Disposal
4-6-4: General Regulations
4-6-5: Penalty
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
   AGRICULTURAL BURNING: Open burning in rural areas essential to agricultural
operations, including the raising of crops, the raising of fowl, animals or
bees, when conducted on the premises where occupied.
   AIR CONTAMINANT: Any particulate matter or any gas, vapor, suspended solid
or any combination thereof, excluding steam and water vapors.
   AIR CONTAMINANT SOURCE: Any and all sources of emission of air contaminants
whether privately or publicly owned or operated.
   AIR POLLUTION: The presence in the ambient air of one or more air
contaminants in quantities, or characteristics and under conditions or
circumstances, and of a duration sufficient to cause or contribute to injury to
human, plant, or animal life or health, or to property or which unreasonably
interferes with the enjoyment of life or use of property, as determined by the
standards, rules and regulations adopted by the State Department of
Environmental Quality, Division of Air Quality.
   APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY: The governing body of any city, town or county.
   ATMOSPHERE: The air that envelops or surrounds the earth and includes all
spaces outside of buildings, stacks or exterior ducts.
   AUTHORIZED LOCAL AUTHORITY: A city, county or combination health department;
a city, county or combination fire department; or other local agency duly
designated by the appropriate authority, with approval of State Division of
Health, as the agency to issue permits for open burning under regulations of
the State Division of Health and other lawfully adopted ordinances, codes or
regulations not in conflict therewith.
   CLEARING INDEX: A number indicating the predicted rate of clearance of
ground level pollutants from a given area. This number is calculated by the
U.S. Weather Bureau, from daily measurements of temperature lapse rates and
wind speeds and directions from ground level to ten thousand feet (10,000').
   DIVISION: Utah State Division of Health.
   EMISSION: The act of discharging into the atmosphere an air contaminant; or
the effluent so discharged into the atmosphere.
   GARBAGE: All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, including wastes
attendant thereto.
   HEAVY FUEL OIL: A petroleum product or similar material heavier than diesel
fuel.
   HOUSEHOLD WASTE: Any solid or liquid material normally generated by a family
in a residence in the course of ordinary day to day living; including, but not
limited to, garbage, paper products, rags, leaves and garden trash.
   OPEN BURNING: The burning of materials wherein products of combustion are
emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or
chimney from an enclosed chamber. Open burning does not include road flares,
smudge pots and similar devices associated with safety or occupational uses
typically considered open flames or recreational fires. For the purpose of this
definition a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time
combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary
to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open.
   PERSON: Any individual, public or private corporation, partnership,
association, firm, trust or estate; the state or any department, institution,
bureau, or agency thereof, any municipal corporation, county, city or other
political subdivision of the state, or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by the law as being subject to rights and duties.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE: An outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish
where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor
fireplace, barbecue grill or barbecue pit and has a total fuel area of three
feet (3') (914 mm) or less in diameter and two feet (2') (610 mm) or less in
height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar
purposes.
   REFUSE: Any solid waste, including garbage and trash.
   SALVAGE OPERATION: Any business, trade or industry engaged in whole or part
in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material; including, but not limited
to, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
   TRASH: Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive; including,
but not limited to, clothing, rags, leathers, plastic, rubber, floor coverings,
excelsior, tree leaves, yard trimmings and other similar materials.
   WASTE: All solid, liquid or gaseous material; including, but not limited to,
garbage, trash, household waste, construction or demolition debris, or other
refuse including that resulting from the prosecution of any business trade or
industry. (1989 Code § 12-4-1, 11-20-1990; amd. 1997 Code; Ord. 2008-05, 8-5-
2008)
4-6-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
The fire chief or other official designated by the city council shall establish
a procedure for the issuance of burning permits under the terms of this
chapter. Said official shall also devise a method of visual determination of
any violations of the open burning regulations and shall institute appropriate
enforcement procedures as necessary. (1989 Code § 12-4-6, 11-20-1990; amd. 1997
Code)
4-6-3: COMMUNITY WASTE DISPOSAL:
No open burning shall be done at sites used for disposal of community trash,
garbage and other wastes, except when authorized for a specific period of time
by the state department of environmental quality, division of air quality, on
the basis of justifiable circumstances reviewed and weighed in terms of
pollution effects and other relevant considerations at appropriate hearing,
following written application. (1989 Code § 12-4-2, 11-20-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
4-6-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
No person shall conduct any open burning. This includes the burning of trash,
garbage or other wastes, weeds, leaves, etc., nor shall any person conduct any
salvage operation in any open fire.
   A.   Recreational Fires: Recreational fires shall not be conducted within
twenty five feet (25') (7,620 mm) of a structure or combustible material.
Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within twenty five feet (25')
(7,620 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition (reference IFC
2006 section 307.4.2).
   B.   Supervision Required: Recreational fires shall be constantly attended
until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher
complying with section 906 of the IFC 2006 with a minimum 4-A rating or other
approved on site fire extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water
barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate
utilization (reference IFC 2006 section 307.5). (Ord. 2008-05, 8-5-2008)
4-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violations. Each day upon which such violation occurs shall
constitute a separate violation. (1989 Code § 12-4-7, 11-20-1990; amd. 1997
Code)
CHAPTER 7
HOMES ON WHEELS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Sanitation In And Around Vehicles
4-7-2: All Night Camping
4-7-3: All Residential Camping
4-7-4: Violation
4-7-1: SANITATION IN AND AROUND VEHICLES:
It is unlawful to permit wastewater or material from sinks, showers, holding
tanks, or other fixtures in camp cars, campers, or trailers to be deposited on
any street, alley, auto court, trailer park, public camp or upon any lot or
property within the corporate limits of the city. All such waste shall run into
the city 's sewer system and not into the city's stormwater system. (Ord. 2024-
04, 7-16-2024)
4-7-2: ALL NIGHT CAMPING:
No person shall park and occupy a camp car, camper, camp trailer type of
vehicle, recreational vehicle, or motorhome upon any street or other public
place in the city, except where authorized by lawful signage, for a period of
time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
p.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m. of any day; provided, that the Mayor or City
Manager or their designee, in any emergency, or to facilitate cleaning, or
repairing the streets or rendering of any other public service, may further
restrict or prohibit parking. (Ord. 2024-04, 7-16-2024)
4-7-3: ALL RESIDENTIAL CAMPING:
No person shall occupy for habitation, dwelling, camping, or lodging, a camp
car, camper, camp trailer type of vehicle, recreational vehicle, or motorhome
upon any residential lot where such use is not authorized pursuant to Sections
10-5A-1 and
10-5B-1. (Ord. 2024-04, 7-16-2024)
4-7-4: VIOLATION:
Penalty: A violation of Section
4-7-1 or
4-7-2 of this chapter by any person shall be a class B misdemeanor, and
violation of subsection
4-7-3 of this chapter by any person shall be a class C misdemeanor, and upon
conviction, subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1. (Ord. 2024-04, 7-16-2024)
CHAPTER 8
CAMPING
SECTION:
4-8-1: Camping And Related Activities
4-8-2: Definitions
4-8-3: Exceptions And Limitations
4-8-4: Penalty
4-8-1: CAMPING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any person to camp, lodge, sleep, cook, make a fire or pitch
a tent, fly, lean to, tarpaulin, umbrella, or any other type of ground cover or
shelter, or place sleeping bags, bedding or any other type of camping or
sleeping equipment upon any portion of a public way, as defined herein, and it
is unlawful for any person using or benefitting from the use of any of the
foregoing shelter or camping or sleeping equipment to fail to remove the same
from any such street or public way. (Ord. 2025-02, 2-18-2025)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
CAMPING: The use of public places for living accommodations purposes, including
sleeping, setting up shelters, or engaging in activities that are typical of
overnight lodging. For the limited purpose of this chapter, camping shall not
include the exceptions listed in section
4-8-3 of this chapter.
PUBLIC WAY/PUBLIC PLACE:
   1.   Any public street, sidewalk, alley, or right of way (including
overpasses);
   2.   Any City park;
   3.   Any publicly owned building or publicly owned real property;
   4.   Any outdoor public area on the premises of a commercial or
manufacturing building, except with the permission of the owner or lawful
possessor of the property;
   5.   Boarded, vacant, or abandoned buildings; or
   6.   Vacant lots within Sunset City. (Ord. 2025-02, 2-18-2025)
4-8-3: EXCEPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Recreational Use: The use of umbrellas, canopies, or similar items
during daylight hours in City parks or recreational areas for non-lodging
purposes (e.g., picnics, gatherings, or sun protection).
   B.   Vehicles: Temporary rest in legally parked vehicles is permitted,
provided the vehicle does not remain parked for more than two (2) consecutive
hours in the same public area or cause obstruction.
   C.   Emergencies: Individuals seeking temporary shelter in the event of an
emergency (e.g., natural disasters or medical needs).
   D.   City-Permitted Events: Official City-permitted events or activities
that involve overnight stays or temporary camping. (Ord. 2025-02, 2-18-2025)
4-8-4: PENALTY:
Violation of the City camping ordinance is a class C misdemeanor, with a
possible punishment of up to ninety (90) days in jail and up to seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) in fines, per occurrence. (Ord. 2025-02, 2-18-2025)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Appointment Of Chief Of Police
5-1-2: Powers And Duties
5-1-3: Disposal Of Unclaimed Property
5-1-1: APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
There shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter a
Chief of Police, who shall be ex officio City Marshal and shall perform the
duties and exercise the authority thereof. (1989 Code § 2-6-1, 10-4-1988)
5-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   General: The Chief of Police shall be head of the Police Department.
The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the direction and control of said
Department and all police officers of the City. It shall be the duty of the
Chief of Police to perform all functions and exercise all powers conferred upon
him by law or City ordinance. The Chief of Police shall, with the aid of such
police officers as may be necessary, suppress riots, disturbances and breaches
of the peace and take all necessary action to apprehend and arrest all persons
committing any criminal offense or who have violated the penal laws of the
State or the ordinances of the City. The Chief of Police shall at all times by
himself or through his officers, diligently and faithfully discharge the duties
of his office and enforce all ordinances and regulations of the City made and
provided for the preservation of peace, good order and the protection of lives,
rights and property of all persons. (1989 Code § 2-6-2, 10-4-1988)
   B.   Authority To Arrest: The Chief of Police and the members of the Police
Department shall have power and authority, without process, to arrest and take
into custody any person who shall commit or threaten or attempt to commit in
the presence of any such officer, or within his view, any breach of the peace
or any offense directly prohibited by the laws of this State or by ordinance.
(1989 Code § 2-6-3, 10-4-1988)
   C.   Service Of Process: The Chief of Police and the members of the Police
Department, when called upon or directed so to do by any court of competent
jurisdiction, shall serve all legal process, civil or criminal, and shall serve
all warrants of arrest and take into custody any person ordered arrested by any
court of competent jurisdiction and in the administration of justice, shall
faithfully and promptly carry out and execute any lawful order of such court.
(1989 Code § 2-6-4, 10-4-1988)
   D.   Report To City Council:
      1.   Appointment Of Officers: The Chief of Police shall report to the
City Council and Mayor on the number of police officers needed in his
Department. The Mayor shall review all such requests for the appointment of
police officers and make his recommendations to the City Council with respect
thereto. (1989 Code § 2-6-5, 10-4-1988)
      2.   Affairs And Conditions Of Department: The Chief of Police shall from
time to time make a report to the City Council of the affairs and conditions of
his Department, which reports shall include a statement on the conduct of his
various police officers with relation to their employment and the execution of
their duties. (1989 Code § 2-6-6, 10-4-1988)
5-1-3: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
Any stolen, lost or abandon personal property which has been recovered by the
Police Department, or any other City agency and held in storage by said
Department for a period of ninety (90) days or over without having been claimed
by the owner thereof, may, by said Police Department, be sold at public sale.
Notice of the time and place of said sale, which notice shall contain a
description of such personal property to be sold, shall be given by publishing
such notice twice, the first publication which shall be at least fifteen (15)
days before the day of sale, and the last publication of which shall be not
later than the Thursday immediately preceding the day of sale in a newspaper of
general circulation within the City, in Davis County, and having general
circulation in said County. The proceeds of such sales shall forthwith be paid
over to the City Treasurer. (Ord. 2-10-2-85, 2-19-1985; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 2
CRIMINAL CODE
SECTION:
5-2-1: Statutes Adopted By Reference; Effective Date
5-2-2: Alcoholic Beverages
5-2-3: General Provisions
5-2-4: Principles Of Criminal Responsibility
5-2-5: Punishment
5-2-6: Inchoate Offenses
5-2-7: Offenses Against Person
5-2-8: Exploitation Of Children
5-2-9: Offenses Against Property
5-2-10: Offenses Against Family
5-2-11: Offenses Against Administration Of Government
5-2-12: Offenses Against Public Order And Decency
5-2-13: Offenses Against Public Health And Safety
5-2-1: STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; EFFECTIVE DATE:
The sections of the Utah Code Annotated listed in this chapter are adopted by
reference and will be enforced as if fully set out herein with an effective
date of November 1, 1991. (Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-2-2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 1 :
All of Utah Code Annotated title 32B, relating to alcoholic beverages, is
hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-4-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
5-2-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections relating to the general provisions
of the criminal code are hereby adopted by reference:
   A.   Introductory Provisions: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-1-103 through
76-1-108;
   B.   Jurisdiction And Venue: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-1-201 through
76-1-202;
   C.   Multiple Prosecutions And Double Jeopardy: Utah Code Annotated sections
76-1-401 through 76-1-404;
   D.   Burden Of Proof: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-1-501 through 76-1-
504;
   E.   Definitions: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-1-601 through 76-1-603.
(Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-2-4: PRINCIPLES OF CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections relating to the principles of
criminal responsibility are hereby adopted by reference:
   A.   Culpability Generally: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-2-101 through
76-2-104;
   B.   Criminal Responsibility For Conduct Of Another: Utah Code Annotated
sections 76-2-201 through 76-2-205;
   C.   Defense To Criminal Responsibility: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-2-
301 through 76-2-308;
   D.   Jurisdiction Excluding Criminal Responsibility: Utah Code Annotated
sections 76-2-401 through 76-2-406. (Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-2-5: PUNISHMENT:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections referring to punishment are hereby
adopted by reference:
   A.   Sentencing: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-3-201.1, 76-3-201.2, 76-3-
204, 76-3-205, 76-3-208(1)(c) and 76-3-208(2);
   B.   Fines And Special Sanctions: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-3-301
through 76-3-303;
   C.   Limitations And Provisions On Sentences: Utah Code Annotated sections
76-3-401 through 76-3-405. (Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-2-6: INCHOATE OFFENSES:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections relating to inchoate offenses are
hereby adopted by reference:
   A.   Attempt: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-4-101 and 76-4-102;
   B.   Criminal Conspiracy: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-4-201 through 76-
4-202;
   C.   Exemptions And Restrictions: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-4-301
through 76-4-302. (Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-2-7: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSON:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections relating to offenses against a
person are hereby adopted by reference:
   A.   Assault And Related Offenses: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-5-101
through 76-5-109;
   B.   Kidnapping: Utah Code Annotated section 76-5-304;
   C.   Sexual Offenses: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-5-401, 76-5-407
through 76-5-411. (Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-2-8: EXPLOITATION OF CHILDREN:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections are hereby adopted by reference:
Utah Code Annotated sections 76-5a-1 through 76-5a-4. (1997 Code)
5-2-9: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections relating to offenses against
property are hereby adopted by reference:
   A.   Property Destruction: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-6-101, 76-6-102,
76-6-104 and 76-6-106;
   B.   Burglary And Criminal Trespass: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-6-201,
76-6-205 and 76-6-206;
   C.   Theft: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-6-401 through 76-6-412;
   D.   Fraud: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-6-501 through 76-6-521;
   E.   Retail Theft: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-6-601 through 76-6-607;
   F.   Property Theft: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-6-801 through 76-6-805.
(Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-2-10: OFFENSES AGAINST FAMILY:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections relating to offenses against the
family are hereby adopted by reference:
   A.   Marital Violence Violations: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-7-101
through 76-7-104;
   B.   Nonsupport And Sale Of Children: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-7-201
through 76-7-204. (Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-2-11: OFFENSES AGAINST ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections relating to offenses against the
administration of government are hereby adopted by reference:
   A.   Corrupt Practices: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-8-101 through 76-8-
109;
   B.   Abuse Of Office: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-8-201 through 76-8-
203;
   C.   Obstructing Governmental Operations: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-8-
301 through 76-8-315;
   D.   Offenses Against Public Property: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-8-401
through 76-8-420;
   E.   Falsification In Official Matters: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-8-
501 through 76-8-514;
   F.   Abuse Of Process: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-8-601 through 76-8-
603;
   G.   Sabotage Prevention: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-8-801 through 76-
8-811;
   H.   Syndicalism And Sabotage: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-8-901 through
76-8-904. (Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-2-12: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND DECENCY:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections relating to offenses against public
order and decency are hereby adopted by reference:
   A.   Breaches Of The Peace: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-9-101 through
76-9-105;
   B.   Telephone Abuse: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-9-201 through 76-9-
202;
   C.   Cruelty To Animals: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-9-301 through 76-9-
305;
   D.   Offenses Against Privacy: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-9-401 through
76-9-405;
   E.   Libel And Slander: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-9-501 through 76-9-
509;
   F.   Offenses Against The Flag: Utah Code Annotated section 76-9-601;
   G.   Miscellaneous Provisions: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-9-701 through
76-9-704. (Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-2-13: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
The following Utah Code Annotated sections relating to offenses against public
health and safety are hereby adopted by reference:
   A.   Cigarettes, Tobacco And Chemical Solvents: Utah Code Annotated sections
76-10-101 through 76-10-111;
   B.   Waters: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-201 through 76-10-205;
   C.   Explosives: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-301 through 76-10-308;
   D.   Fences: Utah Code Annotated section 76-10-401;
   E.   Weapons: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-501 through 76-10-525;
   F.   Charity Drives: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-601 through 76-10-
604;
   G.   Corporation Frauds: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-701 through 76-
10-711;
   H.   Nuisances: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-801 through 76-10-808;
   I.   Trade And Commerce: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-901 through 76-
10-926;
   J.   Trademark, Trade Names And Devices: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-
1001 through 76-10-1010;
   K.   Gambling: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-1101 through 76-10-1109;
   L.   Pornography: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-1201 through 76-10-
1229;
   M.   Prostitution: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-1301 through 76-10-
1304;
   N.   Bus Passenger Safety Act: Utah Code Annotated sections 76-10-1501
through 76-10-1511;
   O.   Communications Fraud: Utah Code Annotated section 76-10-1801. (Ord. 6-
1-1, 10-15-1991)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
SECTION:
5-3-1: Adoption Of Ordinance
5-3-1: ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE:
The City of Sunset hereby adopts by reference, the Davis County Comprehensive
Animal Control Ordinance, as amended. (Ord. 98-04, 7-7-1998)
CHAPTER 4
NOISE
SECTION:
5-4-1: Scope
5-4-2: Declaration Of Prohibited Acts
5-4-3: Exceptions
5-4-4: Abatement Proceedings
5-4-5: Penalty
5-4-1: SCOPE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusual loud noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others within the limits of the City. (Ord. 6-2-1, 7-16-
1991; amd. Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-4-2: DECLARATION OF PROHIBITED ACTS:
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing or
unnecessary noises in violation of this Chapter, but the following enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
   A.   Horns Or Signaling Devices: The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle, except as a danger
warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably
loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time; the use of any horn, whistle or other device
operated by engine exhaust;
   B.   Excessive Operating Of Sound Instruments: The using, operating, or
permitting to be played, used or operated in residential areas of any
television, radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other
machine or device for the providing or reproducing of such sound as to disturb
the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants or at any time with
louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in
the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and
who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of thirty feet (30') from the building, structure or vehicle in which
it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection;
   C.   Instruments Used For Commercial Advertising: The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound upon the public streets for
the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public
to any building or structure;
   D.   Yelling On Public Streets: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., or at any time or place so as to
annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in
any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the
vicinity;
   E.   Disturbing Animals: The keeping of any animal which by causing frequent
or long continued noise disturbs the comfort or repose of any persons in the
vicinity;
   F.   Discharge Of Exhaust: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
   G.   Vehicles Needing Repair: The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other
vehicle which, due to lack of repair or improper loading, creates loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
   H.   Loading Or Unloading: The creation of a loud and excessive noise in
connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction
of bales, boxes, crates and containers; (Ord. 6-2-1, 7-16-1991; amd. Ord. 6-1-
1, 10-15-1991)
   I.   Erection Or Repair Of Buildings: The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration or repair of any building between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. local prevailing time, on
weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a permit from the City as authorized by the
Mayor; (Ord. 6-2-1, 7-16-1991; amd. Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991; 1997 Code)
   J.   Adjacent To Schools And Institutions: The creation of any excessive
noise adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while
the same is in use which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such
institution, or in any park, which unreasonably disturbs the users thereof;
   K.   Operation Of Pile Drivers Or Other Appliance: The operation between the
hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of any pile
driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or
other appliance, the use of which is usually attended by loud or unusual noise;
   L.   Operation Of Power Mowers Or Related Devices: The operation of any
power mower, cultivator, or like or related device (except snow blowers) in an
area zoned residential between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 6-2-1, 7-16-1991; amd. Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-4-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations:
   A.   Safety Signals Or Warning Devices: Noises of safety signals, warning
devices and emergency pressure relief valves;
   B.   Emergency Vehicles: Noises resulting from any authorized emergency
vehicle when responding to an emergency work.
   C.   Emergency Work: Noises resulting from emergency work.
   D.   Aircraft Or Railroad Equipment: Any aircraft or railroad equipment
operated in conformity with or pursuant to State statute, Federal law or
Federal regulations, and traffic control instruction used pursuant to and
within the duly adopted State or Federal regulations. Any aircraft operating
under technical difficulties, in any kind of distress, under emergency orders
of air traffic control or being operated pursuant to and subsequent to the
declaration of an emergency under Federal air regulations shall also be exempt.
(Ord. 6-2-1, 7-16-1991; amd. Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991)
5-4-4: ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS:
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this Chapter,
or which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal
sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of
residents in the area shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance
and may be subject to abatement. (Ord. 6-2-1, 7-16-1991; amd. Ord. 6-1-1, 10-
15-1991; 1997 Code)
5-4-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in Section
 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a
separate offense. (Ord. 6-2-1, 7-16-1991; amd. Ord. 6-1-1, 10-15-1991; 1997
Code)
CHAPTER 5
GRAFFITI
SECTION:
5-5-1: Authority
5-5-2: Definitions
5-5-3: Prohibited
5-5-4: Private Property; Removal
5-5-5: Penalty; Enhancement
5-5-1: AUTHORITY:
For the purposes of Utah Code Annotated section 10-11-1, graffiti is
deleterious and/or unsightly. (Ord. 95-11-28, 11-21-1995)
5-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
   GANG: A group or association which condones, encourages, facilitates or
promotes among its membership:
   A.   Unlawful activities;
   B.   The establishment of alleged territorial areas beyond their own actual
property ownership, wherein they intend to exclude those that otherwise may
lawfully enter in or proceed through; or
   C.   Divisiveness among other such groups, neighborhoods, races, colors or
nationalities.
   GANG GRAFFITI: In addition to the definition of graffiti given herein,
graffiti that identifies, indicates, infers or communicates in any way that it
was done by a gang or member thereof, is about a gang or member thereof, or is
to a gang member thereof. The criteria to be used in making such a
determination may include, but is not limited to, content (whether words,
names, letters, initials, signs, pictures or symbols), style of writing, colors
used, location of the graffiti and that location's history regarding graffiti,
how it was placed in reference to existing graffiti or gang graffiti (such as
overstriking other graffiti or in response to other graffiti or gang graffiti),
absence of or overstriking of certain letters or the absence of particular
colors.
   GRAFFITI: The painting, writing, drawing, application of stickers or logos
or any material or otherwise marking of any property without the express
written consent of the true owner, or that is not otherwise allowed by
ordinance, which defaces, detracts or diminishes the value or reasonable
appearance of the property.
   PROPERTY: All property, public and private, with or without apparent
ownership, real and personal property, and anything temporarily or permanently
affixed thereto or thereon, including, but not limited to, structures, plant
life, signs, banners, etc. (Ord. 95-11-28, 11-21-1995)
5-5-3: PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to place or assist, encourage, aid or participate
in the placement of, or cause to be placed, or be in attendance with others and
acquiescing in the placement of graffiti upon any property. (Ord. 95-11-28, 11-
21-1995)
5-5-4: PRIVATE PROPERTY; REMOVAL:
   A.   Owner's Responsibility: Owners of property, structures, buildings or
natural fences upon which graffiti has been placed shall, within five (5)
business days after the graffiti is reported, remove the graffiti or report the
graffiti to the Police Department and request their assistance in removing the
graffiti. If the owner of said structure fails to remove such graffiti or
report it to the Police Department within the required five (5) business days,
the owner shall be given written notice sent by certified mail that if not
removed within five (5) days after notice, said graffiti may be removed by the
City at the expense of the owner. The City shall do so at the expense of a
property owner for the actual and reasonable costs of cleaning the graffiti,
including labor. (Ord. 95-11-28, 11-21-1995; 1997 Code)
   B.   Appeal Procedure: The owner may appeal the order requiring graffiti
clean up by filing an appeal with the Chief of Police, or designee, within five
(5) days of the date of the order. The Chief of Police, or designee, may
sustain, modify or reverse the order based on evidence regarding the following
criteria: history of graffiti being placed on the same location and the owner's
timely removal thereof; the extent and frequency of graffiti incidents; owner's
ability to bear the costs of removal; general upkeep of the property; and other
related, articulated criteria.
   C.   Failure To Pay City For Clean Up; Collection: After the time for appeal
has expired and the property is cleaned by the City, if the owner fails to make
payment to the City Treasurer within twenty (20) days of the date of billing,
the City may either cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law, or
certify the amount to the County Treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of
the property owner as follows:
      1.   In the event collection of expenses of removal are pursued through
the court, the City shall sue for and receive judgment for all expenses of
removal, together with reasonable attorney fees, interest and court costs, and
shall execute upon such judgment in the manner provided by law.
      2.   In the event that the City elects to certify the expenses of removal
to the County Treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner,
an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in such removal shall be
delivered to the County Treasurer within ten (10) days of the completion of the
graffiti removal. (Ord. 95-11-28, 11-21-1995)
5-5-5: PENALTY; ENHANCEMENT:
   A.   Violation: Any violation of any provision of this Chapter which causes,
or is intended to cause a pecuniary loss of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
less shall be a Class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided
in Section
1-4-1  of this Code. Any person found guilty of violating this Chapter shall be
punished as follows: (Ord. 95-11-28, 11-21-1995; 1997 Code)
      1.   Upon a first conviction, a minimum fine of three hundred dollars
($300.00) shall be imposed;
      2.   Upon a second conviction, a minimum fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) shall be imposed;
      3.   Upon a third conviction, a minimum fine of seven hundred dollars
($700.00) shall be imposed;
      4.   Upon a fourth and subsequent conviction, a minimum fine of nine
hundred dollars ($900.00) shall be imposed.
   B.   Restitution: Upon any of the foregoing convictions, restitution shall
be ordered in an amount sufficient to enable the victim to restore the property
to the condition as it existed prior to the violation. Any incarceration,
probation or other conditions of the sentencing are left to the discretion of
the sentencing court. It is recommended that for second and subsequent
convictions, the court weigh seriously the imposition of a jail sentence. It is
also recommended that if the court, in its discretion, imposes any community
service in lieu of a fine as penalty and/or a jail sentence, that said
community service be assigned in the area of the graffiti removal.
   C.   Gang Enhancement Provision: The fines and penalties set forth in
subsections A and B of this Section shall be enhanced by an amount equal to
twenty percent (20%) of the fine to otherwise be imposed under any one of the
following criteria:
      1.   If the actor is shown, by clear and convincing evidence, at a
sentencing hearing to be a member of a gang, to hold oneself out to be a member
of a gang, or to purposely appear to be a member of a gang, regardless of
whether the graffiti was gang graffiti;
      2.   If the graffiti which formed the basis of the actor's conviction was
shown, by clear and convincing evidence, at a sentencing hearing to be gang
graffiti, regardless of whether the actor was associated with a gang. (Ord. 95-
11-28, 11-21-1995)
CHAPTER 6
CURFEW
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Prohibited Acts
5-6-3: Enforcement Procedure
5-6-4: Penalties
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter:
   ADULT: Any person eighteen (18) years of age and older.
   EMERGENCY: Includes, but is not limited to, fire, natural disaster,
automobile accident or requirement for immediate medical care for another
person.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business to which the public is
invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or
entertainment.
   MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   PARENT: A person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. "Parent"
includes a court appointed guardian or other person eighteen (18) years of age
or older authorized by a parent, by a court order, or by a court appointed
guardian to have the care and custody of the person.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, the
common areas of schools, office buildings, transport facilities and shopping
centers. (Ord. 2001-03, 3-20-2001)
5-6-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Daytime Loitering Of Minors In Any Public Place On School Days:
      1.   Offenses:
         a.   It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory
education to loiter, idle, wander or be in or upon the public streets,
highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public
places, public buildings or the premises of any establishment, vacant lots, any
dwelling not their current residence or any unsupervised place between the
hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) P.M. on any
day when school is in session for that minor.
         b.   It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to a compulsory
alternative education program to loiter, idle, wander or be in or upon the
public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public
grounds, public places, public buildings or the premises of any establishment,
vacant lots, any dwelling not their current residence or any unsupervised place
between the hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00)
P.M. on any day when that minor would otherwise be required to attend a regular
compulsory education school.
         c.   It is unlawful for the parent of any minor to knowingly permit or
by insufficient control allow the minor to be in violation of subsection A1a or
A1b of this section.
      2.   Exceptions: It is an exception to prosecution under this chapter:
         a.   When the minor is accompanied by a parent;
         b.   When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by a parent;
         c.   When the minor is going to or coming directly from their place of
school approved employment;
         d.   When the minor is going to or coming directly from a medical
appointment;
         e.   When the minor has permission to leave the school campus for
lunch or a school sponsored activity or has in their possession a valid, school
issued, off campus permit;
         f.   When the minor is going to or coming from a compulsory
alternative education program activity;
         g.   When the minor is attending or, without any detour or stop, going
to or returning from an official school, religious, government sponsored or
other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of
Sunset, or a civic organization, the school district, religious or other
government organization.
   B.   Nighttime Curfew For Minors:
      1.   Offenses:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any minor to be or remain in or upon the
public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public
places, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in the city of Sunset between
the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the
following day except as provided below.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for any parent of any minor to allow any
minor to go or be in or upon any of the public streets, highways, roads,
alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public places, vacant lots or other
unsupervised places in the city of Sunset without their personal supervision or
other adult supervision during the times provided in subsection B1a of this
section.
         c.   It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or
encourage any minor to violate the provisions of subsection B1a of this
section.
      2.   Exceptions: The provisions of subsection B1a of this section shall
not apply when any regulated person is:
         a.   Accompanied by an adult having the care and custody of such
person.
         b.   Attending or directly returning home from an organized function
which was supervised by an adult.
         c.   On an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed
by their parent.
         d.   Engaged in legitimate employment which requires their presence in
public places during the prohibited hours. (Ord. 2001-03, 3-20-2001)
5-6-3: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Upon any violation by a minor of:
      1.   Subsection
5-6-2A1a or A1b of this chapter, a peace officer may issue a citation to the
minor and may transport the minor home or to the school from which the minor is
absent.
      2.   Subsection
5-6-2B1a of this chapter, a peace officer may issue a citation to the minor and
may transport the minor home.
   B.   If a parent has been previously warned as set forth in this chapter,
upon a parent's first violation of subsection
5-6-2A1c or B1b of this chapter, a peace officer may issue a citation for the
infraction to the parent to appear in court.
   C.   When a parent has previously been issued a citation for an infraction
as set forth in subsection B of this section, upon any subsequent violation by
a parent of subsection
5-6-2A1c or B1b of this chapter, a peace officer may issue a citation for a
class C misdemeanor to the parent of the minor to appear in court. (Ord. 2001-
03, 3-20-2001)
5-6-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   A minor convicted of a first time violation of subsection
5-6-2A1a of this chapter may be placed on probation with the school for a
period of up to ninety (90) days. If the minor does not have another unexcused
absence or violation of subsection
5-6-2A1a of this chapter, the case may be dismissed by the court upon a
recommendation from the school that the minor has complied.
   B.   A minor convicted of a violation of subsection
5-6-2A1a, A1b or B1a of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. In addition to
any fine, the court shall review whether there is appropriate community
service. The court shall fine the minor at least thirty five dollars ($35.00).
   C.   A parent convicted of a violation of subsection
5-6-2A1c or B1b of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction if the parent
had been previously given formal warning of the requirements of this chapter or
a class C misdemeanor if the parent had been previously convicted of a
violation of subsection
5-6-2A1c or B1b of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-03, 3-20-2001)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Traffic Code Adopted
6-1-2: City Traffic Engineer; Appointment
6-1-3: On Street Parking Regulations
6-1-4: Operation Of Vehicles
6-1-5: Intoxication
6-1-6: Restricted Or Dangerous Vehicles
6-1-6-1: Low Profile Motorized Vehicles
6-1-7: Vehicle Regulations
6-1-8: Penalty
6-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
That certain code in book form known as "Traffic Rules And Regulations"
compiled by the state department of public safety, and as amended or superseded
from time to time is hereby adopted. All laws, rules and regulations continued
therein where applicable shall be in full force and effect within the city. Not
less than three (3) copies of said book shall remain on file in the office of
the city recorder. (1989 Code § 7-1-1, 9-20-1988; amd. 1997 Code)
6-1-2: CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER; APPOINTMENT:
   A.   Established: The office of the traffic engineer is hereby established.
Until further designation and appointment is made by the city council, the
chief of police is hereby appointed as the traffic engineer and shall exercise
all the powers and duties as provided by the ordinances of the city. (1989 Code
§ 7-1-2, 9-20-1988)
   B.   Authority, Powers And Duties:
      1.   General: It is the general duty of the city traffic engineer to
determine the installation and maintenance of traffic control devices, to
conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial
measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions and to
cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to
improve traffic conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties
imposed by the ordinances of the city. (1989 Code § 7-1-5, 9-20-1988)
      2.   Traffic Control Devices:
         a.   The traffic engineer shall place, recommend and maintain on city
streets all traffic control devices when and as required under the ordinances
of the city to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place
and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary
to regulate, guide or warn traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city.
All such traffic control devices shall conform to and be maintained in
conformance with the state manual and specifications. This subsection shall not
apply to traffic control devices authorized installed and maintained by the
state. (1989 Code § 7-1-3, 9-20-1988)
         b.   The traffic engineer may test traffic control devices under
actual conditions of traffic. (1989 Code § 7-1-4(2), 9-20-1988)
      3.   Temporary Or Experimental Regulations: The traffic engineer is
hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions
of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or
experimental regulations to cover any emergency or special conditions. No such
temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect for more than
ninety (90) days. (1989 Code § 7-1-4(1), 9-20-1988)
      4.   Designate Crosswalks, Safety Zones And Traffic Lanes: The traffic
engineer is hereby authorized:
         a.   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his
opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such places as he may deem necessary;
         b.   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians;
         c.   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as
he may deem necessary and advisable, consistent with the traffic ordinances of
the city. (1989 Code § 7-1-6, 9-20-1988)
      5.   Timing Of Traffic Signals: The traffic engineer is authorized to
regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic
in an orderly and safe manner at speed somewhat below the speeds otherwise
applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate
signs giving notice thereof. (1989 Code § 7-1-7, 9-20-1988)
      6.   Markings At Intersections: The traffic engineer is authorized to
place islands, markers or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating
the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such
course shall be traveled irrespective of any other provisions of this chapter.
(1989 Code § 7-1-8, 9-20-1988)
      7.   Vehicles In Congested Places: The traffic engineer is hereby
authorized to determine and designate by proper signs, places, not exceeding
one hundred feet (100') in length, in which the stopping, standing or parking
of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause
unusual delay to traffic. (1989 Code § 7-1-9, 9-20-1988)
6-1-3: ON STREET PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, in addition to the common
definition, "vehicle" shall also include unattached trailer, camper or boat.
   B.   Restrictions: In addition to other parking regulations in this Code, it
shall be unlawful for the owner of a vehicle:
      1.   To park or allow to remain standing any vehicle on City streets that
visually or physically hinders the ability to enter or exit driveways safely.
(Exceptions see D 2.)
      2.   To park or allow to remain standing any vehicle in the same location
on any street for a continuing period of time exceeding twenty-four (24) hours.
      3.   To move or allow to be moved a vehicle in any manner or leave a
parking space and then reenter it to avoid the intent of this section.
   C.   Prohibited Times: It is unlawful for the owner of a vehicle to park or
allow to remain standing such vehicle on any public street in the City between
November 15 and March 15 between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or until the street has been plowed after a
measurable snowfall.
   D.   Exceptions:
      1.   Any resident of the City may request permission to park any vehicle
on the street in excess of twenty-four (24) hours when the same is required by
emergency or other unusual circumstances.
      2.   The Police Department, for good cause shown, may grant such
permission. The Police Department shall be the sole judge as to the necessity
and requirements for the granting of such permission.
   E.   Snowbound Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vehicle to
allow the vehicle to remain standing upon any public street for longer than
forty-eight (48) consecutive hours after such vehicle has become snowbound due
to snowplows plowing around the vehicle. Such vehicles shall be presumed to be
abandoned. Abandoned vehicles shall be subject to removal and impound in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-1406, as amended, or its
successor provision. (Ord. 2017-06, 10-3-2017; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 1-21-2020;
Ord. 2023-05, 9-5-2023)
6-1-4: OPERATION OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Careless Driving: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle without the care and caution of a reasonable prudent person under the
circumstances then and there existing, or in a manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger any person or property. (1989 Code § 7-1-11, 9-20-1988)
   B.   Incapable Or Incompetent Driver: No person or owner in control of a
vehicle shall knowingly permit said vehicle to be operated by any person who is
physically or mentally disabled to such an extent that such person's judgment
or driving ability is impaired.
      1.   No driver shall operate a vehicle while his ability or alertness is
so impaired through fatigue, illness, or any other cause to make it unsafe for
him to drive such vehicle. (1989 Code § 7-1-13, 9-20-1988)
      2.   No person physically or mentally disabled or incapacitated in any
particular manner, temporarily or permanently, may drive a motor vehicle upon
any street or alley, provided such disability or incapacity is such as to
interfere with the reasonable and safe operation of such vehicle. (1989 Code §
7-1-13, 9-20-1988; amd. 1997 Code)
      3.   No person, whether a resident or nonresident of this State, under
sixteen (16) years of age shall operate a motor vehicle upon any highway,
street or public way in this City. (1989 Code § 7-1-13, 9-20-1988)
   C.   Failure To Keep Proper Lookout: No person shall drive a motor vehicle
within the corporate limits of the City in such a manner as to endanger life or
property by failing to keep a safe and proper lookout for other traffic,
objects or persons. (1989 Code § 7-1-10, 9-20-1988)
   D.   Negligent Collision: It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle with
such lack of due care and in such a negligent manner as to cause the same to
collide with any vehicle, person or object. (1989 Code § 7-1-12, 9-20-1988)
   E.   Exhibition Driving: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
exhibition driving in any motor vehicle upon any public highway, street or
alley within the corporate limits of the City. Exhibition driving shall consist
of, but not be limited to, unnecessarily or unreasonably doing one or more of
the following in the operation of a motor vehicle: squealing or spinning the
tires through application of excessive power, or through excessive braking,
throwing rocks, gravel, sand or dirt through excessive application of power or
in sharp turns; fishtailing, rocking or weaving while applying excessive power;
sliding, spinning or skidding a motor vehicle, alternating between extreme
acceleration and extreme deceleration; or display of extreme acceleration. This
offense may be committed by any person operating a motor vehicle singly or in
concert with or in the company of another person operating a separate motor
vehicle, and it shall not be necessary to show that any person intended to
engage or was engaged in any contest or display with another to constitute a
violation of this chapter. (1989 Code § 7-1-14, 9-20-1988)
6-1-5: INTOXICATION:
   A.   Intent To Drive Or Operate Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any
person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs to be in or
about any vehicle with the intention of driving or operating such vehicle.
(1989 Code § 7-1-16, 9-20-1988)
   B.   Drinking In Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any
intoxicating liquor while in a motor vehicle on the streets or alleys of the
city. (1989 Code § 7-1-17, 9-20-1988)
6-1-6: RESTRICTED OR DANGEROUS VEHICLES:
   A.   Regulations: Vehicles with a gross weight of sixteen thousand (16,000)
pounds or more, any semitractor or semitrailer or any vehicle carrying
explosives, corrosives or flammable substances are hereby declared restricted
vehicles. All restricted vehicles shall be driven only upon state highways,
including the interstate system within the city limits, deviating therefrom
only when necessary to traverse another street when necessary for loading,
unloading or servicing, and then only departing from the said state highway
route at the nearest reasonable and practicable point; however, no such vehicle
shall be loaded, unloaded or serviced upon any street or part of street if
there is usable off street loading, unloading or servicing space available.
Subject to the exceptions in subsection B of this section, no restricted
vehicle or vehicle which normally carries corrosive or flammable substances,
even though they may be empty at the time, shall be parked for any period of
time anywhere within the city limits.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   Construction vehicles when retained for work in said area;
      2.   School buses;
      3.   Recreational trailers or motor homes; and
      4.   Sunset City resident operated semitractor, without trailer, may park
at the semitractor operator's place of residence only after obtaining the
required permit from the business licensing department.
         a.   "Semitractor" is defined as any vehicle that has at least three
(3) axles and is of the type commonly used for commercial transport purposes.
         b.   Semitractor's bed (if applicable) must be unloaded.
         c.   Only one semitractor allowed per property.
         d.   No on street parking.
         e.   No washing or maintenance of tractor on the premises or on the
street.
         f.   Engine may only idle for five (5) minutes before leaving the
premises.
         g.   Renters must provide city with letter of permission from property
owner to park on the property.
         h.   Semitractor parking permit must be obtained annually and expires
December 31 of each year.
         i.   Permit may be revoked for any violation of this chapter. (Ord.
2010-05, 5-4-2010)
6-1-6-1: LOW PROFILE MOTORIZED VEHICLES:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
   LOW PROFILE MOTORIZED VEHICLE: Any motorized vehicle that:
      1.   Is not regulated by the state or by any other city code provision;
      2.   Is not otherwise permitted upon the highways or sidewalks; and
      3.   Is less than thirty six inches (36") in height when in its normal
operating position, notwithstanding any flag, antenna or other device attached,
or modifications made thereto.
This definition includes, but is not limited to, "pocket bikes", or miniature
motorcycles, and "go-carts".
   B.   Proscription: It is unlawful for any person to operate a low profile
motorized vehicle upon any public property within the city. It is unlawful for
an adult, parent or guardian to allow a minor to operate such a vehicle on
public property within the city.
   C.   Penalty: A violation of this section is a class C misdemeanor and is
punishable as such. (Ord. 2005-01, 1-4-2005)
6-1-7: VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Inspection: No person shall drive, stop or park, nor shall any owner or
person in possession cause or knowingly permit to be driven, stopped or parked
on any street or alley within the city any vehicle which is required under the
laws of the state to be inspected, unless such vehicle has been inspected and
has attached thereto, in proper position, a valid and unexpired certificate of
inspection as required by the laws of the state. (1989 Code § 7-1-19, 9-20-
1988)
   B.   Registration; Certificate:
      1.   Every vehicle at all times while being driven, stopped or parked
upon the streets or alleys of this city shall be registered in the name of the
owner thereof in accordance with the laws of the state, unless such vehicle is
not required by the laws to be registered in this state, and shall display in
proper position valid and unexpired registration plates or indicia of
registration, meeting the requirements of the laws of the state, clear and
distinct and free from defacement, mutilation, grease and other obscuring
matter, so as to be plainly visible and legible at all times; provided,
however, if such vehicle is not required to be registered in this state, the
indicia of registration issued by another state, territory, possession or
district of the United States or a foreign country, substantially complying
with the provisions hereof, shall be considered as compliance with this code.
(1989 Code § 7-1-20, 9-20-1988)
      2.   The current, valid registration certificate of every motor vehicle
shall at all times be carried in the vehicle to which it refers or shall be
carried by the person driving or in control of such vehicle who shall display
the same upon demand of a police officer. (1989 Code § 7-1-21, 9-20-1988)
6-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
 1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 7-1-22, 9-20-1988; amd. 1997 Code)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
PARKS AND RECREATION DIVISION AND SUPERVISORS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Creation
7-1-2: Supervisors
7-1-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created a division of the public works department for parks and
recreation. (1989 Code § 10-3-1, 9-5-1990; amd. 1997 Code)
7-1-2: SUPERVISORS:
The public works director may hire qualified persons as supervisors of this
division to control, manage, operate, protect and conserve all real and
personal property now owned or that may hereafter be acquired by the city for
the establishment and maintenance of city parks and recreational areas. Such
supervisors shall be directly responsible to the public works director and
shall carry out and execute all rules and regulations of management and
programs of recreation that may be devised and established by the city council.
(Ord. 2010-02, 3-2-2010)
CHAPTER 2
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
7-2-1: General Powers
7-2-2: Prohibited Acts
7-2-3: Excavation Or Construction; Permit Required
7-2-4: Construction By Individuals; Special Permission
7-2-5: Building Line On Street
7-2-6: Removal Of Weeds, Vegetation And Other Obstructions
7-2-7: Location Of Poles On Streets
7-2-8: Height Of Awnings, Porches, Tree Limbs And Branches
7-2-9: Limitation Of Standards
7-2-10: Penalty
7-2-1: GENERAL POWERS:
The City shall have and exercise all the powers vested in cities of the third
class by the laws of the State relating to the control, management and
regulations of public streets and sidewalks of the City. (Ord. 2018-04, 8-7-
2018)
7-2-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Destruction: It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface or
in any manner injure any public street or sidewalk.
   B.   Obstruction: All persons are hereby forbidden to obstruct the
sidewalks, crosswalks or streets of the City, or to permit any gate or other
obstruction to swing across any sidewalk of the City to the annoyance of
another; provided however, that special permission may be granted by the City
to place obstructions on sidewalks or streets when necessary for improving the
same or to provide protection when buildings are in the course of construction.
   C.   Unlawful Deposit Of Snow Or Other Material On City Streets: It shall be
unlawful for any person removing snow from a sidewalk or driveway leading from
a business or residence to deposit said snow or other material in a street
maintained and plowed for purposes of snow removal by the City. (Ord. 2018-04,
8-7-2018)
7-2-3: EXCAVATION 1  OR CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall open up, excavate in or upon any public street or sidewalk for
the purpose of laying therein or thereunder any gas, electric, telephone,
conduits and pipes or in any manner commence any construction in or upon any
public street or sidewalk without first having procured from the Building
Department a franchise so to do and/or a permit for the specific construction
to be undertaken, and no such construction shall be commenced, undertaken or
completed until the same has been approved and inspected by the City through
its proper officers or agents and all costs of such inspection herein required
by the City shall be paid by the person or corporation making such
construction. (Ord. 2018-04, 8-7-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 3 of this title.
7-2-4: CONSTRUCTION BY INDIVIDUALS; SPECIAL PERMISSION:
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent, servant or
contractor or employee, to construct any street or sidewalk in the City unless
a building permit is first obtained from the Building Department to do so and
unless such street or sidewalk be constructed to lines and grades and
specifications as given and established by the City Council, or unless special
permission to deviate from such lines and grades is first obtained from the
City. All such streets and sidewalks shall be constructed under the supervision
of an inspector to be appointed by the City, and the cost of such supervision
and the cost of indicating grade and lines shall be borne by the applicant,
except where otherwise provided. (Ord. 2018-04, 8-7-2018)
7-2-5: BUILDING LINE ON STREET:
No building or house erected on the boundary or edge of any street, lane,
avenue or alley of the City shall extend further into the street than the outer
edge of the lot or the inner edge of the sidewalk. (Ord. 2018-04, 8-7-2018)
7-2-6: REMOVAL OF WEEDS, VEGETATION AND OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any private property
fronting a public sidewalk to remove all weeds and noxious vegetation from such
property and in front thereof to the curb line of the street and to keep the
sidewalks in front of such property free from litter, snow, ice or
obstructions. Snow and ice shall be removed from the sidewalks within twenty
four (24) hours after a storm.
   B.   Shade trees, yard trees, and park strip trees along any public sidewalk
shall be pruned clear of all branches between the ground and a height of nine
feet (9') for that portion of the plant located over the sidewalk. Similar
vegetation which projects over any street or access road which may be used for
emergency purposes shall be trimmed to a height of thirteen feet (13') from the
grade of the street or access road.
   C.   Shrubs and similar vegetation shall be trimmed to a minimum of one foot
(1') from sidewalks. (Ord. 2018-04, 8-7-2018)
7-2-7: LOCATION OF POLES ON STREETS:
All signposts, telegraph, telephone or light poles, awnings, porch posts or
other obstructions shall be set at the outer edge of the sidewalk at such
places as the City may designate; provided, that no pole stubs shall be set on
any telegraph, telephone or light poles located on a public street or sidewalk
within the City. (Ord. 2018-04, 8-7-2018)
7-2-8: HEIGHT OF AWNINGS, PORCHES, TREE LIMBS AND BRANCHES:
All canopies, porch tops, sign boards and tree limbs or branches crossing or
extending over any sidewalk in the City must be at least nine feet (9') above
the grade of the sidewalk. (Ord. 2018-04, 8-7-2018)
7-2-9: LIMITATION OF STANDARDS:
Nothing herein contained shall in any way be deemed a waiver of any of the
provisions of the subdivision title 1  or zoning title 2  of the City and
wherever any conflict may arise by the standards herein required and the
standards required or the ordinances mentioned, the provisions of the latter
shall control. (Ord. 2018-04, 8-7-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11 of this Code.
2 2. See title 10 of this Code.
7-2-10: PENALTY:
   A.   Individual Violation: Any violation of this chapter is a Class B
misdemeanor and is punishable as such. Any person found guilty of violating
this chapter shall be punished as follows:
      1.   Upon a first conviction, a minimum fine of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) shall be imposed.
      2.   Upon a second conviction, a minimum fine of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) shall be imposed.
      3.   Upon a third conviction, a minimum fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) shall be imposed.
      4.   Upon a fourth conviction, a minimum fine of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed.
      5.   Upon a fifth or subsequent conviction, a minimum fine of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed.
For purposes of this subsection A, the present conviction must be within five
(5) years of the prior conviction.
   B.   Corporation Violation: A corporation, association, partnership, or
governmental instrumentality found guilty of violating this chapter shall be
punished as follows:
      1.   Upon a first conviction, a minimum fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) shall be imposed.
      2.   Upon a second conviction, a minimum fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) shall be imposed.
      3.   Upon a third conviction, a minimum fine of one thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00) shall be imposed.
      4.   Upon a fourth conviction, a minimum fine of two thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($2,750.00) shall be imposed.
      5.   Upon a fifth or subsequent conviction, a minimum fine of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be imposed.
For purposes of this subsection B, the present conviction must be within five
(5) years of the prior conviction.
   C.   Mandatory Appearance: If a uniform summons and citation is issued and
filed with the court, a mandatory appearance is required. (Ord. 2018-04, 8-7-
2018)
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Permit, Application And Fee
7-3-3: Compliance With Specifications And Requirements
7-3-4: Notice To And Protection Of Users
7-3-5: Trench Material And Compaction
7-3-6: Inspection
7-3-7: Penalty
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this Chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
   EXCAVATION: Digging in, cutting into the surface of or breaking the surface
of any street.
   STREET: Includes any street, road, highway, sidewalk or walkway in the City.
(Ord. 10-4-1-87, 10-20-1987)
7-3-2: PERMIT, APPLICATION AND FEE:
   A.   Required: No person shall excavate in a street in the City without
first obtaining a permit to do so from the Building Department. Forms for such
permits shall be available at the City office building.
   B.   Information Required: The applicant for an excavation permit shall
furnish to the Building Department such information as necessary in
administering and enforcing this Chapter. The application form shall contain an
agreement, on file in the office of the City Recorder, by the provisions of
which the applicant shall hold the City harmless from any claim, damage or suit
and shall pay all expenses incurred by the City which may arise out of or
result from, or by reason of the excavation.
   C.   Fee Determined: The fee for issuance of an excavation permit shall be
fixed by resolution of the City Council. Each applicant for an excavation
permit shall furnish an amount to be fixed by the City Council for single
excavated areas less than fifty feet (50') in length and twenty feet (20') in
width. The applicant shall pay the City the amount necessary for repairing the
excavation as determined by the contracted engineer and Public Works Director
with this amount being double for any repair between October 15 and May 15. For
larger excavation repair work, the amount of the fee may be different as
determined by the type or size of the project. (Ord. 10-4-1-87, 10-20-1987;
1997 Code)
7-3-3: COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Required: No person shall excavate in a street or repair any such
excavation except in strict accordance with City standards and specifications
as outlined in this Chapter and as adopted and amended from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 10-4-1-87, 10-20-1987)
   B.   Notification; Authorization: Before any excavation in a street or
repair of any such excavation can proceed, the contracted engineer or Public
Works Director must be contacted and authorization given to proceed for better
control, safety and organized construction so as to impose upon users of the
street or excavated area the least amount of inconvenience. (Ord. 10-4-1-87,
10-20-1987; 1997 Code)
7-3-4: NOTICE TO AND PROTECTION OF USERS:
No person shall excavate in a street without thereafter erecting or placing
adequate barriers and taking all steps as required for notice to and protection
of users of the street. Such steps shall include the placing of flasher lights
operating in hours of darkness, or such other requirements as may be imposed by
State statute or regulation. (Ord. 10-4-1-87, 10-20-1987)
7-3-5: TRENCH MATERIAL AND COMPACTION:
For single excavated areas less than fifty feet (50') in length and twenty feet
(20') in width, all materials that are dug out of the trench or excavation
shall be hauled off and disposed of. The trench or excavation shall be refilled
with new crushed gravel and compacted to ninety five percent (95%) and made
ready for the asphalt finish surface. The trench or excavation shall be patched
by the applicant with a minimum of two and one-half inches (21/2") of asphalt.
For larger excavations, the street repair work shall be done by the applicant,
according to City specifications. (Ord. 10-4-1-87, 10-20-1987)
7-3-6: INSPECTION:
After completion, and the contracted engineer and Public Works Director are
satisfied that the requirements have been met, a memo will be written to the
Building Department indicating that the work is satisfactory. Payment
adjustments to the applicant will then be made accordingly. The trench shall be
totally completed within one week's time after the excavation work is started.
It shall be the responsibility of the one receiving the permit to maintain the
trench with barricades and in a suitable manner for traffic and safety to the
public until it is patched and completed. (Ord. 10-4-1-87, 10-20-1987; 1997
Code)
7-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person excavating in a street in the City in violation of any provision of
this Chapter or any standards or specifications relating to this Chapter is
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day during which any violation occurs constitutes a
separate violation. In addition to the penalties provided in this Section, such
person may be enjoined from continuing any violation of this Chapter. The City
Attorney shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and
seek damages if necessary, by any means available by law. (Ord. 10-4-1-87, 10-
20-1987)
CHAPTER 4
CITY PARKS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Nonpermitted Uses And Activities
7-4-2: Exceptions
7-4-3: Dog Walking In South Park
7-4-4: Organized Sports
7-4-5: Penalties
7-4-1: NONPERMITTED USES AND ACTIVITIES:
All activities which endanger the health, safety and welfare of City park users
shall be prohibited, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Golfing and driving of golf balls;
   B.   Archery;
   C.   Equestrian uses;
   D.   Drinking of alcoholic beverages;
   E.   Smoking;
   F.   Driving of unauthorized motor vehicles in areas not designed as
roadways and parking lots;
   G.   Parking in no parking areas;
   H.   Allowing animals, such as dogs, cats and other household pets in the
park (with the exception of section
7-4-3 of this chapter);
   I.   Building fires in areas not designated for such purposes;
   J.   Unauthorized camping overnight; or
   K.   Engaging in any other activity deemed by a Police Officer to affect the
health, safety, and welfare of other park users. (Ord. 2017-04, 4-18-2017)
7-4-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the use of seeing eye or
hearing dogs properly trained to assist handicapped individuals when such dogs
are actually being used to aid such individuals. (Ord. 2017-04, 4-18-2017)
7-4-3: DOG WALKING IN SOUTH PARK:
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this chapter, dogs
are allowed to be walked and exercised in South Park subject to the following
rules and regulations:
   A.   All dogs must be properly licensed and display a current tag. A current
rabies vaccination tag must also be displayed.
   B.   The length of leash shall be limited to a maximum of six feet (6').
   C.   No person can walk more than two (2) dogs at one (1) time.
   D.   The person walking the dog must effectively control the dog or dogs at
all times.
   E.   The person walking the dog is to remain on the walking track at all
times.
   F.   Dogs will be allowed in the park only between the hours of four o'clock
(4:00) A.M. and eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   G.   No vicious dogs shall be allowed in the park at any time. A dog shall
be considered vicious if it displays aggressive behavior by barking or snarling
at people or other dogs or if it has a history of having bitten any person or
another domestic animal.
   H.   Dogs which are unusually noisy or constantly barking shall not be
allowed in the park.
   I.   Dog waste must be immediately cleaned up by the person walking the dog
or who is present and otherwise responsible for the dog.
   J.   Dogs will not be allowed in the park during any organized event
authorized or conducted by the City or Doxey Elementary School.
   K.   Each person responsible for the dog being walked shall have three (3)
dog dropping cleanup bags in their possession at the beginning of the walk.
(Ord. 2017-04, 4-18-2017)
7-4-4: ORGANIZED SPORTS:
Without first having reserved the playing field through Sunset City, organized
sports shall be prohibited, including, but not limited to baseball, softball,
soccer, football and lacrosse.
   A.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to impromptu games being
played by residents or those who have reserved a bowery for family reunions or
parties, if the playing field is not already reserved. (Ord. 2017-04, 4-18-
2017)
7-4-5: PENALTIES:
Any person or legal entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter or
committing any acts prohibited by this chapter shall commit a Class B
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, and shall be subject to an order of restitution for any
damage, cleanup, or expense borne by the City. (Ord. 2017-04, 4-18-2017)
CHAPTER 5
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-5-1: Declaration Of Findings And Intent; Scope
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Franchise Required
7-5-4: Compensation And Other Payments
7-5-5: Franchise Application
7-5-6: Construction And Technical Requirements
7-5-7: Franchise And License Nontransferable
7-5-8: Oversight And Regulation
7-5-9: Rights Of City
7-5-10: Obligation To Notify
7-5-11: General Provisions
7-5-12: Federal, State And City Jurisdiction
7-5-1: DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND INTENT; SCOPE:
   A.   Declaration Of Findings And Intent:
      1.   Findings Regarding Rights Of Way: The city finds that the rights of
way within the city:
         a.   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property
in the business and social life of the city;
         b.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent;
         c.   Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and
other public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered
for profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic
well-being of the city and its citizens; and
         d.   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper
management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and
negative effects upon the public from such facilities' construction, placement,
relocation and maintenance in the rights of way.
      2.   Findings Regarding Compensation: The city finds that the city should
receive fair and reasonable compensation for use of the rights of way.
      3.   Findings Regarding Local Concern: The city finds that while
telecommunications systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce,
their operations also involve rights of way, municipal franchising, and vital
business and community service, which are of local concern.
      4.   Findings Regarding Promotion Of Telecommunications Services: The
city finds that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to
promote the rapid development of telecommunications services, on a
nondiscriminatory basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to
assure availability for municipal, educational and community services.
      5.   Findings Regarding Franchise Standards: The city finds that it is in
the interests of the public to franchise and to establish standards for
franchising providers in a manner that:
         a.   Fairly and reasonably compensates the city on a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
         b.   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under
which providers may use the rights of way to serve the public;
         c.   Fully protects the public interests and the city from any harm
that may flow from such commercial use of rights of way;
         d.   Protects the police powers and rights of way management authority
of the city, in a manner consistent with federal and state law;
         e.   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and
use of the city infrastructure;
         f.   Protects the public's investment in improvements in the rights of
way; and
         g.   Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers
are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting telecommunications services, within
the meaning of the telecommunications act of 1996 ("Act") (PL no. 96-104).
      6.   Power To Manage Rights Of Way: The city adopts this
telecommunications ordinance pursuant to its power to manage the rights of way,
pursuant to common law, the Utah constitution and statutory authority, and
receive fair and reasonable compensation for the use of rights of way by
providers as expressly set forth by section 253 of the act.
   B.   Scope: This chapter shall provide the basic local scheme for providers
of telecommunications services and systems that require the use of the right of
way, including providers of both the system and service, those providers of the
system only, and those providers who do not build the system but who only
provide services. This chapter shall apply to all future providers and to all
providers in the city prior to the effective date hereof, whether operating
with or without a franchise as set forth in subsection
7-5-12B of this chapter.
   C.   Excluded Activity:
      1.   Cable TV: This chapter shall not apply to cable television operators
otherwise regulated by the ordinance 2-1-16 (the "Cable TV Ordinance", 2-18-
1992).
      2.   Wireless Services: This chapter shall not apply to personal wireless
service facilities.
      3.   Provisions Applicable To Excluded Providers: Providers excused by
other law that prohibits the city from requiring a franchise shall not be
required to obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this
chapter through the exercise of the city's police power and not preempted by
other law shall be applicable. (Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-2000)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the
plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meanings.
   APPLICATION: The process by which a provider submits a request and indicates
a desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights of way of all, or a
part, of the city. An application includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider
to the city concerning: the construction of a telecommunications system over,
under, on or through the rights of way; the telecommunications services
proposed to be provided in the city by a provider; and any other matter
pertaining to a proposed system or service.
   CITY: Sunset City, Utah.
   COMPLETION DATE: The date that a provider begins providing services to
customers in the city.
   CONSTRUCTION COSTS: All costs of constructing a system, including make-ready
costs, other than engineering fees, attorney or accountant fees, or other
consulting fees.
   CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the
system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control
or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more
than thirty five percent (35%) of any provider (which person or group of
persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or
"controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than
one person or group of persons.
   FCC: The federal communications commission, or any successor thereto.
   FRANCHISE: The rights and obligation extended by the city to a provider to
own, lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights of way
within the boundaries of the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include: a) any other permit or authorization
required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the
city required by the ordinances and laws of the city; b) any other permit,
agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on rights of
way or public property including, without limitation, permits and agreements
for placing devices on or in poles, conduit or other structures, whether owned
by the city or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in
or along the rights of way.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contract entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth,
subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will
be exercised.
   GROSS REVENUE: Includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as
gross revenue within the meaning of chapter 26, title 11 Utah Code Annotated
1953, as amended. In the case of any provider not covered within the ambit of
chapter 26, title 11 Utah code, the definition of "Gross Revenue" shall be that
set forth in the franchise agreement.
   INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunications services to customers, all or part of the
necessary system which uses the rights of way.
   OPEN VIDEO SERVICE: Any video programming services provided to any person
through the use of rights of way, by a provider that is certified by the FCC to
operate an open video system pursuant to section 651 et seq., of the
telecommunications act (to be codified at 47 USC title VI, part V), regardless
of the system used.
   OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: The system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave-guides,
optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment,
or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying or distributing open video services to or from subscribers or
locations within the city.
   OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system
and directly or through one or more persons owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
   ORDINANCE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE: This telecommunications ordinance
concerning the granting of franchise in and by the city for the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
   PSC: The public service commission, or any successor thereto.
   PERSON: Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the city.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Has the same meaning as provided in
section 704 of the act (47 USC 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly
known as cellular and PSC services that do not install any system or portion of
a system in the rights of way.
   PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, or system lessee.
   RESALER: Refers to any person that provides local exchange service over a
system for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or
lease the underlying system used for the transmission.
   RIGHTS OF WAY: The surface of and the space above and below any public
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or
hereafter existing as such within the city.
   SIGNAL: Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or
laser or radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or
digital format.
   SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific
portion of a system to provide services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission between or among points specified by
the user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video, and voice),
without change in the form or content of information sent and received.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE OR SERVICES: Any telecommunications or
communications services provided by a provider within the city that the
provider is authorized to provide under federal, state and local law, and any
equipment and/or facilities required for and integrated with the services
provided within the city, except that these terms do not include "cable
service" as defined in the cable communications policy act of 1984, as amended
by the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 (47 USC
section 521 et seq.), and the telecommunications act of 1996.
Telecommunications service or services also include an open video service.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEMS: All conduit, manholes, poles,
antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment,
wire and appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a provider, located in the
rights of way and utilized in the provision of services, including fully
digital or analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced
telecommunications services. Telecommunications system or systems also include
an open video system.
   WIRE: Fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
(Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-2000)
7-5-3: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
   A.   Nonexclusive Franchise: The city is empowered and authorized to issue
nonexclusive franchises governing the installation, construction, and
maintenance of systems in the city's rights of way, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The franchise is granted through a franchise
agreement entered into between the city and provider.
   B.   Every Provider Must Obtain: Except to the extent preempted by federal
or state law, as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction,
including any appeals, every provider must obtain a franchise prior to
constructing a telecommunications system or providing telecommunications
services using the rights of way, and every provider must obtain a franchise
before constructing an open video system or providing open video services via
an open video system. Any open video system or service shall be subject to the
customer service and consumer protection provisions applicable to the cable TV
companies to the extent the city is not preempted or permitted as ultimately
interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals. The
fact that particular telecommunications systems may be used for multiple
purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By
way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must
obtain a cable franchise, and should it intend to provide telecommunications
services over the same system, must also obtain a telecommunications franchise.
(Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-2000)
   C.   Nature Of Grant: A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or
legal, in the rights of way. A franchise is only the right to occupy rights of
way on a nonexclusive basis for the limited purpose and for the limited period
stated in the franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned, or
subleased, except as may be expressly provided in the franchise agreement. A
franchise does not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole
attachment agreements before collocating its system on the property of others,
including the city's property. This section shall not be construed to prohibit
a provider from leasing conduit to another provider, so long as the lessee has
obtained a franchise. (Ord. 2000-07, 11-17-2000)
   D.   Current Providers: Except to the extent exempted by federal or state
law, any provider acting without a franchise on the effective date hereof shall
request issuance of a franchise from the city within ninety (90) days of the
effective date hereof. If such request is made, the provider may continue
providing service during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not
made, or if negotiations cease and a franchise is not granted, the provider
shall comply with the provisions of subsection
7-5-9D of this chapter.
   E.   Nature Of Franchise: The franchise granted by the city under the
provisions of this chapter shall be a nonexclusive franchise providing the
right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its system
on, over and under the rights of way in order to provide services.
   F.   Regulatory Approval Needed: Before offering or providing any services
pursuant to the franchise, a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory
approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of
such services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if
required, and shall submit to the city upon the written request of the city
evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
   G.   Term: No franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of
less than five (5) years or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each franchise
shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner. (Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-2000)
7-5-4: COMPENSATION AND OTHER PAYMENTS:
   A.   Compensation: As fair and reasonable compensation for any franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter, a provider shall have the following
obligations:
      1.   Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the city to review
an application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or
charges, a provider may be required to pay the city, at the time of
application, five hundred dollars ($500.00) as a nonrefundable application fee.
      2.   Franchise Fees: The franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the
franchise agreement. The obligation to pay a franchise fee shall commence on
the completion date. The franchise fee is offset by any business license fee or
business license tax enacted by the city.
      3.   Excavation Permits: The provider shall also pay fees required for an
excavation permit as provided in chapter 3 of this title.
   B.   Timing: Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all
franchise fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within forty five (45) days of
the close of each calendar month.
   C.   Fee Statement And Certification: Unless a franchise agreement provides
otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the
manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to its
accuracy.
   D.   Future Costs: A provider shall pay to the city or to third parties, at
the direction of the city, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and
reasonable expenses that the city incurs for the services of third parties
(including, but not limited to, attorneys and other consultants) in connection
with any renewal or provider-initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this
chapter or a franchise, provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a
reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. In the event the
parties are unable to agree, either party may submit the issue to binding
arbitration in accordance with the rules and procedures of the American
arbitration association. Any costs associated with any work to be done by the
power and public works department to provide space on city-owned poles shall be
borne by the provider.
   E.   Taxes And Assessments: To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities, other than the city on the use of the city
property as a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights of way,
the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such
taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
chapter.
   F.   Interest On Late Payments: In the event that any payment is not
actually received by the city on or before the applicable date fixed in the
franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the
rate charged for delinquent state taxes.
   G.   No Accord And Satisfaction: No acceptance by the city of any fee shall
be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount,
nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any
claim the city may have for additional sums payable.
   H.   Not In Lieu Of Other Taxes Or Fees: The fee payment is not a payment in
lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in
this chapter or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not
limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the city-owned
poles are not waived and remain applicable.
   I.   Continuing Obligation And Holdover: In the event a provider continues
to operate all or any part of the system after the term of the franchise, such
operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter and the franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation and
other payment provisions throughout the period of such continued operation,
provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a
renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a limitation on the
remedies, if any, available to the city as a result of such continued operation
after the term including, but not limited to, damages and restitution.
   J.   Costs Of Publication: A provider shall assume any publication costs
associated with its franchise that may be required by law. (Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-
2000; amd. Ord. 2022-01, 4-5-2022)
7-5-5: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
   A.   Franchise Application: To obtain a franchise to construct, own,
maintain or provide services through any system within the city, to obtain a
renewal of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, or to obtain the city
approval of a transfer of a franchise, as provided in subsection
7-5-7A2 of this chapter, granted pursuant to this chapter, an application must
be filed with the city on the form attached to ordinance 2000-05 as exhibit A,
on file in the city recorder's office, which is hereby incorporated by
reference. The application form may be changed by the mayor so long as such
changes request information that is consistent with this chapter. Such
application form as amended, is incorporated by reference.
   B.   Application Criteria: In making a determination as to an application
filed pursuant to this chapter, the city may, but shall not be limited to,
request the following from the provider:
      1.   A copy of the order from the PSC granting a certificate of
convenience and necessity, if any is necessary for provider's offering of
services within the state of Utah.
      2.   Certification of the provider's financial ability to compensate the
city for provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights of way during
the franchise term proposed by the provider.
      3.   Provider's agreement to comply with the requirements of section
7-5-6 of this chapter.
   C.   Franchise Determination: The city, in its discretion, shall determine
the award of any franchise on the basis of these and other considerations
relevant to the use of the rights of way, without competitive bidding. (Ord.
2000-05, 9-5-2000)
7-5-6: CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirement: No provider shall receive a franchise unless it
agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this section governing
construction and technical requirements for its system, in addition to any
other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the city or the
franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in the cost of
locating portions of the system with other systems or with city utilities. A
provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the excavation
ordinance 1 , before commencing any work in the rights of way.
   B.   Quality: All work involved in the construction, maintenance, repair,
upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and
reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time,
it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by federal
law or the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the system
including, without limitation, any means used to distribute signals over or
within the system, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or
quality of service or reliability, then a provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
   C.   Licenses And Permits: A provider shall have the sole responsibility for
diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or
other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain,
upgrade or repair the system including, but not limited to, any necessary
approvals from persons and/or the city to use private property, easements,
poles and conduit. A provider shall obtain any required permit, license,
approval or authorization including, but not limited to, excavation permits,
pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for
which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
   D.   Relocation Of The System:
      1.   New Grades Or Lines: If the grades or lines of any rights of way are
changed at any time in a manner affecting the system, then a provider shall
comply with the requirements of the excavation ordinance.
      2.   The City Authority To Move System In Case Of An Emergency: The city
may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined
by the city in its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the system
and appurtenances on, over or under the rights of way of the city, in which
event the city shall not be liable therefore to a provider. The city shall
notify a provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon
as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any
action taken under this section. Notice shall be given as provided in
subsection
7-5-11D of this chapter.
      3.   A Provider Required To Temporarily Move System For Third Party: A
provider shall, upon prior reasonable written notice by the city or any person
holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable
under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its system to permit the
moving of said structure. A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any
person other than the city for any such movement of its systems.
      4.   Rights Of Way Change; Obligation To Move System: When the city is
changing a rights of way and makes a written request, a provider is required to
move or remove its system from the rights of way, without cost to the city, to
the extent provided in the excavation ordinance 2 . This obligation does not
apply to systems originally located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated into the rights of way, if that
private easement grants a superior vested right. This obligation exists whether
or not the provider has obtained an excavation permit.
   E.   Protect Structures: In connection with the construction, maintenance,
repair, upgrade or removal of the system, a provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the city and all
designated landmarks, as well as all other structures within any designated
landmark district. A provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the
city to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or
any other municipal structure on, over or under the rights of way of the city
required because of the presence of the system. Any such alteration shall be
made by the city or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A provider agrees
that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the city to replace or repair
and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified
by the city, and municipal structure or any other rights of way of the city
involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the
system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by
or on behalf of a provider pursuant to the franchise.
   F.   No Obstruction: In connection with the construction, maintenance,
upgrade, repair or removal of the system, a provider shall not unreasonably
obstruct the rights of way of fixed guide- way systems, railways, passenger
travel, or other traffic to, from or within the city without the prior consent
of the appropriate authorities.
   G.   Safety Precautions: A provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its
work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such
other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply
with all applicable federal, state and local requirements including, but not
limited to, the national electrical safety code.
   H.   Repair: After written reasonable notice to the provider, unless, in the
sole determination of the city, imminent danger exists, any rights of way
within the city which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may be repaired by
the city at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing
before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the city shall submit to such a
provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and restoring the
rights of way intruded upon. The provider shall, within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the statement, pay to the city the entire amount thereof.
   I.   System Maintenance: A provider shall:
      1.   Install and maintain all parts of its system in a nondangerous
condition throughout the entire period of its franchise.
      2.   Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent
engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the national
electrical safety code and all other applicable federal, state and local laws
or regulations.
      3.   At all reasonable times, permit examination by and duly authorized
representative of the city of the system and its effect on the rights of way.
   J.   Trimming Of Trees: A provider shall have the authority to trim trees,
in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement
restrictions, upon and hanging over rights of way so as to prevent the branches
of such trees from coming in contact with its system. (Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 3 of this title.
2 1. See chapter 3 of this title.
7-5-7: FRANCHISE AND LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
   A.   Notification Of Sale:
      1.   Notification And Election: When a provider is the subject of a sale,
transfer, lease, assignment, sublease, or disposed of, in whole or in part,
either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or
otherwise, such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek
the approval of the PSC, the provider or its successor entity shall promptly
notify the city of the nature of the transaction. The notification shall
include either:
         a.   The successor entity's certification that the successor entity
unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of the original provider's franchise
agreement; or
         b.   The successor entity's application in compliance with section
7-5-5 of this chapter.
      2.   Transfer Of Franchise: Upon receipt of a notification and
certification in accordance with subsection A1a of this section, the city
designee, as provided in subsection
 7-5-9A1 of this chapter, shall send notice affirming the transfer of the
franchise to the successor entity. If the city has good cause to believe that
the successor entity may not comply with this chapter or the franchise
agreement, it may require an application for the transfer. The application
shall comply with section
7-5-5 of this chapter.
   B.   If PSC Approval No Longer Required: If the PSC no longer exists, or if
its regulations or state law no longer require approval of transactions
described in subsection A of this section and the city has good cause to
believe that the successor entity may not comply with this chapter or the
franchise agreement, it may require an application. The application shall
comply with section
 7-5-5 of this chapter.
   C.   Events Of Sale: The following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with
subsection A of this section: 1) the sale, assignment or other transfer of all
or a majority of a provider's assets to another person; 2) the sale, assignment
or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity
interests in a provider by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners,
members or other equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest in a
provider; 3) the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership,
membership, or other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new
controlling interest in such a provider; or 4) the entry by a provider into an
agreement with respect to the management or operation of such provider or its
system. (Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-2000)
7-5-8: OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION:
   A.   Insurance, Indemnity, And Security: Prior to the execution of a
franchise, a provider will deposit with the city an irrevocable, unconditional
letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise, and
shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the
franchise. A provider shall also indemnify the city as set forth in the
franchise.
   B.   Oversight: The city shall have the right to oversee, regulate and
inspect periodically the construction, maintenance and upgrade of the system,
and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the franchise and
applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain managerial and
operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a provider to
prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the city at all times
throughout the term, that a provider is in compliance with the franchise. A
provider shall retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of
limitations.
   C.   Maintain Records: A provider shall at all times maintain:
      1.   On file with the city, a full and complete set of plans, records and
"as-built" hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an
electronic format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the
city's existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the
types of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights of way,
properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and systems
installed or constructed in the rights of way, properly identified and
described as to the types of equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and
marks which shall include annotations of all rights of way where work will be
undertaken. As used herein, "as-built" maps includes "file construction
prints". Maps shall be drawn to scale. "As-built" maps, including the
compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within
thirty (30) days of completion of work or within thirty (30) days after
completion of modification and repairs. "As-built" maps are not required of the
provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing system to
the extent they do not exist.
      2.   Throughout the term of the franchise, a provider shall maintain
complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership
and operations of a provider with respect to the system in a manner that allows
the city at all times to determine whether a provider is in compliance with the
franchise. Should the city reasonably determine that the records are not being
maintained in such a manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the
books and/or records are maintained so that a provider comes into compliance
with this section. All financial books and records which are maintained in
accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that
regulates utilities in the state of Utah, and generally accepted accounting
principles shall be deemed to be acceptable under this section.
   D.   Confidentiality: If the information required to be submitted is
proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by federal, state or local
law, upon proper request by a provider, such information shall be classified as
a protected record within the meaning of the Utah government records access and
management act ("GRAMA"), making it available only to those who must have
access to perform their duties on behalf of the city, provided that a provider
notifies the city of, and clearly labels the information which a provider deems
to be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling
shall be the sole responsibility of the provider.
   E.   Provider's Expense: All reports and records required under this chapter
shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter or a franchise.
   F.   Right Of Inspection: For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of
the franchise fee, the books and records of the provider pertaining thereto
shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the
city at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to
inspect or audit the books and records, provided that the city shall not audit
the books and records of the provider more often than annually. The provider
agrees to reimburse the city the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit
discloses that the provider has paid ninety five percent (95%) or less of the
compensation due the city for the period of such audit. In the event the
accounting rendered to the city by the provider herein is found to be
incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty
(30) calendar days of written notice, it being agreed that the city shall not
be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is later
found to be incorrect. (Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-2000)
7-5-9: RIGHTS OF CITY:
   A.   Enforcement And Remedies:
      1.   Enforcement; City Designee: The city is responsible for enforcing
and administering this chapter and the city or its designee, as appointed by
the mayor, is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any
franchise agreement.
      2.   Enforcement Provision: Any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation and
protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this chapter
including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for
accessing the bond/security fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
   B.   Force Majeure: In the event a provider's performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise is
prevented by a cause or event not within a provider's control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events
not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation, acts of
God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of
utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires.
   C.   Extended Operation And Continuity Of Services:
      1.   Continuation After Expiration: Upon either expiration or revocation
of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the city shall have discretion
to permit a provider to continue to operate its system or provide services for
an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such
expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to operate its system under
the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant to
this chapter.
      2.   Continuation By Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier: If the provider is
the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to
operate its system and provide services without regard to revocation or
expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith.
   D.   Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property:
      1.   Abandoned System: In the event that: a) the use of any portion of
the system is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, and
thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the city to the last
known address of the provider; b) any system has been installed in the rights
of way without complying with the requirements of this chapter or franchise; or
c) the provisions of subsection
7-5-3E of this chapter are applicable and no franchise is granted, a provider,
except the provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed
to have abandoned such system.
      2.   Removal Of Abandoned System: The city, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a provider written permission to abandon, without removing,
any system, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained
under a franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time the
abandoned system and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights of way to their former state at the time such system was
installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense, any
excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights of way in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires,
poles or attachments. The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of the rights of way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to
and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this
chapter and any security fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a
provider with the terms and conditions of this section.
      3.   Transfer Of Abandoned System To City: Upon abandonment of any system
in place, a provider, if required by the city, shall submit to the city a
written instrument, satisfactory in form to the city, transferring to the city
the ownership of the abandoned system.
      4.   Removal Of Aboveground System: At the expiration of the term for
which a franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as
provided for by this chapter in any such case without renewal, extension or
transfer, the city shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its
expense, all aboveground portions of a system from the rights of way within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty
(180) days. If the provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall
not be required to remove its system, but shall negotiate a renewal in good
faith.
      5.   Leaving Underground System: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
set forth in this chapter, a provider may abandon any underground system in
place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights of
way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other
person. (Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-2000)
7-5-10: OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY:
   A.   Publicizing Work: Before entering onto any private property, a provider
shall make a good faith attempt to contact the property owners in advance, and
describe the work to be performed. (Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-2000)
7-5-11: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conflicts: In the event of a conflict between any provision of this
chapter and a franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter
in effect at the time the franchise is entered into shall control.
   B.   Severability: If any provision of this chapter is held by any federal,
state or local court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting
with any federal or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in
any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and all
appellate remedies with regard to the validity of the chapter provisions in
question are exhausted, such provisions shall be considered a separate,
distinct and independent part of this chapter and such holding shall not affect
the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event
such law is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so
that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in
conflict with such law, the provision in question shall return to full force
and effect and shall again be binding on the city and the provider, provided
that the city shall give the provider thirty (30) days, or a longer period of
time as may be reasonably required for a provider to comply with such a
rejuvenated provision, written notice of the change before requiring compliance
with such provision.
   C.   New Developments: It shall be the policy of the city to liberally amend
this chapter upon application of a provider, when necessary to enable the
provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of
telecommunications which will afford the provider an opportunity to more
effectively, efficiently or economically serve itself or the public.
   D.   Notices: All notices from a provider to the city required under this
chapter or pursuant to a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
directed to the officer as designated by the mayor. A provider shall provide in
any application for a franchise the identity, address and phone number to
receive notices from the city. A provider shall immediately notify the city of
any change in its name, address, or telephone number.
   E.   Exercise Of Police Power: To the full extent permitted by applicable
law either now or in the future, the city reserves the right to adopt or issue
such rules, regulations, orders or other directives that it finds necessary or
appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers. (Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-
2000)
7-5-12: FEDERAL, STATE AND CITY JURISDICTION:
   A.   Construction: This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent
with all applicable federal and state statutes.
   B.   Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or
renewed after the effective date hereof. This chapter shall further apply, to
the extent permitted by applicable federal or state law, to all existing
franchises granted prior to the effective date hereof and to a provider
providing services, without a franchise, prior to the effective date hereof.
   C.   Compliance: A provider's rights are subject to the police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. A provider shall comply with all applicable general laws
and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to its police powers. In
particular, all providers shall comply with the city zoning and other land use
requirements.
   D.   City Failure To Enforce: A provider shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any
franchise granted pursuant to this chapter by reason of any failure of the city
to enforce prompt compliance.
   E.   Construed According To Utah Law: This chapter and any franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the
substantive laws of the state of Utah. (Ord. 2000-05, 9-5-2000)
CHAPTER 6
PURCHASE OR DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Acquisition Of Real Property
7-6-3: Disposal Of Real Property
7-6-4: Opportunity For Public Comment
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
   REASONABLE NOTICE: Publishing a notice of the proposed acquisition or
disposition and of a public hearing before the city council to consider such
proposition once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and on a
website established by the collective efforts of Utah's newspapers as set forth
in Utah Code Annotated title 45, chapter 1 - official notices.
   SIGNIFICANT PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY: A parcel of real property, or a
combination of contiguous parcels, owned by the city having a value of twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more. (Ord. 2010-08, 10-5-2010)
7-6-2: ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY:
Interests in real property shall be purchased or otherwise acquired for the
city by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. No other
officer or employee shall be authorized to purchase or acquire real property
for or on behalf of the city. (Ord. 2010-08, 10-5-2010)
7-6-3: DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Every sale or other conveyance of city owned real property shall be
made by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. All
conveyances or encumbrances of such property shall be based on the highest and
best economic return to the city, except that consideration of property
conveyed may be based on other factors if the city council makes a legislative
determination that the consideration is adequate.
   B.   Methods for the sale of real property may include, but are not limited
to, listing with a broker, auction, sealed bidding process or private
negotiations. (Ord. 2010-08, 10-5-2010)
7-6-4: OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC COMMENT:
   A.   Before any acquisition or disposal of any significant parcel of real
property owned by the city, the city council shall:
      1.   Provide reasonable notice of the proposed acquisition or disposal of
real property at least fourteen (14) days before a scheduled meeting at which
the city will hear public comment; and
      2.   Hold a meeting at which the city council accepts public comment on
the proposed acquisition or disposal of real property.
   B.   The notice required in subsection A of this section shall specify the
following:
      1.   A general description of the property to be purchased, sold or
traded;
      2.   The nature of the proposed conveyance or encumbrance whether the
property is to be purchased, sold or traded, including the nature of the
conveyance if the property is to be sold, or if a trade of property is
contemplated, a brief summary of the proposed transaction; and
      3.   The date, time and place of the public hearing. (Ord. 2010-08, 10-5-
2010)
TITLE 8
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
UTILITY SERVICES; LEASED OR RENTED PREMISES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Application
8-1-2: Fees
8-1-3: Rates Established
8-1-4: Termination Of Services
8-1-1: APPLICATION:
   A.   Required: No culinary water service, sewer service, sewer treatment
service, garbage collection service or other utility service for which payment
of a fee to the City is required, including surcharge where applicable, shall
be furnished to any house, tenement, apartment, building, business, premises or
lot, whether such utility service is for the use of the owner or tenant, unless
an application for such utility service shall be made in writing, signed by the
owner of legal record or his duly authorized agent. Such owner, tenant or
occupant shall agree to pay for all such utility services furnished thereto
according to City ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions.
   B.   Forms: The City shall prepare forms upon which application for utility
services shall be made. These forms may be amended by the City from time to
time as necessary in the opinion of the City.
   C.   Contents: The applicant shall state fully and truly the purpose of
which such utility services are required and shall agree to conform to, and be
governed by, such ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions as may be
prescribed by the City for the control of such utility services. The applicant
shall agree to be responsible for and pay on time all statements and bills due
the City on account of all utility services delivered to the premises named in
the application. (Ord. 10-1-5-87, 5-19-1987)
8-1-2: FEES:
   A.   Payment Of Previous Charges: Before utility services will be furnished
to any premises, all charges against the premises that are due and payable to
the City for such utility services, or any service, material or supplies
pertaining thereto or furnished thereon, must have been paid with the property
owner remaining ultimately responsible for payment of any charges owed.
   B.   Responsibility For Payment: The owner shall sign the application
referred to in subsections
8-1-1A and
8-1-1C of this Chapter and thereby become responsible for payment of all water,
sewer and garbage bills on premises rented or leased by such owner. (Ord. 10-1-
5-87, 5-19-1987)
8-1-3: RATES ESTABLISHED:
Utility rates shall be as established from time to time by resolution or other
appropriate documents adopted by the City. (Ord. 10-1-5-87, 5-19-1987)
8-1-4: TERMINATION OF SERVICES:
Utility services to any premises may be suspended or terminated to premises for
nonpayment of utility bills or for other cause in accordance with City rules,
regulations and policies. Restoration of utility services to premises to which
utility services have been suspended or terminated shall be in accordance with
such City rules, regulations and policies. (Ord. 10-1-5-87, 5-19-1987)
CHAPTER 2
WATER AND SEWER SERVICES; RATES
SECTION:
8-2-1: Department Of Water And Sewer System
8-2-2: Application For Service
8-2-3: Rates And Fees
8-2-4: Billings
8-2-5: Application For Connection
8-2-6: Building Sewers And Connections
8-2-7: Unauthorized Users
8-2-8: Plumbing Permits
8-2-9: Access To Premises
8-2-10: Multiple Connections
8-2-11: Water Use Regulations
8-2-12: Prohibited Acts
8-2-13: Privy Vaults And Cesspools
8-2-14: Nonliability For Damages
8-2-15: Penalty
8-2-1: DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM:
The City water plant and system and the City sewer collection system shall be
the same and are hereby declared to be consolidated as a single utility, which
shall be referred to and known as the City water and sewer system. (1989 Code §
10-1-1, 9-5-1990)
8-2-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to receive any service from the City water
and sewer system without first filing with the City a written signed
application, which is on file in the office of the City Recorder. (1989 Code §
10-1-5, 9-5-1990; 1997 Code)
8-2-3: RATES AND FEES:
   A.   Water: The City shall set rates and fees for water supplied which shall
be charged and collected, with respect to the class of services furnished. Such
rates are hereby declared established by resolution.
   B.   Sewer Service: The standard rate for all users connected to the
sanitary sewer will be set by the North Davis Sewer District with any
additional fees applicable for administrative costs. (1989 Code § 10-1-2, 9-5-
1990; 1997 Code)
8-2-4: BILLINGS:
   A.   Payment: The City shall, through its properly designated employees,
promptly bill all persons, firms, corporations, partnerships and other legal
entities for all services furnished by the consolidated City water and sewer
system. The form of the statement may show the separate charges for water
supplied and sewer furnished; provided however, that all users of such
consolidated utility shall each pay monthly the total sum of water charges and
sewer charges, and that such charges may not be paid separately. Water services
shall be disconnected to any consumer who shall become delinquent in the
payment of water or sewer charges for more than thirty (30) days from the date
of billing.
   B.   Procedure For Delinquent Accounts: If any person, firm, corporation,
partnership or other legal entity receiving water supplied from the
consolidated utility neglects, fails or refuses to pay the total sum of both
water and sewer billings for a period of more than thirty (30) days from the
date of billing, the City shall notify the Public Works Department, who shall
cause the water to be turned off from the premises of such delinquent account,
and before the water shall be turned on again, all delinquent water and sewer
charges shall be paid up to the end of the term as assessed. In the event water
is turned off for nonpayment of the water or sewer charges as herein provided,
there shall be assessed in addition to all delinquent amounts a fee as set by
resolution as expenses for shutting off the service, which shall be paid before
the water is turned on again. If payment is made after hours, once it is
verified it will be turned on the next business day. (1989 Code § 10-1-4, 9-5-
1990; 1997 Code; Ord. 2025-03, 2-18-2025)
8-2-5: APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION:
   A.   Water: Whenever any new connection to the City water system is desired,
the applicant for such connection shall file with the City a written and signed
connection application. Application forms are on file in the office of the City
Recorder. (1989 Code § 10-1-6, 9-5-1990; 1997 Code)
   B.   Sewer: Whenever any new connection to the City sewer system is desired,
the applicant for such connection shall file with the City a written, signed
sewer connection application. Application forms are on file in the office of
the City Recorder. (1989 Code § 10-1-7, 9-5-1990; 1997 Code)
8-2-6: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Building
Department.
   B.   Owner To Pay Costs And Expenses: All costs and expenses incidental to
the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall retain or employ a qualified person or firm approved by
the City to make connection to and installation or change within the building,
which firm or person shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(1989 Code § 10-1-8, 9-5-1990; 1997 Code)
   C.   Separate Connections Required: A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided and required for every building, except where one
building stands at the rear of another or on an interior lot and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building. A separate connection fee shall
be required for each separate building. A multiple dwelling unit housed under
one building shall pay one connection fee. (1989 Code § 10-1-9, 9-5-1990)
   D.   Permit, Fees And Costs: There shall be two (2) classes of building
sewer permits: 1) for residential and commercial service, and 2) for service to
establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a form furnished by the City. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Building Inspector. A
permit and inspection fee shall be charged for a residential building sewer
permit or for an industrial or commercial building sewer permit shall be paid
to the City at the time the application is filed, plus such inspection fees as
may be established by resolution of the City Council from time to time. (1989
Code § 10-1-10, 9-5-1990; 1997 Code)
8-2-7: UNAUTHORIZED USERS:
It shall be unlawful for any water user to permit any person from another
premises, or any unauthorized persons to use or obtain water regularly from his
premises or water fixtures, either outside or inside his building. (1989 Code §
10-1-12, 9-5-1990)
8-2-8: PLUMBING PERMITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any extension of any pipe or water
fixture attached to the water works system for any purpose whatsoever without
first obtaining a permit from the City. Within twenty four (24) hours after the
completion of any plumbing work connected with the water system the same must
be reported to the City. (1989 Code § 10-1-14, 9-5-1990)
8-2-9: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
The City, by its agents, shall at all ordinary hours have free access to places
supplied with water from the water system for the purpose of examining the
apparatus, ascertaining the amount of water used and the manner of its use.
(1989 Code § 10-1-16, 9-5-1990)
8-2-10: MULTIPLE CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Where two (2) or more families or premises are supplied from the same
water service pipe, the failure on the part of either of said parties to comply
with this Chapter or any ordinances of the City shall warrant the City in
withholding a supply of water through said service pipe until separate service
pipes for each user of water under a separate application have been installed.
   B.   Where mixed use of residential and commercial are located within the
same building, there must be a minimum of two (2) meters. One (1) meter to
track water usage for the residential section of the building and one (1) meter
to track usage for the commercial section of the building. This is at the
recommendation of the North Davis Sewer District and will allow for proper
billing for the commercial units according to District Ordinances which is
based on water usage. (1989 Code § 10-1-11, 9-5-1990; amd. Ord. 2022-03, 5-17-
2022)
8-2-11: WATER USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Waste Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any water user to waste
water, or to allow it to be wasted, by imperfect stops, taps, valves, leaky
joints or pipes, or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow, or
to wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets or stops or through basins,
water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus, or to use the water for
purposes other than those for which he has paid, or to use water in violation
of the rules and regulations for controlling the water supply. (1989 Code § 10-
1-15, 9-5-1990)
   B.   Limitation Of Use During Shortage: The City Council may by resolution
regulate, restrict or limit the use of water during water shortage periods and
shall have the power to take all necessary means and make any necessary
regulations as circumstances may require to protect the users of the City
water. (1989 Code § 10-1-19, 9-5-1990)
   C.   Not For Specific Machinery: No water shall be supplied from the pipes
of the City water system for the purpose of driving any motor, syphon, turbine
or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines, or elevators or for driving or
propelling machinery of any kind whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted
or issued for any such purpose except by special permission of the City
Council. (1989 Code § 10-1-18, 9-5-1990)
   D.   Pipes To Be Kept In Good Repair: All water users shall keep their
service pipe and connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected
from frost at their own expense, but no person, except under the direction of
the Public Works Department, shall be allowed to dig into the street for the
purpose of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe. (1989 Code § 10-1-
13, 9-5-1990; 1997 Code)
8-2-12: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Water System:
      1.   Turning On Without Authority: It shall be unlawful for any person
after the water has been turned off from his premises for either nonpayment of
water or sewer charges as provided for in this Chapter or for a violation of
the rules and regulations pertaining to the City water and sewer system, to
turn on or allow the water to be turned on or used without authority.
      2.   Destruction Of System: It shall be unlawful for any person to
destroy, deface, injure or interfere with the operation of any part, pipe,
fixture, appliance or appurtenance of the City water system.
      3.   Introducing Deleterious Substances: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, cause to be placed or to introduce into the City water system
or any source of water supplying said system any matter, substance, chemical or
compound poisonous to human life, deleterious and harmful to human health.
   B.   Sewer System:
      1.   Manhole Covers: It shall be unlawful for any person to open any
sewer manhole without permission from the City.
      2.   Destruction Of System: It shall be unlawful for any person to
destroy, deface, injure or interfere with the operation of any part, pipe,
fixture, appliance or appurtenance of the City sewer system.
      3.   Injurious Substances: It shall be unlawful for any person to put
into or cause to be put into or drained into the City sewer system through an
authorized connection or otherwise, any pump, mash, trash, inflammable gas,
gasoline, oil, petroleum by-products, any calcium carbide or residue therefrom,
any liquid or other material which will evolve in inflammable gas when in
contact with water, sewage or fire, or any other matter which by chemical
reaction shall injure said sewer or any part thereof or the operation thereof,
or which may become dangerous to health, life or property.
   C.   Violation; Discontinuance: Whenever the City shall determine that any
of these provisions are being violated, notice shall be served upon the
violator immediately to desist from the operation and use creating the
violation. Failure to comply with such notice shall render the user immediately
liable to a discontinuance of his or its privilege to use said sewer system.
(1989 Code § 10-1-20, 9-5-1990)
8-2-13: PRIVY VAULTS AND CESSPOOLS:
   A.   Unlawful Where Sewer Available: It shall be unlawful for the owner, or
his agent, or any other person having charge of or occupying any property
located upon any street, alley, court, passageway or area in the City and
within two hundred feet (200') of the sewer system situated in any such court,
street, alley, passageway or area in the City to maintain or use or cause to
permit to exist any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool on such property. The
City shall cause notice to be served upon the owner, agent or occupant of such
premises to disconnect all plumbing from any cesspool or septic tank and to
fill cesspools and privy vaults with fresh earth and to remove all seats from
privies and to connect all plumbing therein with the sewer system.
   B.   Noncompliance; Violation: It shall be unlawful for the plumbing on any
premises within the area above described to remain unconnected to the sewer
system for more than sixty (60) days after such sewer system is ready to
receive connections therewith. In the event that notice is served upon persons
violating the requirements of this Section and they fail or refuse to comply
with the requirements of the same within thirty (30) days, they shall be guilty
of a Class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. It shall be the duty of the City Council to proceed
forthwith with condemnation proceedings declaring the subject matter of such
violation to be a nuisance and also to proceed forthwith with the filing of a
complaint for the criminal violation of this Section. (1989 Code § 10-1-21, 9-
5-1990; 1997 Code)
8-2-14: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The City shall not be liable for any damage to a water user by reason of
stoppage or interruption of his water supply caused by fires, scarcity of
water, accidents to works or mains, alterations, additions, repairs or from any
other unavoidable cause. (1989 Code § 10-1-17, 9-5-1990)
8-2-15: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1989 Code § 10-1-22, 9-5-1990)
CHAPTER 3
WASTEWATER CONTROL
SECTION:
8-3-1: Code Adopted; Scope
8-3-2: Definitions
8-3-3: Monitoring And Enforcement
8-3-4: Industrial Users; Violation
8-3-5: Penalty
8-3-1: CODE ADOPTED; SCOPE:
There is hereby adopted by the City Council by reference that certain Code
known as the "North Davis County Sewer District Wastewater Control Ordinance/
Rules and Regulations", dated June 9, 1983, for the purpose of prescribing
requirements, standards and criteria for the pretreatment of industrial
wastewaters and industrial sewage and all other waters requiring pretreatment
prior to being inducted into the sewage collection facilities of the City and
the sewage collection facilities and treatment plant of the North Davis County
Sewer District and prescribing other rules and regulations pertaining to the
collection and treatment of sewage. The whole thereof of said "Wastewater
Control Ordinance/Rules and Regulations" is hereby adopted, save and except
such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which Code
not less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the office of the
City Recorder and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein, and as of the effective date hereof, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City. (Ord. 6-3-1990, 3-
6-1990)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever the words "City", "District", "Manager", or similar terms referring to
the North Davis County Sewer District or its personnel shall be used, and the
context of such usage would be so indicated, such terminology shall refer to
the City and/or its comparable personnel functioning within the City
government. (Ord. 6-3-1990, 3-6-1990)
8-3-3: MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT:
The North Davis County Sewer District, by and through its authorized and
designated officers, agents, servants and employees, is hereby authorized and
designated to monitor and enforce compliance with this Chapter and the North
Davis County Sewer District Wastewater Control Ordinance/Rules and Regulations
adopted by the Ordinance codified as this Chapter, and for such purpose is
authorized to inspect premises, books, records of users, and do all other
things necessary which it deems legal and proper, unless otherwise directed by
the City, in accordance with law and the terms and provisions of said North
Davis County Sewer District Wastewater Control Ordinance/Rules and Regulations
in connection with the monitoring and enforcement of the terms and provisions
thereof. (Ord. 6-3-1990, 3-6-1990)
8-3-4: INDUSTRIAL USERS; VIOLATION:
In the event any industrial user should violate any of the terms and provisions
of the North Davis County Sewer District Wastewater Control Ordinance/Rules and
Regulations, thereby resulting in a fine or penalty being assessed against the
City and/or the North Davis County Sewer District by the Environmental
Protection Agency or any other State or Federal agency, such violating
industrial user shall be responsible for payment of such penalty or fine to the
City and/or the North Davis County Sewer District in the same amount of such
fine or penalty as may be levied against the City or the North Davis County
Sewer District. (Ord. 6-3-1990, 3-6-1990)
8-3-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Violation: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the
Wastewater Control Ordinance/Rules and Regulations hereby adopted or fail to
comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
thereunder, shall severally for each and every such violation or noncompliance,
respectively, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to
penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 6-3-1990, 3-6-1990; 1997
Code)
   B.   Civil Remedies: The charging of a criminal offense, conviction and
imposition of sentence shall not in any way preclude the City from pursuing
civil remedies. (Ord. 6-3-1990, 3-6-1990)
CHAPTER 4
BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Purpose
8-4-2: Definitions
8-4-3: Installation Required
8-4-4: Responsibility And Enforcement
8-4-5: Licensed And Certified Technicians
8-4-6: Regulations
8-4-7: Penalty
8-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of cross connection and backflow requirements is to help protect
the drinking water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or
pollution. (Ord. 2-5-91, 2-5-1991)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
   APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: An assembly accepted by the department of
environmental quality, division of drinking water, as meeting an applicable
specification or as suitable for the proposed use.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the city's public water supply will be considered an auxiliary water
supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another supplier's public
potable water supply from any natural source such as a well, spring, river,
stream, harbor, used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be
contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an
unacceptable water source over which the supplier does not have authority for
purposes of sanitary control.
   BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
under pressure into the feeding distribution pipes of a potable water supply
system from any source other than the intended source.
   BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable
water supply system.
   BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage. It is controlled if it is the subject of a proper
backflow assembly approved by the department of environmental quality, division
of drinking water, as meeting applicable specifications or as suitable for a
proposed use. Specifications are as set forth in the Utah plumbing code 1 .
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow as the same are set forth within the Utah plumbing code and the cross
connection control program for Utah.
   CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water supply by
sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds or other materials.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
fixtures which may allow nonpotable water or industrial fluids or other
material of questionable quality to come in contact with potable water inside a
distribution system. This would include any temporary connection such as swing
connectors, removable sections, four (4) way plug valves, spools, dummy
sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding multi-arrangements.
It is controlled if it has an approved backflow prevention assembly properly
installed and maintained so it will continuously afford the protection
commensurate with the degree of hazard. This it must do. (Ord. 2-5-91, 2-5-
1991; 1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 9, chapter 1 of this code.
8-4-3: INSTALLATION REQUIRED:
The installation of an approved backflow assembly shall be required at the
water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and
economically not feasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all
actual or potential cross-connections within the customer's water system. The
installation of such a system shall be required on the service line leading to
and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or
potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or
controlled at the point of cross-connection. (Ord. 2-5-91, 2-5-1991)
8-4-4: RESPONSIBILITY AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Consumer: It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to comply with
this Chapter as a condition of receiving supply. This responsibility shall
extend to the purchase, installation, testing and maintenance of a backflow
prevention device required to comply. (Ord. 2-5-91, 2-5-1991)
   B.   Public Works Department: The appropriate representative of the Public
Works Department shall have the obligation to enforce the applicable sections
of the Utah Plumbing Code beginning at the point of service and continuing
throughout the developed length of the consumer's water system. All plans shall
be reviewed to ensure that unprotected cross-connections are not an integral
part of the consumers water system. If a cross-connection cannot be eliminated,
it must be protected by the installation of an air gap or an approved backflow
prevention device or assembly in accordance with the Utah Plumbing Code. Water
vacating the drinking water supply must do so via approved air gap or approved
mechanical backflow prevention assembly properly installed and in accordance
with the Utah Plumbing Code. (Ord. 2-5-91, 2-5-1991; 1997 Code)
8-4-5: LICENSED AND CERTIFIED TECHNICIANS:
Whether employed by a consumer or a utility to survey, test, repair or maintain
backflow prevention assemblies, the technician will have the responsibility of
ensuring that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for testing,
repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies. He shall be properly
licensed and certified and shall make such reports as are required by the
Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Drinking Water, and within the
time frames, required by the Division. In conducting tests he must tag each
double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow
assembly, and high hazard air gap, showing the serial number, date tested and
by whom. His license number must also be on this tag. If a tested assembly is
in need of repair, a licensed plumber shall be required to make the repair.
(Ord. 2-5-91, 2-5-1991; 1997 Code)
8-4-6: REGULATIONS:
   A.   General Policy; Discontinuance For Violation: No water service
connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained unless the water
supply is protected as required by the laws or regulations of the State, any
applicable code or this Chapter. Service of water to a consumer determined by
the City to be in violation of this Chapter may be discontinued by the City
after notice to the consumer and an opportunity to be heard is afforded within
ten (10) days of the date of the notice. The City may discontinue the service
if the consumer does not then respond or takes no action within ten (10) days
after it is determined by the administration upon a hearing or on its own if no
hearing is held that:
      1.   A backflow prevention assembly as required by this Chapter for
control of backflow or cross-connections is not installed, tested or not
working properly.
      2.   A backflow prevention assembly has been removed or by-passed.
      3.   The periodic system survey has not been conducted.
   B.   Restoration Of Service: Service will not be restored until the defects
or conditions are corrected.
   C.   Inspection: Each customer's system shall be open for inspection by the
City at all reasonable times.
   D.   Installation: Whenever the City shall find that a service connection's
water usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water supply, an approved
backflow prevention assembly shall be installed by the consumer on the service
line of his system at or near the property line or immediately inside the
building being served or in the meter box, but in all cases before the first
branch line leading off the service line. The type of assembly required shall
depend upon the degree of hazard which exists at the point of cross-connection
whether direct or indirect and as the same may be governed by local and State
requirements or resulting from the required survey. It shall be tested within
ten (10) days after installation.
   E.   Present Systems: All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies
which do not meet the requirements of this Chapter but were approved at
installation and which have been properly maintained shall, except for the
inspection and maintenance requirements herein provided for, be excluded from
the requirements hereunder so long as the City is assured that the public water
system is satisfactorily protected. Whenever an existing assembly is removed or
requires more than minimum maintenance or if the City finds that operation or
maintenance thereof constitutes a hazard to health as herein provided, the unit
shall be replaced with an approved assembly.
   F.   Testing: It shall be the responsibility of the consumer where
assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests
made at least once a year. Where the City deems any hazard to exist it may
require such test at more frequent intervals. All such tests shall be made
according to the standards of the Department of Environmental Quality, Division
of Drinking Water. No assembly shall be installed so as to create a safety
hazard within any building or in relation to any other service lines or systems
or equipment. (Ord. 2-5-91, 2-5-1991; 1997 Code)
   G.   Restoration: In the event service is terminated by the City and any
break has been made or has occurred in a service line, it shall be the
responsibility of the consumer or owner either to accomplish and pay for the
repair or to reimburse the City for all charges in connection therewith before
service is restored. (Ord. 2-5-91, 2-5-1991)
8-4-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class
B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 5
WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
SECTION:
8-5-1: Water Conservation Plan Adopted
8-5-1: WATER CONSERVATION PLAN ADOPTED:
The water conservation plan of Sunset City was adopted on February 16, 2010.
The plan will be amended no less than every five (5) years and will continue to
play a vital role in the future development/redevelopment of Sunset City, Utah.
(Ord. 2010-01, 2-16-2010)
CHAPTER 6
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
8-6-1: General Provisions
8-6-2: Storm Drainage Utility
8-6-3: Stormwater Management And Permit
8-6-4: Prohibited Actions
8-6-5: Violations And Enforcement
8-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish and provide
policies, rules and regulations regarding the city's storm drain system and for
the control, management, discharge, removal and prevention of pollutants
entering the city's storm drain system. It is further the purpose of this
chapter to protect the health, safety and welfare of Sunset City, its
inhabitants and the environment by improving the city's storm drain system,
managing and controlling the storm drain system and other receiving waters to
the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This
chapter is intended to comply with all regulations and requirements of the
NPDES and UPDES programs. The objectives of this chapter are:
      1.   To regulate and prevent the contribution of pollutants to the city's
storm drain system by stormwater discharges by any user;
      2.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the city's storm
drain system;
      3.   To guide, regulate and control the design, construction, use and
maintenance of any development or other activity that results in the movement
of earth on land within the city;
      4.   To minimize increases in non-point source pollution caused by
stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
      5.   To reduce stormwater runoff rates and volume, soil erosion and non-
point source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater BMPs (best
management practices), and to ensure that these BMPs are properly maintained
and pose no threat to public safety;
      6.   To establish a viable and fair method of financing the construction
operation and maintenance of the city's storm drain system;
      7.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter;
      8.   To establish penalty and enforcement procedures for violations of
this chapter; and
      9.   To ensure compliance with requirements of the Sunset City UPDES
general permit and the Sunset City stormwater management plan, dated August
2011.
   B.   Applicability: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any
activities conducted within the incorporated area of the city, to all real
property and development within the incorporated area of the city, and to all
portions of the city's storm drain system. This chapter shall also apply to all
water entering the city's storm drain system generated on any developed or
undeveloped land or entering any stormwater facility located within the city,
unless explicitly exempted in writing by the city or other authorized
enforcement agency.
   C.   Administration And Interpretation: The stormwater official is hereby
designated as the city's authorized enforcement official and as such shall
implement, administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the stormwater official may be delegated by the
stormwater official or the city council to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city.
   D.   Appeals: Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, any person
aggrieved by a final decision of the stormwater official interpreting or
administering the provisions of this chapter may appeal such decision to the
city appeal board by filing a written notice of appeal with the city recorder
within fifteen (15) days from the date of the decision being appealed and
stating the specific grounds for the appeal. The city appeal board may hold a
hearing on the appeal. If the person or entity is not satisfied with the city
appeal board's decision, a further appeal may be made to the city council. The
appeal to the city council shall follow the same procedure as the appeal to the
city appeal board. The city council's decision shall be final and binding on
all parties.
   E.   Ultimate Responsibility: The standards and requirements set forth in
this chapter and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards and
requirements. This chapter does not intend or imply that compliance by any
person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or
unauthorized discharge of pollutants. The issuance of any permit or any
inspection conducted under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall not
release any person from responsibility, liability, penalty, or requirement set
forth herein or by any applicable state or federal laws or regulations. Any
person violating the terms and conditions of this chapter or discharging
contaminated waters into the city's storm drain system shall be liable and
responsible for such violations and/or contaminations.
   F.   Storm Drainage Master Plan: The city has adopted a master plan for the
construction of storm drainage facilities within the city known as the Sunset
City storm drainage master plan. All construction and development within the
city and any connections or discharges of water into the city's storm drain
system shall comply with provisions of the storm drainage master plan, as may
be amended from time to time.
   G.   UPDES General Permit: The city has applied for and received from the
state of Utah, department of environmental quality, division of water quality,
a UPDES general permit for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer
systems (MS4s). All construction and development within the city and any and
all connections and discharges of waters into the city's storm drain system
shall comply with terms, conditions and provisions of the city's UPDES general
permit, as may be amended from time to time.
   H.   Stormwater Management Plan: The city has adopted a stormwater
management plan in accordance with applicable state and federal rules and
regulations. All construction and development within the city and any and all
connections and discharges of waters into the city's storm drain system shall
comply with the provisions of the stormwater management plan, as may be amended
from time to time.
   I.   Definitions: Words not otherwise defined in this chapter or the
materials referenced herein are defined in the federal clean water act and any
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and any applicable state laws,
rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the UPDES and NPDES
programs. As used herein, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the
following meanings:
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: City employees designated to administer and
enforce this chapter.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Includes schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, design standards, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly
or indirectly into the water of the United States. BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, educational activities, and practices to
control site runoff spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage.
   CATCH BASIN: A basin combined with a storm drain inlet used to collect storm
runoff waters and/or trap solids.
   CITY APPROVALS: Any permit or approval required by the city prior to any
construction activity, including, but not limited to, site preparation,
grading, excavation or construction.
   CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1251 et
seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Any land disturbance or activities such as clearing,
grubbing, grading, excavating, building, and demolition.
   CONVEYANCE SYSTEM: Any channel or pipe for collecting and directing the
stormwater.
   CULVERT: A covered channel or large diameter pipe that directs water flow
below the ground surface.
   DEGRADATION:
    Biological Or Chemical: The breakdown of chemical compounds into simpler
substances, usually less harmful than the original compound, as with the
degradation of a persistent pesticide.
    Geological: Wearing down by erosion.
    Water: The lowering of the water quality of a watercourse by an increase in
the amount of pollutant(s).
   DETENTION: The process of collecting water from developed areas and
releasing it at a slower rate than it enters the collection system. The excess
of inflow over outflow is temporarily stored in a pond or a vault and is
typically released over a few hours or a few days.
   DETENTION BASIN: A depression, designed with an inlet and outlet that
regulates water flow and allows debris to settle out, that is capable of
detaining stormwater runoff until it can be released downstream.
   DISCHARGE: The release of stormwater or other substance from a conveyance
system or storage container.
   DRAIN INLET: A point of entry into a detention basin, storm drain, or other
inlet used to collect stormwater and/or trap solids.
   DRAINAGE: The collection, conveyance, containment, and/or discharge of
surface and storm water runoff.
   ENTITY: Any corporation, partnership, limited liability company,
organization, association, trust, governmental agency, or any other legal
entity.
   EROSION: The wearing away of land surface by wind or water. Erosion occurs
naturally from weather or runoff but can be intensified by land clearing
practices related to farming, residential or industrial development, road
building, or timber cutting.
   FILL: A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   FINAL STABILIZATION: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed, and that a uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare
areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of eighty percent (80%) of the
native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all
unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent
permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or
geotextiles) have been employed.
   GENERAL PERMIT: A permit issued under the NPDES or UPDES program to cover a
class or category of stormwater discharges.
   GRADING: The cutting and/or filling of the land surface to a desired slope
or elevation.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE: Byproducts of society that can pose a substantial hazard to
human health or the environment when improperly managed. Possesses at least one
of four (4) characteristics (flammable, corrosive, reactive, or toxic), or
appears on special EPA lists.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the
storm drain system, except discharges from firefighting activities and other
discharges exempted in this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any physical connection to a publicly maintained storm
drain system allowing discharge of nonstormwater which has not been permitted
by the public entity responsible for the operation and maintenance of the
system.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surface area which prevents or retards the
penetration, absorption or entry of water into the ground, or any hard surface
area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an
increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions preexistent
to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to:
roofs; sidewalks; concrete or asphalt paving; walkways; patios; decks;
driveways; parking lots; storage areas; compacted gravel; road base; or other
surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of storm and surface
water.
   INDIVIDUAL PERMIT: A permit issued under the NPDES and UPDES program for a
specific facility, whereby the unique characteristics of that facility may be
addressed through the imposition of special conditions or requirements.
   INFILTRATION: The downward movement of water from the surface to the
subsoil. The infiltration capacity is expressed in terms of inches per hour.
   INLET: An entrance into a ditch, storm sewer, or other waterway.
   MULCH: A natural or artificial layer of plant residue or other materials
covering the land surface which conserves moisture, holds soil in place, aids
in establishing plant cover, and minimizes temperature fluctuations.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A municipally owned and
operated stormwater collection system that may consist of any or all of the
following: curb, gutter, drainage swales, piping, ditches, canals, detention
basins, inlet boxes, or any other system used to convey stormwater that
discharges into canals, ditches, streams, rivers, or lakes not owned and
operated by that municipality.
   NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM):   EPA's program to
control the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
   NPDES PERMIT: An authorization, or license, or equivalent control document
issued by the EPA or an approved state agency to implement the requirements of
the NPDES program.
   NON-POINT SOURCE: Pollution caused by diffuse sources (not a single location
such as a pipe) such as agricultural or urban runoff.
   NONSTRUCTURAL PRACTICES: A preventative action to protect receiving water
quality that does not require construction. Nonstructural BMPs rely
predominantly on behavioral changes in order to be effective. Major categories
of nonstructural BMPs include education, recycling, maintenance practices and
source controls.
   OFF SITE: Any area lying upstream of the site that drains onto the site, any
area lying downstream of the site to which the site drains, and any area that
is not on site of the project.
   ON SITE: The entire property that includes the proposed development.
   OUTFALL: The point, location, or structure where wastewater or drainage
discharges from a sewer pipe, ditch, or other conveyance to a receiving body of
water.
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company,
organization, association, trust, governmental agency, or any other legal
entity.
   POINT SOURCE: Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including,
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or
vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
   POLLUTANT: Generally, any substance introduced into the environment that
adversely affects the usefulness of a resource. Pollutants may include, but are
not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive
fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; sand, dirt,
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animals
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   RECEIVING WATERS: Bodies of water or surface water systems receiving water
from upstream constructed or natural systems.
   RETENTION: The process of collecting and holding surface and storm water
runoff with no surface outflow.
   RIPARIAN: A relatively narrow strip of land that borders a stream or river.
   RUNOFF: That part of precipitation, snowmelt, or irrigation water that runs
off the land into streams or other surface water. It can carry pollutants from
the air and land into the receiving waters.
   SOURCE CONTROL: A practice or structural measure to prevent pollutants from
entering stormwater runoff or other environmental media.
   STORM DRAIN: A closed conduit for conducting stormwater that has been
collected by inlets or collected by other means.
   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM: The city's storm drain system comprised of storm and
subsurface water facilities, improvements, streets, gutters, drains, swales,
detention basins, property, or other interests therein made, constructed or
acquired by the city for purposes of managing and controlling storm or
subsurface water.
   STORMWATER: Water produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and ice melt,
and spring flows and drainage. Stormwater does not include infiltration.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A document which describes the
BMPs and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify
sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or
reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/
or receiving waters.
   STRUCTURAL PRACTICES: Constructed facilities or measures to help protect
receiving water quality and control stormwater quantity. Examples include
storage, vegetation, infiltration and filtration.
   SWALE: An elongated depression in the land surface that is at least
seasonally wet, is usually heavily vegetated, and is normally without flowing
water. Swales direct stormwater flows into primary drainage channels and allow
some of the stormwater to infiltrate into the ground surface.
   UPDES PERMIT: An authorization, or license, or equivalent control document
issued by the state of Utah to implement the requirements of the NPDES and
UPDES program.
   WATERS OF THE STATE: Surface waters and groundwaters within the boundaries
of the state of Utah and subject to its jurisdiction.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: Surface watercourses and water bodies as
defined in 40 CFR section 122.2 including all natural waterways and definite
channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such
waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry
stormwater at and during all times and seasons.
   J.   Severability: The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared
severable. If any provision, clause, section, or sentence of this chapter or
the application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstance is held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect
or invalidate any other remaining provisions or application of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-03, 10-2-2012)
8-6-2: STORM DRAINAGE UTILITY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the city and its inhabitants by improving the city's storm drain
system, managing and controlling groundwater and stormwater runoff, protecting
property, improving water quality, preventing polluted waters from entering the
city's water supply and other receiving waters, providing for flood mitigation,
and establishing a viable and fair method of financing the construction,
operation and maintenance of the city's storm drain system and flood mitigation
projects.
   B.   Definitions: In addition to the definitions set forth in subsection
8-6-1I of this chapter, for the purposes of this section, the following terms,
phrases and words shall have the following meanings:
   DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has been altered from its natural
condition by the construction of improvements or other impervious surface areas
or by grading or filling of the ground surface areas which grading or filling
affects the hydraulic properties of the parcel.
   EQUIVALENT SERVICE UNIT (ESU): The average amount of impervious surface,
expressed in square feet, on developed parcels in the city.
   PARCEL: The smallest separately segregated unit or plot of land having an
identified owner, boundaries, and surface area which is documented for tax
purposes and given a tax account (lot) number by the Davis County assessor.
   C.   Drainage Utility: The city council hereby creates and establishes a
drainage utility. The drainage utility shall plan, design, construct, maintain,
administer and operate the Sunset City's storm drain system.
   D.   Enterprise Fund: The city council hereby establishes a drainage utility
enterprise fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial transactions
related to the drainage utility. All drainage utility service charges shall be
deposited in the drainage utility enterprise fund. Money in the drainage
utility enterprise fund shall not be commingled with or transferred to other
city funds. However, the drainage utility may pay other city funds for services
and expenses directly attributable to the drainage utility. The drainage
utility enterprise fund shall be operated according to state law and city
ordinances, rules, regulations and policies.
   E.   Facilities And Assets: The drainage utility shall operate independently
of city operations funded by the general fund. Upon creation of the utility,
all of the city's storm drain system, facilities and assets (other than streets
and other facilities and assets designated by the city council) shall be
transferred to the drainage utility in consideration for the drainage utility's
agreement to take primary responsibility for planning, designing, constructing,
maintaining, administering and operating the city's storm drain system.
   F.   Fees:
      1.   Imposed: Each developed parcel of real property in the city shall be
charged a drainage utility fee.
      2.   ESU: The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent service
units (ESUs) contained on the parcel. The city council finds that the ESU is
the most accurate measurement for determining the amount that each parcel
contributes to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the drainage utility. Based
on a study completed within Sunset, the city council finds and establishes that
one ESU equals nine thousand (9,000) square feet of impervious surface area.
      3.   Calculation: The fees established herein are based upon studies
conducted by the city, or caused to be conducted by the city. Based on
collection data, the city council finds that each single-family residential
unit and residential duplex contributes approximately the same amount of
stormwater runoff; therefore, each developed single-family residential parcel
or residential duplex shall pay a base rate of one ESU. All developed multi-
family residential parcels, commercial parcels, and other nonresidential
parcels shall pay a multiple of this base rate, expressed in ESUs, according to
the measured impervious area on the parcel.
      4.   Charge Per ESU: The amount charged for each ESU shall be established
by resolution of the city council and set forth in the city's fee schedule.
   G.   Billing: The city council finds that the city's storm drain system,
culinary water system and solid waste collection system are all interrelated
services that are part of a unified city plan to provide for the health, safety
and welfare of the city and its residents in an environmentally responsible
manner. Therefore, the drainage utility fee shall be included on the city's
regular monthly utility bill for any given property. If there is no regular
utility bill for the property, the drainage utility fee shall be charged to the
owner of the property. The fee shall be deemed a civil debt owed to the city by
the person or entity paying the city utility service provided to the property.
All developed parcels shall be charged the fee, regardless of whether or not
the owner or occupant of the property requests the drainage utility service.
Failure to pay any portion of the utility bill may result in termination of
water service.
   H.   Exemptions: The following exemptions shall be provided regarding
required drainage utility fees:
      1.   Undeveloped Parcels: Undeveloped parcels shall not be required to
pay any drainage utility fees.
      2.   Streets: The city council finds that fully improved dedicated public
streets, constructed in compliance with city standards and specifications, are
part of the storm utility conveyance system and are therefore exempt from the
drainage utility fees set forth herein.
   I.   Credits:
      1.   Credits And Adjustments: The city acknowledges the need to provide
credits and adjustments to the drainage utility fees charged for various
developments as more particularly provided herein.
      2.   Residential Units: All single-family residential units and
residential duplexes have been assumed to be similar in terms of their impact
and contribution of stormwater runoff to the city's storm drainage systems. As
such, all single-family residential units and duplexes pay a common base user
fee and will not be considered for a user fee credit.
      3.   Multi-Family, Commercial And Industrial Developments: As there are
many varying site runoff conditions for multi-family, commercial, industrial,
institutional and other nonresidential developments, the city will consider
granting a reduction and/or credit to the calculated user fee for certain
parcels based upon detention, retention and/or mitigation management facilities
and/or measures provided on the parcel.
      4.   Amendments: The city council reserves the right to alter the
criteria on which credits are granted, based on the objectives of the drainage
utility program. The current primary object behind the credit policies set
forth herein is to encourage on site detention, retention and/or mitigation
measure in accordance with this chapter, the city's storm drain master plan and
stormwater management plan, and to address water quality.
      5.   Limitations: The credits provided herein are intended to encourage
property owners to implement on site stormwater management facilities and/or
best management practices to assist and improve the city's overall ability to
address stormwater management and water quality. The various types of credits
may be utilized alone or cumulatively to address such issues, provided the
maximum amount of credit that may be granted for any parcel or property shall
be seventy percent (70%) of the original calculated fee. In no event shall any
credit be granted that would reduce the minimum month storm drainage utility
fee below one ESU. No credit shall be imposed retroactively.
      6.   Application For Credit Or Adjustment: Any multi-family, commercial,
industrial or institutional property owner, or their agent, may apply to the
city administrator for a reduction in the monthly drainage utility fee. A
reduction in the monthly fee will be considered if one or more of the following
credit or adjustment criteria apply:
         a.   Adjustments:
            (1)   Adjustment criteria #1: Calculation of the impervious surface
area is incorrect.
               (A)   A great amount of time and effort has been expended in
analyzing and determining the measurement and calculation of the impervious
surface area for property within the city to ensure accuracy and correctness.
The impervious surface area for most properties is determined from site plans
on file with the city, aerial photos, and/or actual field measurements.
Property owners, or their agents, who disagree with the amount of impervious
surface area measured on their property may apply for an adjustment based on an
incorrect calculation of impervious surface. In order to receive an adjustment,
the property owner, or his or her agent, must provide sufficient evidence that
indicates that the amount of impervious surface has been miscalculated. This
information may include, but is not limited to, final site plans, as built
drawings, aerial photos, actual field measurements, and/or other documents that
indicate the impervious surface areas. All properties that are reevaluated by
the city will be billed according to the new measurements. This new billing may
result in a lower or higher fee applied to the property.
            (2)   Adjustment criteria #2: The amount of impervious surface area
on the property changes.
               (A)   There is a possibility that changes may occur in the
amount of impervious surface areas as a result of development or other
improvements to the property. If changes have been made on a parcel of land
that alters the amount of impervious surface area (e.g., new areas of
landscaping, or a reduction of impervious surface areas), the property owner,
or his or her agent, may apply for an adjustment. Supporting documentation must
accompany the application, including, but not limited to, final site plans, as
built drawings, aerial photos, actual field measurements, and/or other
documents that indicate the impervious surface areas. All properties that are
reevaluated by the city will be billed according to the new calculations. This
new billing may result in a lower or higher fee applied to the property.
         b.   Credits:
            (1)   Credit criteria #1: Property owner has constructed on site
stormwater retention or detention basin(s) which limit the stormwater discharge
rate and have a benefit to the overall system of the city, as determined by the
city.
               (A)   Many properties within the city have constructed retention
or detention areas on site. These retention or detention areas or basins help
control the amount of stormwater that enters into the city's system during and
after a storm event. Nonresidential property owners, or their agents, that have
constructed such on site stormwater retention or detention facilities may be
eligible to apply for credit. In order for a property to receive credit for
retention or detention capabilities on their site, the property owner, or their
agent, must provide detailed information about the retention or detention area.
This information shall include, but is not limited to: final site plans, as
built drawings, and blue prints, engineer's studies or reports, and/or drainage
calculations. In order to receive credit, it must be determined by the city
that the retention or detention facility has a sufficient benefit to the city's
overall storm drain system; that the retention or detention facility helps to
reduce the city's costs in operating and maintaining the city's storm drain
system; and/or that the retention or detention facility reduces downstream flow
or adds capacity or reduces the city's downstream costs in providing stormwater
services. The retention or detention facility must be inspected by the city to
determine that the system is in good working order as represented by the
applicant.
               (B)   If granted, the credit provided may remain in effect,
subject to amendment to this credit policy, as long as:
                  (i)   The retention or detention system is in working order
and properly maintained.
                  (ii)   The property owner remains responsible for all costs
of operation and maintenance of the facility.
                  (iii)   The city has access to the stormwater retention or
detention facility for the purpose of inspecting its compliance with design,
maintenance and operating standards.
                  (iv)   The retention or detention system continues to provide
a sufficient benefit to the city's overall storm drain system; helps to reduce
the city's costs in operating and maintaining the city's overall storm drain
system; and/or reduces downstream flow, adds capacity or reduces the city's
downstream costs in providing stormwater services, as determined by the city.
               (C)   The amount of credit, if any, for an on site stormwater
detention basin shall be determined by the city administrator, upon
recommendation by the review committee, as to the benefit of the facility and
the following table:
 
Basin Outlet Rate Maximum Credit Amount
0.8 cfs per acre  30%
0.6 cfs per acre  35%
0.4 cfs per acre  40%
0.2 cfs per acre  45%
 
               (D)   A maximum credit of up to fifty five percent (55%) may be
granted for on site retention facilities with a discharge of zero, as
determined by the city administrator, upon recommendation by the review
committee as to the benefits of the facility.
(2) Credit criteria #2: Property owner has constructed on site stormwater
detention that has the capacity to detain more water than the property
generates and is considered to be a regional detention facility by the city.
               (A)   A maximum credit of up to forty five percent (45%) may be
granted for on site stormwater detention facilities that have the capacity to
detain more water than the property generates and is considered to be a
regional detention facility by the city as more particularly described herein.
In some instances, certain nonsingle-family residential parcels may have the
space needed and the location desired for construction of a regional detention
basin. Regional detention basins can have a great overall benefit to the city's
storm drain system. In order for a property to be considered a regional
detention facility, it must have the needed space to construct facilities that
can detain the property's own runoff as well as additional amounts of
stormwater runoff from other properties within the same drainage basin. It must
also be in a geographical location that is in agreement with the city's storm
drain master plan and stormwater management plan, as determined by the city.
Properties that qualify as regional detention facilities may receive an
approved credit under credit criteria #1 for on site detention plus an
additional credit based on the amount of additional regional detention that the
site can provide. Properties requesting additional credits for excess detention
must provide detention facilities with a maximum minimum 0.2 cfs per acre basin
outlet rate. The amount of additional credit given for a property that has
regional detention shall be based on the following table:
 
If on site detention exceeds the needed The additional amount of credit given
amount by:                              is:
35% - 49%                               35%
50% - 74%                               40%
75% or more                             45%
 
(3) Credit criteria #3: Property owner has constructed, installed and/or
maintains improvements that meet best management criteria as approved by the
city, state or federal agencies in accordance with the NPDES phase II program
for improving water quality for stormwater runoff.
               (A)   A maximum credit of thirty percent (30%) may be granted by
the city administrator, upon recommendation of the review committee, for the
installation and maintenance of improvements, facilities and/or measures that
meet best management criteria as approved by the city, state or federal
agencies in accordance with the NPDES phase II program for improving water
quality for stormwater runoff. A sample of city approved best management
practices are more particularly set forth in the Sunset City stormwater
management plan as adopted, and amended, by the city.
      7.   Approval And Granting Of Credit Or Adjustment: Each property owner,
or their agent, applying for a drainage utility fee adjustment or credit will
be required to complete a credit or adjustment application and submit this
application together with any required calculations and specific site data to
the city administrator. A review committee shall meet and evaluate the
adjustment or credit application and supporting documents. The review committee
shall consist of the stormwater official, public works director and city
engineer. The applicant may be invited to present his/her application, if
desired by the review committee. The review committee shall evaluate the merits
of each credit application and shall recommend to the city administrator the
approval or denial of the fee credit or adjustment and the recommended amount
of any credit or adjustment. The city administrator shall make the final
decision regarding fee credits and adjustments. The city administrator's
decisions for credit or adjustment may be based on the review committee's
recommendation, the data submitted, as well as the city administrator's and the
review committee's evaluation of how the facilities comply with and/or further
the city's storm drain master plan and stormwater management plan; the
sufficiency of the benefit of the on site facilities to the city's overall
storm drainage system; the amount of benefit that a facility provides to the
city in reducing the costs associated with operating and maintaining the storm
drain system; and whether the facility adds capacity or reduces the city's
costs in providing stormwater services. If approved, the monthly fee will be
reduced or adjusted in accordance with the amount granted by the city
administrator.
      8.   Duration Of Credits: Subject to amendment to this policy or the
city's storm drainage utility, any credit for the drainage utility fee granted
by the city shall remain in effect as long as the property owner, or their
agent, receiving the credit is in compliance with the criteria that the credit
is based upon. If a property owner, or their agent, is not in compliance, the
city may suspend the fee credit granted to the property owner or their agent.
   J.   Administration: The drainage utility shall be administered by the city
administrator.
   K.   Policies: The city administrator may recommend for adoption by the city
council policies and procedures to assist in the application, administration
and interpretation of this chapter. Said policies and procedures may be adopted
by resolution of the city council.
   L.   Appeals: Any person or entity aggrieved by a final decision of the city
administrator in implementing this chapter may appeal such decision to the city
council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city recorder within
fifteen (15) days from the date of the decision being appealed and stating the
specific grounds for the appeal. The city council may hold a hearing on the
appeal. The city council's decision shall be final and binding on all parties.
(Ord. 2012-03, 10-2-2012)
8-6-3: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND PERMIT:
   A.   City Stormwater Permit Required: Except as otherwise exempted under
subsection B of this section, any person or entity proposing to disturb one
acre or more of ground in connection with any development, land disturbance, or
construction activity within the city or any person or entity proposing to
disturb less than one acre of ground which is part of a larger common plan of
development that disturbs one acre or more ground shall be required to obtain a
stormwater permit from the city. Such permit is required to be obtained prior
to or in conjunction with the issuance of any demolition, excavation, land
disturbance, building, site plan, land use or subdivision permit or approval or
any development or construction activity within the city. A stormwater permit
shall also be required for any building permit for a structure requiring
earthmoving, unless otherwise waived by the stormwater official. In determining
whether to grant a waiver, the stormwater official shall consider the following
with respect to the property and circumstances associated with the same:
topography, vegetation, wetlands, steep slopes, sensitive areas, high water
table, proximity to water channels, creeks, well or riparian areas.
   B.   Exemptions: A stormwater permit is not required for the following
activities:
      1.   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources; or
      2.   Existing nursery and agricultural operations legally conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use.
   C.   City Stormwater Permit Application: A completed application for a
stormwater permit shall be submitted to the stormwater official on forms
provided by the city. All applications for a stormwater permit shall contain
the following information and/or documents:
      1.   The name, address and contact information for the owner of the site,
the developer of the site, contractors working at the site, and any consulting
firm retained by the applicant;
      2.   The proposed starting date and estimated completion date for the
proposed work and/or construction activity;
      3.   A city stormwater pollution prevention plan, as more particularly
described in subsection D of this section, for the subject property and the
proposed construction activities to be prepared and implemented in accordance
with the terms and conditions of this chapter;
      4.   A copy of the UPDES permit issued by the state and a copy of the
stormwater pollution prevention plan submitted in conjunction with the UPDES
permit for the subject property and the proposed construction activities, as
applicable;
      5.   The required stormwater pollution prevention review and application
fee as set forth in the city's fee schedule; and
      6.   A bond in the amount deemed sufficient by the city to cover all
costs and required performance under the terms and conditions of this chapter
regarding stormwater pollution prevention, including, but not limited to,
compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter, the stormwater
pollution prevention plan, and any additional conditions required by the
stormwater official or city engineer as provided herein. All bonds shall comply
with the provisions of subsection F of this section.
   D.   City Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan:
      1.   A city stormwater pollution prevention plan ("city SWPPP") shall be
required with all permit applications and shall include sufficient information
(e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, soil reports, erosion and sediment
control plan, etc.) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the
project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site,
both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and
acceptability of the structural and/or nonstructural BMPs proposed for managing
stormwater generated at the project site. The city SWPPP shall include a
landscaping plan in accordance with subsection Q3 of this section. The intent
of the city SWPPP is to determine the type of stormwater BMPs necessary for the
proposed project and to ensure adequate planning for long term operation,
management, and maintenance of stormwater runoff from future development. The
stormwater official may prepare a city SWPPP checklist for assistance in
preparing such plans.
      2.   For development, redevelopment or construction activities occurring
on a previously developed site, an applicant shall be required to include
within the city SWPPP BMPs for controlling existing stormwater runoff
discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this chapter to
the maximum extent practicable.
      3.   For developments, projects or construction activities involving a
residential, commercial or industrial subdivision, the applicant shall be
required to include with the city SWPPP individual lot development standards
and recommended BMPs for home or building construction activities within the
subdivision.
      4.   For projects, developments and construction activities requiring a
state UPDES permit and SWPPP, applicants may submit the SWPPP submitted to the
state for purposes of the city SWPPP, provided the city reserves the right to
require additional information or conditions in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
      5.   For individual lot developments, projects or construction activities
within a subdivision previously approved under the terms and conditions of this
chapter, including issuance of a city stormwater permit and city SWPPP, the
applicant may submit the city SWPPP submitted for the previously approved
subdivision, provided the city reserves the right to require additional
information or conditions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      6.   The stormwater official may waive any city SWPPP requirements set
forth herein in conjunction with the issuance of a stormwater permit for any
building permit or individual lot development or construction activity which is
not subject to the federal EPA requirements to obtain a city stormwater permit
(i.e., disturbs 1 acre or more of ground in connection with any development,
land disturbance, or construction activity within the city or disturbs less
than 1 acre of ground which is part of a larger common plan of development that
disturbs 1 acre or more of ground). In determining whether to grant a waiver of
any of the city SWPPP requirements, the stormwater official shall consider the
following with respect to the property and circumstances associated with the
same: topography, vegetation, wetlands, steep slopes, sensitive areas, high
water table, well or riparian areas, and existing construction and
infrastructure.
   E.   Licensed Professional Engineer: All proposed stormwater facilities and
submitted plans shall be calculated, designed and certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
   F.   Bond: Prior to issuance of a stormwater permit, the applicant and
responsible parties shall enter into a bond agreement with the city to insure
completion of, compliance with, and performance under the terms and conditions
of this chapter regarding stormwater pollution prevention, including, but not
limited to, compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter, the
stormwater pollution prevention plan, and any additional conditions required by
the stormwater official and/or city engineer as provided herein. The bond
agreement shall be in a form and contain such provisions as approved by the
city. Such provisions may be included in and combined with any other additional
bonds required for the project, development or construction activity, such as
the public improvements bond for subdivisions. The bond amount shall be
determined by the stormwater official and city engineer on a case by case basis
depending upon the property and circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the stormwater BMPs proposed for the project. The city shall have the right to
use the bond proceeds in the event the permit holder fails to comply with the
terms and conditions of the bond agreement. The city shall retain a percentage
of the bond proceeds to cover administrative costs incurred by the city in
obtaining compliance or completion of improvements. If the bond proceeds are
inadequate to pay the cost of completion of, compliance with, and performance
under the terms and conditions of the bond agreement, the permittee shall be
responsible for the deficiency and no further construction or development
activities shall be conducted on the project until the deficiency is paid or
remedied and a new bond, satisfactory to the city, is executed and delivered.
   G.   Permit Review And Approval: The stormwater official and/or city
engineer shall review all stormwater permit applications and city SWPPP for
compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter. In the event the
stormwater permit application or city SWPPP as submitted is deemed inadequate
or fails to meet the terms and requirements of this chapter, the stormwater
official and/or city engineer may require additional information or impose
additional conditions and requirements on the proposed construction activities
to the extent necessary to bring the application and/or plan into compliance
with the terms and purposes of this chapter. Failure to comply with the terms
and conditions of this chapter shall be grounds for denial of the stormwater
permit and/or any development, land use, subdivision or land disturbance permit
or approval. No construction activity, land use or land disturbance activity
shall occur on the subject property until a stormwater permit is approved by
the stormwater official and/or city engineer.
   H.   Notice Of Commencement Of Work: After issuance of a permit, the
stormwater official shall be notified by the permittee of proposed commencement
of the work at least twenty four (24) hours prior to commencement of work.
   I.   Permit Duration And Extensions: A stormwater permit shall be valid for
the time period specified in the permit. If the work is not completed during
such period, prior to the expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to
the city for a permit extension. A permit extension shall be reviewed and
approved by the stormwater official and/or city engineer and shall only be
issued upon a showing of good cause. The length of the extension shall not
exceed the original term and shall be determined by the stormwater official
and/or city engineer. Any extension shall require written review and amendment
to the stormwater permit, SWPPP, and bonding, as necessary.
   J.   Permit Not Transferable Or Assignable: Stormwater permits shall not be
transferable or assignable and work shall not be performed under a permit in
any place other than that specified in the permit. Nothing contained herein
shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work to be performed under a
permit; provided, however, that the holder of the permit shall be and remain
responsible for the performance of the work under the permit, and for all
bonding, insurance and other requirements of this chapter. Subcontractors shall
be appropriately licensed, insured and bonded.
   K.   Compliance With Other Ordinances: The issuance of any stormwater permit
by the city shall be subject to and conditioned upon compliance with all
applicable city ordinances regarding the proposed land disturbance or
construction activity, including, but not limited to, subdivision ordinance,
zoning ordinance, excavation, erosion control and grading permit ordinances,
and other land use development requirements.
   L.   Permit Kept On Site: Any approved stormwater permit, SWPPP and all
related documents and plans shall be kept on site at the project.
   M.   Inspection: Field inspections may occur during and postconstruction to
verify BMPs are built and properly designed and to ensure BMPs are properly
maintained. Field inspections for compliance with this chapter and any permits
issued hereunder shall be conducted by the stormwater official, the city
building inspector, the city ordinance enforcement officer, and/or other
designated agent of the city. The stormwater official may prepare an inspection
checklist to assist in field inspections.
   N.   As Built Plans: In addition to all other ordinance requirements, all
permittees subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter are required to
submit actual as built plans for any and all permanent stormwater BMPs and
facilities after final construction is completed. As built plans must show the
final design specifications for all stormwater BMP facilities and must be
certified by a licensed professional engineer. A final inspection by the
stormwater official and/or city engineer is required before release of any bond
may occur.
   O.   Notice Of Termination (NOT):
      1.   Operators: Operators wishing to terminate coverage under the city
stormwater permit must submit a notice of termination (NOT) to the city. Such
NOT shall be submitted to the stormwater official.
      2.   Permittees: All permittees must submit a NOT within thirty (30) days
after completion of their construction activities and final stabilization of
their portion of the site, or another operator taking over all of their
responsibilities at the site. A permittee cannot submit a NOT without final
stabilization unless another party has agreed to assume responsibility for
final stabilization of the site. Appropriate enforcement action may be taken
for permit violations where a permittee submits a NOT but the permittee has not
transferred operational control to another permittee or the site has not
undergone final stabilization.
   P.   Stormwater Management Performance Criteria: Unless determined by the
stormwater official and/or city engineer to be exempt or granted a waiver, the
following performance criteria shall be utilized and addressed for stormwater
BMPs at all sites and proposed land disturbance or construction activities.
      1.   All site designs shall establish stormwater BMPs to control the peak
flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms
(specified by the UPDES stormwater general permit for construction activities
UTS 100000) and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should
seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate
stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and
landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both
water quality and quantity.
      2.   No stormwater runoff generated from new development shall be
discharged directly into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body without
adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the
proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method
acceptable to the stormwater official and city engineer. In no case shall the
impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the army corps of
engineers (ACE) or the department of environmental quality (DEQ) responsible
for natural resources.
      3.   Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained by promoting
infiltration through the use of structural and nonstructural methods. At a
minimum, annual recharge from the postdevelopment site shall mimic the annual
recharge from predevelopment site conditions. This subsection shall not apply
to areas with high water tables.
      4.   All site designs shall establish stormwater BMPs to minimize, to the
maximum extent practicable, sediment, debris and all other pollutants from
entering the storm drain system during all phases of demolition. The owner,
developer, contractor and/or their authorized agents shall be responsible for
the removal of all construction debris, dirt, trash, rock, sediment, and sand
that may accumulate in the storm drain system and stormwater appurtenances as a
result of site development.
      5.   All site designs shall establish stormwater BMPs to minimize, to the
maximum extent practicable, soil erosion. Any earth disturbance shall be
conducted in such a manner so as to effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion
and resulting sedimentation. All earth disturbances shall be designed,
constructed, and completed in such a manner so that the exposed area of any
disturbed land shall be limited to the shortest possible period of time. Soil
erosion control measures for all slopes, channels, ditches, or any disturbed
land area shall be completed within fourteen (14) calendar days after final
grading, or final earth disturbance, has been completed. All temporary soil
erosion control measures shall be maintained until permanent soil erosion
control measures are implemented.
      6.   Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources
(i.e., cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas,
water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or
may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater BMPs.
      7.   Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots", may require the use of
specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices.
      8.   Postconstruction stormwater BMPs, where practicable, shall be
installed during the construction process to control pollutants in stormwater
discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed.
Postconstruction stormwater BMPs may include, but are not limited to,
stormwater detention structures (including wet ponds); stormwater retention
structures; flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural
depressions; infiltration of runoff on site; and sequential systems (which
combine several practices).
      9.   Prior to design, applicants shall consult with the stormwater
official to determine if the project or activity is subject to additional
stormwater design requirements.
   Q.   Stormwater Management Design Criteria:
      1.   Site Design: Stormwater BMPs for a site shall be chosen based on the
physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered:
         a.   Topography;
         b.   Maximum drainage area;
         c.   Depth of water table;
         d.   Removal of suspended sediment;
         e.   Soils;
         f.   Slopes;
         g.   Terrain;
         h.   Elevation head; and
         i.   Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features.
      2.   Conveyance: All stormwater BMPs shall be designed to convey
stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow
velocities. This shall include, but is not limited to:
         a.   Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points;
         b.   Protection of inlet and outfall structures;
         c.   Elimination of erosive flow velocities; and
         d.   Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable.
      3.   Landscaping: When deemed necessary by the stormwater official or
city engineer, all stormwater BMPs and city SWPPP shall have a landscaping plan
detailing both the vegetation to be in the project and how and who will manage
and maintain this vegetation. When required, this plan shall be prepared by a
registered landscape architect.
      4.   Maintenance: The permittee carrying out all BMPs and control
measures under the provisions of this chapter, and all subsequent owners or
tenants of the property on which such measures have been taken, shall maintain
all temporary and permanent BMPs and control measures. Should the permittee, or
any subsequent property owner and/or tenants, fail to adequately maintain the
temporary and permanent BMPs and control measures, the city reserves the
authority to enter the affected property and to take such action as is
necessary in accordance with the enforcement and violation provisions of
section
8-6-5 of this chapter.
   R.   Waivers:
      1.   Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required
by this chapter unless a written request to waive such requirement is filed
with and approved by the city. Requests to waive the stormwater management
permit and/or plan requirements shall be submitted to the stormwater official
and shall be reviewed and approved by the stormwater official and the city
engineer. The city is not authorized to grant any waiver of state or federal
requirements and no waiver granted by the city hereunder shall be interpreted
to grant such authority. The decision to grant a waiver under this subsection
shall be within the sole discretion of the city.
      2.   The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in
whole or in part upon written request of the applicant and approval by the
city, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
         a.   It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not
likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter;
         b.   Alternative minimum requirements for on site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan
that has been approved by the stormwater official and city engineer and the
implementation of the plan is required by city ordinance;
         c.   Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off site facility.
The off site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately
sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than
that which would be afforded by on site practices and there is a legally
obligated entity responsible for long term operation and maintenance of the
stormwater practice; or
         d.   The stormwater official and city engineer find that meeting the
minimum on site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or
existing physical characteristics of a site.
      3.   In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the
stormwater official and city engineer may grant a waiver from strict compliance
with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation
measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a waiver, the applicant must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the stormwater official and city engineer
that the waiver will not result in the following impacts to downstream
waterways:
         a.   Deterioration of existing culverts, and other structures;
         b.   Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
         c.   Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; or
         d.   Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life,
property.
      4.   Where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management
is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one
of the mitigation measures selected by the jurisdictional stormwater authority.
Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
         a.   The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant
of an easement to be dedicated for preservation. These lands should be located
adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to
protect water quality and aquatic habitat;
         b.   The creation of a stormwater management facility or other
drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private,
that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed
in accordance with the purposes and standards of this chapter; or
         c.   Monetary contributions (fee in lieu) to fund stormwater
management activities such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland
delineation studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macro
invertebrates, stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species
studies, hydrologic studies, and monitoring of stormwater BMPs).
   S.   Fee In Lieu: Where the city waives all or part of the minimum
stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the
provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed
development, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount
determined by the city in accordance with the provisions of this section. When
an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the
monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule
(unless the developer and stormwater authority agree on a greater alternate
contribution) established by the city, and based on the cubic feet of storage
required for stormwater management of the development in question. All of the
monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements
program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of
any city approval or permit for the development, land disturbance or
construction activity.
   T.   Dedication Of Land: In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant
may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an
agreement with the city for the granting of an easement or the dedication of
land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off site
stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the
applicant and the city prior to the recording of plats, or, if no record plat
is required, prior to city approval or permit for the development, land
disturbance or construction activity. (Ord. 2012-03, 10-2-2012)
8-6-4: PROHIBITED ACTIONS:
   A.   Violations Of This Chapter: It is unlawful for any person or entity to
violate or cause to be violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person or entity to conduct or
cause to be conducted any activity which is subject to the stormwater permit
requirements of this chapter upon any parcel of real property within the city
unless a stormwater permit and all of its applicable components have been
issued for the subject parcel of real property and activity.
   C.   No Polluted Waters: The only substance allowed to be discharged under
this chapter into the city's storm drain system is stormwater, surface
drainage, subsurface drainage, groundwater, roof runoff, or nonpolluted water.
Such water may be discharged only into city storm drain system facilities which
have adequate capacity for the accommodation of such water. Such discharged
water shall comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter and the city's
stormwater quality standards.
   D.   Obstructions:
      1.   Obstruction Of Flow: It is unlawful for any person or entity to
obstruct or contribute to the obstruction of the flow of stormwater runoff or
nonstormwater runoff into any detention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter,
drain inlet, or other associated structural controls that convey stormwater
and/or nonstormwater runoff, unless the obstruction is authorized in writing by
the city.
      2.   Interference: It is unlawful for any person or entity to cause any
obstruction that inhibits the normal flow of stormwater and/or nonstormwater
runoff in any curb and gutter, unless the obstruction is associated with a
street and/or storm drainage improvement project and is authorized in writing
by the city and granted with the issuance of a permit signed by an authorized
agent of the city.
      3.   Covering Inlet: It is unlawful for any person or entity to cover any
drain inlet for any reason or purpose, unless the obstruction is authorized in
writing by the city; provided, however, that a drainage system inlet may be
temporarily obstructed in emergency situations in order to prevent contaminants
from entering the storm drain system.
      4.   Exceptions: Subsections D1 and D2 of this section shall not apply
during cleanup periods established by the city, provided the materials are
placed according to any directions from the city and do not obstruct drain
inlets.
   E.   Dumping:
      1.   Dumping Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person or entity to place
or dump or allow to be placed or dumped into any detention basin, storm drain,
curb, gutter, drain inlet, or other storm drainage structure that conveys
stormwater and/or nonstormwater, any type of deleterious product, including,
but not limited to, debris, dirt, sand, petroleum product, chemical, paint,
pesticide, herbicide, heavy metal, acid or base product, solid or liquid waste
product, hazardous waste product, and/or human or animal waste.
      2.   Exceptions: The restrictions set forth in subsection E1 of this
section shall not apply to the normal runoff of nonstormwater related to
domestic home uses; for example, lawn watering.
   F.   Damage To Facilities: It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to
place or cause to be placed in the easement, channel, bed or bank of any river,
stream, wash or other natural drain or within or upon any storm drain, flood
control channel, reservoir, detention basin, debris basin, spreading ground of
other property over which the city has an interest, matter of any kind that may
operate to impede, retard or change the normal direction of the flow of flood,
storm or other waters, or that may catch or collect debris carried by such
waters, or that may be carried downstream by such waters to the damage and
detriment or adjacent private or public property, or that may degrade the
quality of the water, without first obtaining a written permit for such
placement from the city.
   G.   Tracking Mud Or Materials On Public Street: It is unlawful for any
person or entity to track or drop mud, stones, dirt, concrete, gravel, sediment
or other similar materials onto public streets by construction or delivery
vehicles. It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud, stones, concrete, gravel, sediment or other similar materials
or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or deposited upon any
public street to immediately remove the same or cause the same to be removed.
It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle to clean the tires and
vehicle undercarriage of dirt or debris before the vehicle enters onto a paved
public street. Developers, builders and any responsible person shall provide
for the cleaning of all construction vehicles on site before the vehicles leave
the site. Developers, builders and any responsible person shall be required to
bond for protection measure and potential cleanup costs as determined by the
stormwater official or city engineer in connection with any city approvals or
permits issued for the land disturbance or construction activity. In the event
construction traffic causes debris to be dropped or deposited onto public
streets in violation of this section, developers, builders and any responsible
person shall also be responsible and liable for cleaning the public streets.
Curbs, gutters and streets adjacent to construction projects will be inspected
by the city for compliance with the provisions herein.
   H.   Washing Out Concrete Trucks: It is unlawful for any person or entity to
wash out a concrete truck, including windows, tires and the truck exterior, at
any construction site other than in preapproved designated areas or to
discharge waste concrete or concrete truck rinse water except into preapproved
discharge facilities. Dumping of excess concrete at any construction site shall
not be allowed. It shall be the duty of the driver of the concrete vehicle to
wash out his or her concrete truck in preapproved designated areas. The driver
of the vehicle shall be responsible for cleaning up any concrete or debris
deposited on any site in violation of this section. Developers, builders and
any responsible person shall provide a preapproved designated area for the
cleaning of concrete trucks. Developers, builders and any responsible person
shall be required to bond for protection measure and potential cleanup costs as
determined by the stormwater official or city engineer in connection with any
city approvals or permits issued for the land disturbance or construction
activity. In the event a concrete truck is washed out or excess concrete is
deposited on any site, the developers, builders and any responsible person
shall also be responsible and liable for cleaning up the illegally deposited
concrete from the site. Projects will be inspected by the city for compliance
with the provisions herein.
   I.   Stockpiling Debris Or Materials: It is unlawful for any person or
entity to stockpile construction or yard improvement materials or debris in the
street, gutter or in any drainage channel (natural or manmade). This includes,
but is not limited to, ramps, being constructed for temporary access across the
existing curb and gutter, stockpiling of topsoil or other fill material,
stockpiling of sand, gravel, landscape rock, bark, mulch or any other material
that may be considered a source of pollution in the storm drain system.
Materials stored on a pallet, in a self- contained storage unit, or by other
acceptable means may be preapproved by the stormwater official.
   J.   Chemical Storage Or Use: It is unlawful for any person or entity to use
or store chemicals in a manner that causes pollution to the city's storm drain
system.
   K.   Dumpster Location: Dumpsters shall not be allowed in the street or on
any paved surfaces except as may be approved under special circumstances by the
stormwater official. Drain plugs with respect to containers designed with
drains shall be in place at all times. Dumpsters shall be serviced with
sufficient frequency so as to prevent overflow, spillage and the emanation of
offensive odors.
   L.   Portable Toilet Location: Portable toilets shall not be allowed in the
street, on any paved surfaces, or in the park strip except as may be approved
under special circumstances by the stormwater official.
   M.   Dust Control: Dust control measures shall be implemented on all
construction sites where there will be major soil disturbances or heavy
construction activity, such as clearing, excavation, demolition, or excessive
vehicle traffic. Dust control measures include, but are not limited to, mulch,
sprinkling, vegetative cover, wind breaks, stone, and spray of chemical soil
treatments.
   N.   Illicit Discharges:
      1.   No person or entity shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the city's storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not
limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards.
      2.   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to
the city's storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
         a.   Water line flushing or other potable water sources;
         b.   Landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
         c.   Approved diverted stream flows;
         d.   Groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
         e.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
         f.   Air conditioning condensation;
         g.   Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
         h.   Firefighting activities, and any other water source not
containing pollutants;
         i.   Swimming pools (only if dechlorinated in accordance with federal
regulations to less than 0.4 ppm chlorine);
         j.   Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; or
         k.   Discharges specified in writing by the stormwater official as
being necessary to protect public health and safety.
            (1)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a written
notification to the stormwater official at least five (5) business days prior
to the time of the test.
            (2)   The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to
any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority
of the federal environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is
in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and
other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has
been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system by the city.
            (3)   The prohibitions set forth in this section expressly include,
without limitation, connections made in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection. The prohibition also expressly includes, without
limitation, connections of sanitary sewer lines to the storm drain system.
            (4)   No person or entity shall install drainage outlets into
curbsides unless approved by the city engineer or stormwater official. Approval
shall be granted in limited circumstances and must be based on a showing of
good cause.
   O.   Residential Roof Drainage Restrictions: No person or entity shall
connect roof drains to the subsurface drainage system. The capacity of the
subsurface drainage system is not designed to handle the quantity of runoff
generated from roof drains. Runoff from roof drains should be directed to a
lawn or a flowerbed. (Ord. 2012-03, 10-2-2012)
8-6-5: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notification Of Spills:
      1.   All persons in charge of a project, development, or facility or
responsible for emergency response for a project, development or facility are
responsible to train personnel, maintain records of such training and maintain
notification procedures to assure that immediate notification is provided to
the city upon becoming aware of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release
of material, pollutants or waste that creates a risk of discharge into the
city's storm drain system.
      2.   As soon as any person in charge of a project, development, or
facility or responsible for emergency response for a project, development or
facility has knowledge of any release of materials as described in subsection
A1 of this section, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
containment and cleanup of such release and shall immediately notify the city
stormwater official of the occurrence (no later than the next business day).
      3.   The notification requirements of this section are in addition to any
other notification requirements set forth in federal, state or local
regulations and/or laws.
   B.   Inspections: Whenever the stormwater official determines it is
necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this
chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition
which may constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the
official and/or stormwater official may enter such building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the
official by this chapter; provided that: 1) if such building or premises is
occupied, he or she first shall present proper credentials and request entry;
and 2) if such building or premises is unoccupied, he or she first shall make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control
of the building or premises and request entry.
   C.   Testing And Monitoring:
      1.   Whenever the stormwater official or his or her designee determines
that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility
may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or illicit discharges to the
city's storm drain system, the stormwater official or his or her designee may,
by written notice, order that such person undertake such monitoring activities
and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the stormwater official or his or
her designee may recommend. The written notice shall be served either in person
or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, and shall set
forth the basis for such order and shall particularly describe the monitoring
activities and/or analyses and reports required. The burden to be borne by the
owner or operator, including costs of these activities, analyses and reports,
shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses
and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such order shall
undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and reports within the time
frames set forth in the order.
      2.   In the event the owner or operator of a project, development or
facility fails to conduct the monitoring and/or analyses and furnish the
reports required by the order in the time frames set forth therein, the city
may cause such monitoring and/or analyses to occur and assess all costs
incurred, including reasonable administrative costs and attorney fees, to the
facility owner or operator. The city may pursue judicial action to enforce the
order and recover all costs incurred.
   D.   Removal Of Obstruction: In addition to any penalties which may be
imposed pursuant to this chapter, the city may do the following:
      1.   Remove any of the obstructions and any pipelines or other devices
installed in violation of the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   Give written notice to persons in violation of the provisions of
this chapter requiring the removal of offending installations from natural
channels or other storm drainage facilities. Notices may be personally served
or may be mailed to violators by registered mail provided that a copy is also
posted on offending installations for a period of ten (10) days. If such
installations are not removed within ten (10) days after notice is given, the
city may effect removal at the expense of the person in violation and may
recover its costs and expenses, therefor; and/or
      3.   Bring an action for the abatement of the nuisance caused by the
offending installation, and/or for the recovery of the city's costs and
expenses incurred in removing the offending installation pursuant to subsection
D1 or D2 of this section.
   E.   Stop Work Order; Revocation Of Permit: In the event that any person
holding a stormwater permit pursuant to this chapter fails to complete the work
required under the permit, fails to comply with all the requirements,
conditions and terms of the permit, or violates the terms of the permit, the
city may suspect or revoke the stormwater permit and/or the applicable site
development permit and issue a stop work order as is necessary to eliminate any
danger to persons or property and to leave the site in a safe condition. If the
city issues a stop work order, the permittee, and its subcontractors, shall
immediately stop all work on the project, building, or permit activity. Except
as otherwise authorized by the city, no work shall be conducted on the project,
building, or permit activity until and unless the violation has been remedied
and the city has issued a reinstated permit. The permittee shall be required to
pay a reinstatement fee in accordance with the Sunset City fee schedule. The
city may authorize completion of all necessary temporary or permanent erosion
control or stabilization measures and may use authorized bond funds to pay for
the same. The permittee shall be liable to the city for all costs and expenses
that may be incurred or expended by the city in bringing the property into
compliance with the requirements of the permit and any collection costs,
including legal fees, incurred by the city. The city may recover these costs
through appropriate legal action.
   F.   Order Compliance: Whenever the city finds that a person or entity has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
authorized enforcement official may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require, with limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   G.   Use Of Bond Proceeds: In addition to the remedies and procedures set
forth in this section, the city is authorized to utilize the bond proceeds in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the bond agreement entered into by
the parties for the particular project, development or construction activity in
accordance with subsection
8-6-3F of this chapter.
   H.   Violation And Penalty:
      1.   Criminal Violation: Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to fines
as provided in Utah Code Annotated 76-3-301, as amended, and/or imprisonment as
provided in Utah Code Annotated 76-3-204, as amended. Each day during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or
permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. A penalty determination flow
chart is attached as appendix 1 to the ordinance codified herein.
      2.   Civil Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
may be subject to civil penalties as more particularly set forth by resolution
or ordinance of the city council.
      3.   Damages: If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this
chapter, the city or any other party suffers damage and is required to make
repairs to and/or replace any materials, the cost of the repair or replacement
shall be borne by the party in violation, in addition to any criminal fines
and/or penalties.
      4.   Nuisance: In addition to the penalties provided herein, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be considered a threat to the public health, safety, welfare
and the environment, and may be declared and deemed a nuisance by the
stormwater official, or his or her designee, and may be abated and/or restored
by the city in accordance with nuisance procedures.
      5.   Other Relief: This section shall not limit the authority of any
court of competent jurisdiction to impose any other sanction or order any other
relief as may be appropriate and lawful under local, state or federal law.
(Ord. 2012-03, 10-2-2012)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES ADOPTED
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Code
9-1-2: Residential Building Code
9-1-3: Electrical Code
9-1-4: Fuel Gas Code
9-1-5: Mechanical Code
9-1-6: Plumbing Code
9-1-7: Fire Code
9-1-8: Fee Schedule
9-1-9: Penalty
9-1-1: BUILDING CODE:
The city hereby adopts by reference thereto the international building code as
published by the International Code Council, except the attached appendices
contained therein. The same is hereby adopted as if fully set out at length
herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling. The code herein
referred to shall be the original code specified as the same is amended by the
proper officials from time to time so that the international building code
shall be continuously the current edition of said code, three (3) copies of
which are on file in the Sunset City office and open for public inspection and
use. This code shall remain current without further action by the city council.
(Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-2005)
9-1-2: RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE:
The city hereby adopts by reference thereto the residential building code as
published by the International Code Council, except the attached appendices
contained therein. The same is hereby adopted as if fully set out at length
herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling. The code herein
referred to shall be the original code specified as the same is amended by the
proper officials from time to time so that the international residential code
shall be continuously the current edition of said code, three (3) copies of
which are on file in the Sunset City office and open for public inspection and
use. This code shall remain current without further action by the city council.
(Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-2005)
9-1-3: ELECTRICAL CODE:
The city hereby adopts by reference thereto the national electrical code,
international electrical code series, as published by the International Code
Council. The same is hereby adopted as if fully set out at length herein and
the provisions thereof shall be controlling. The code herein referred to shall
be the original code specified as the same is amended by the proper officials
from time to time so that the national electrical code shall be continuously
the current edition of said code, three (3) copies of which are on file in the
Sunset City office and open for public inspection and use. This code shall
remain current without further action by the city council. (Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-
2005)
9-1-4: FUEL GAS CODE:
The city hereby adopts by reference thereto the international fuel gas code as
published by the International Code Council, except the attached appendices
contained therein. The same is hereby adopted as if fully set out at length
herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling. The code herein
referred to shall be the original code specified as the same is amended by the
proper officials from time to time so that the international fuel gas code
shall be continuously the current edition of said code, three (3) copies of
which are on file in the Sunset City office and open for public inspection and
use. This code shall remain current without further action by the city council.
(Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-2005)
9-1-5: MECHANICAL CODE:
The city hereby adopts by reference thereto the international mechanical code
as published by the International Code Council, except the attached appendices
contained therein. The same is hereby adopted as if fully set out at length
herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling. The code herein
referred to shall be the original code specified as the same is amended by the
proper officials from time to time so that the international mechanical code
shall be continuously the current edition of said code, three (3) copies of
which are on file in the Sunset City office and open for public inspection and
use. This code shall remain current without further action by the city council.
(Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-2005)
9-1-6: PLUMBING CODE:
The city hereby adopts by reference thereto the international plumbing code as
published by the International Code Council, except the attached appendices
contained therein. The same is hereby adopted as if fully set out at length
herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling. The code herein
referred to shall be the original code specified as the same is amended by the
proper officials from time to time so that the international plumbing code
shall be continuously the current edition of said code, three (3) copies of
which are on file in the Sunset City office and open for public inspection and
use. This code shall remain current without further action by the city council.
(Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-2005)
9-1-7: FIRE CODE:
The city hereby adopts by reference thereto the international fire code as
published by the International Code Council, except the attached appendices
contained therein. The same is hereby adopted as if fully set out at length
herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling. The code herein
referred to shall be the original code specified as the same is amended by the
proper officials from time to time so that the international fire code shall be
continuously the current edition of said code, three (3) copies of which are on
file in the Sunset City office and open for public inspection and use. This
code shall remain current without further action by the city council. (Ord.
2005-07, 3-15-2005)
9-1-8: FEE SCHEDULE:
The fees for building permits and for inspection shall be determined using the
building valuation data table and the permit fee multiplier published by the
International Code Council, amended by the proper officials from time to time
so that the building valuation data table and the permit fee multiplier shall
be continuously the current edition. (Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-2005)
9-1-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title, either by act or
omission, or act of commission, shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor
and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-2005)
CHAPTER 2
DEMOLITION OR REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Demolition Permit Required
9-2-2: Qualifications
9-2-3: Utility Disconnection
9-2-4: General Requirements
9-2-5: Site Restoration
9-2-6: Inspection
9-2-7:    Expiration
9-2-1: DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall demolish or move any building or structure within the
City, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a building permit
for each such building or structure. All permits will be obtained from the
Building Department.
   B.   Application must include:
      1.   The State of Utah 10 day notification form accepted by the Division
of Air Quality.
      2.   Site plan showing fencing type and placement to protect pedestrian
traffic, adjacent property and structures. Covered walkways will be constructed
when required by the Building Official for pedestrian protection.
      3.   Verification from the utilities that all utilities (water, sewer,
storm water, natural gas, electric, telephone, cable TV, etc.) have been
properly disconnected, shut off and/or secured.
      4.   A surety bond or cash bond (payable by cashier's check, cash or
card) as outlined in section 9-2-4.
(Ord. 2020-02, 5-19-2020)
9-2-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The permit required shall be obtained by the person doing the work specified in
the permit. Demolition permits may be issued by the Building Official to
parties who meet the following qualifications:
   A.   Licensed Subcontractor: A subcontractor currently holding a license in
good stating with the State of Utah, qualified to do wrecking and/or demolition
work.
   B.   License General Contractor: A contractor currently holding a license in
good standing with the State of Utah, qualified as a general building
contractor or a residential and small commercial contractor.
   C.   Special Restricted Permittee: A property owner doing his/her own work,
who cannot qualify under subsections A or B of this section, may qualify for a
restricted special demolition permit conditioned upon compliance with the
following terms and restrictions:
      1.   Only one special demolition permit may be issued or outstanding at
any time for any property owner.
      2.   The permit is not transferable between parties.
      3.   Each demolition project commenced under a special permit must be
completed and receive final inspection and approval from the Building Inspector
prior to the approval or issuance of any subsequent special permit to the
owner.
      4.   Special demolition permits may be issued for demolition of the
following structures only:
         a.   Accessory buildings,
         b.   Single-family or duplex residential structures.
(Ord. 2020-02, 5-19-2020)
9-2-3: UTILITY DISCONNECTION:
All utilities connected to a building or structure shall be disconnected as
follows:
   A.   Sewer: Sewer laterals which meet the existing requirements of the city
standards, and will be used for a future structure, shall be cut back to a
point ten feet (10') inside the property line, an approved plug shall be placed
in the lateral and a two inch by 4 inch (2" x 4") piece of treated lumber shall
be placed at the end of the pipe and extended up to within one foot (1') of
final grade. Laterals which do not meet the requirements of the city standards,
or will not be used for a future structure, shall be removed back to the sewer
main and the main repaired to meet the requirements of the Sunset City Public
Works Department.
   B.   Culinary Water: Culinary water laterals which meet the existing
requirements of the city standards, and will be used for a future structure,
shall be cut back to a point ten feet (10') inside the property line, an
approved plug shall be placed in the lateral and a two inch by 4 inch (2" x 4")
piece of treated lumber shall be placed at the end of the pipe and extended up
to within one foot of final grade. Laterals which do not meet the requirements
of the City Standards, or will not be used for a future structure, shall be
removed back to the water main and the main repaired to meet the requirements
of the Sunset City Public Works Department.
   C.   Storm Water: Storm water laterals which meet the existing requirements
of the city standards, and will be used for a future structure, shall be cut
back to a point ten feet (10') inside the property line, an approved plug shall
be placed in the lateral and a two inch by 4 inch (2" x 4") piece of treated
lumber shall be placed at the end of the pipe and extended up to within one
foot of final grade. Laterals which do not meet the requirements of the city
standards, or will not be used for a future structure, shall be removed back to
the storm water main and the main repaired to meet the requirements of the
Sunset City Public Works Department.
   D.   All utility laterals being capped or removed to the main shall be
inspected by the Public Works Department before being covered.
(Ord. 2020-02, 5-19-2020)
9-2-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
All permittees shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Bond Posted: A surety bond, cashier's check or cash bond must be posted
with Sunset City. Special circumstances may require special bonds. Otherwise,
the following bond schedule will apply:
      1.   Floor area of structure up to 2,000 square feet - $2,000.
      2.   Floor area of structure 2,001 to 10,000 square feet - $10,000.
      3.   Floor area of structure over 10,000 square feet - $20,000.
   B.   Protection Of Off-Site Improvements: The purpose of the bond outlined
in subsection A. of this section shall be to assure the satisfactory completion
of the project as well as maintaining the satisfactory condition of the curb,
gutter, sidewalk, drive approach, landscaping, paving, patching, asphalt cut,
and other public improvement (protected items) theretofore installed on and in
close proximity to the individual property for which the building permit was
sought.
   C.   Release Of Bond: The bond will be released after satisfactory
completion of the project and the protected items are inspected and found to be
not damaged or are installed to meet city standards. Inspection of the
protected items shall be done by the Sunset City Public Works Department. The
bond will be released to the individual/party indicated on the demolition
permit.
   D.   Safe Condition Maintained: All buildings and structures shall be
secured and maintained in a safe condition, both prior to and during demolition
or moving.
   E.   Dust Control: All demolition projects must have means of controlling
dust on the job site.
(Ord. 2020-02, 5-19-2020)
9-2-5: SITE RESTORATION:
   A.   A permit for demolition or removal requires that all materials
comprising part of the existing structure, including the foundation and
footings, must be removed from the site. The depression caused by removal of
such debris must be filled back and compacted to the original grade, as
approved by the Building Inspector, with granular fill. The work must be
completed, including filling and leveling back to grade and removal of required
pedestrian walkways and fences within the permit period, unless the Building
Inspector:
      1.   Finds that any part of the foundation of the building will form an
integral part of a new structure to be erected on the same site for which plans
have already been approved by the Building Inspector, in which case the
Inspector may approve plans for the appropriate adjustment and may impose
reasonable conditions, including the erection of fences, securing, etc., to
guarantee the site does not create a hazard.
      2.   Finds that new construction will shortly commence and approves the
continuance of the protective pedestrian walkway.
      3.   Finds that the foundation, footings or existing retaining walls are
integral to the support of adjacent sidewalks, streets, legal easements or
buildings, in which case the Building Inspector may permit such supporting
structures to remain.
   B.   In no case shall grade next to sidewalks or on the site present a
hazard to the public or anyone who may be on the site.
(Ord. 2020-02, 5-19-2020)
9-2-6: INSPECTION:
The person or corporation to whom a demolition or relocation permit is issued
will, upon completion of all work on the site, cause the site to be inspected
by the Public Works Department and Building Inspector. The Public Works
Department shall note on the inspection report the location of all laterals
relative to the property lines and insure that the site is suitable in
accordance with this chapter. Additionally, the building permit must be closed
with the passing of a final inspection by the Building Official.
(Ord. 2020-02, 5-19-2020)
9-2-7: EXPIRATION:
All permits issued shall expire sixty (60) calendar days from the date of
issuance, unless a completion date allowing more time is stated and approved by
the Building Inspector at the time of application. Demolition permits may be
renewable upon request prior to expiration with the approval of the Building
Official, provided continuous progress is being made. If a permit is allowed to
expire without the prior renewal, any subsequent request for reinstatement
shall be accompanied by a reinstatement fee equal to the original demolition
permit fee.
(Ord. 2020-02, 5-19-2020)
CHAPTER 3
RESERVED
(Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-2005)
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
(Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-2005)
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
(Ord. 2005-07, 3-15-2005)
CHAPTER 6
SIGNS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Purpose
9-6-2: Definitions
9-6-3: General Rules And Regulations
9-6-4: Construction Specifications
9-6-5: Prohibited Signs
9-6-6: Temporary Signs
9-6-7: Residential Uses
9-6-8: Commercial Uses
9-6-9: Nonconforming Signs
9-6-10: Removal Of Certain Signs
9-6-11: Penalty
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Scope: Regulation of the location, size, placement and certain features
of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services, and
facilities in the city of Sunset without difficulty and confusion, to encourage
the general attractiveness of the community, to protect property values
therein, to preserve freedom of speech and to promote and protect the public
health, safety, comfort, morals and convenience.
   B.   Interpretation: In interpreting and applying the provisions of this
chapter, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum
requirements for the purpose set forth and nothing in this chapter shall
prevent anyone from engaging in noncommercial speech as guaranteed by the first
amendment to the United States constitution or the Utah state constitution.
   C.   Restrictive Provisions: This chapter shall not nullify the more
restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements, ordinances or laws, but shall
prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive.
   D.   Existing Agreements: This chapter shall not abrogate any agreement
provided that where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or
impose higher standards than such private agreements the provisions and
requirements of this chapter shall govern.
   E.   Separability: In accordance with the following, it is hereby declared
that several provisions of this chapter are separable:
      1.   If any court of competent jurisdiction determines any provisions of
this chapter to be invalid, such determination shall not affect any other
provision of these ordinances, not specifically included in the court's
judgment order.
      2.   If any court of competent jurisdiction determines any provision of
this chapter to be invalid as applied to any particular sign, such
determination shall not affect the application of such provision to any other
sign not specifically included in the court's judgment order. (Ord. 2011-02, 3-
15-2011)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A-FRAME SIGN: A sign, temporary in nature, double faced, constructed of
dimensional lumber with separate panels attached at the top and designed to
stand without other structural support on four (4) legs.
   ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which has discontinued to identify or advertise a
bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity for a period
of one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days or a temporary sign that remains
more than two (2) days after expiration of its specified time limit.
   ALTERATIONS: A change or rearrangement in the structural part of design
whether by the extending of a side, by increasing in area or height, or by
relocating or change in position, other than general maintenance or altering of
changeable copy.
   AWNING: A rooflike structure made of cloth, metal or other material affixed
to a building for shelter or ornamental purposes in such a manner that the
structure may or may not be raised or retracted to a position against the
building and does not have ground support.
   AWNING SIGN: A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the
surface of an awning.
   BALLOON: Advertisement supported by an inflated object anchored to the
premises where the advertised use is conducted, commodity sold or service
performed. Inflatable entertainment structures shall also be considered
balloons.
   BANNER OR PENNANT: A sign intended to be hung either with or without a
frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied
to cloth, canvas, fabric, or other light material excluding flags, emblems, or
insignia of political, professional, religious, educational, or corporate
organizations providing that such flags, emblems and insignia are displayed for
noncommercial purposes.
   BILLBOARD SIGN: An off premises advertising sign.
   BUSINESS SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession,
activity, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered upon
the premises where such sign is located, or within the building to which such
sign is affixed.
   CANOPY: A fixed roof with a cloth, metal or other material covering or
ornamental structure affixed to a building which is supported by the ground and
cannot be raised or retracted.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign which is characterized by changeable copy,
regardless of method of attachment.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A sign identifying individuals or companies involved in
design, construction, wrecking, financing, or development when placed upon the
premises where work is under construction, but only for the duration of
construction or wrecking.
   COPY: The wording on a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter
form.
   GROUND SIGN: A sign that is supported by more than one upright, pole or
brace in the ground.
   MAINTENANCE: For the purposes of this chapter, the cleaning, painting,
repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not
alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign.
   MONUMENT SIGN: A sign supported by a solid base with zero ground clearance,
not attached to a wall or building. This sign will be a ground sign which does
not have any exposed pole or pylon, and is attached to a base for at least
sixty percent (60%) of the entire width of the sign.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN: A previously lawful sign which subsequently does not
adhere to one or more of the provisions contained in this chapter.
   OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession,
activity, commodity, service or entertainment other than one conducted, sold,
or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it
is located.
   OWNER: A person recorded as such on official records. For the purposes of
this chapter, the owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to
be the owner of the sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded
or otherwise brought to the attention of the building official, e.g., a sign
leased from a sign company.
   PARAPET: The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.
   POLE SIGN: A sign wholly supported by a single pole in the ground.
   POLITICAL SIGN: A sign identifying a political candidate, issue or party,
used in connection with a local, state, or national election, or referendum.
   PORTABLE SIGN: A sign not permanently affixed to the ground, or building, or
other structure, which may be moved from place to place.
   PROJECTING SIGN: A sign, other than a wall sign, that projects more than
sixteen inches (16") from and is supported by a wall of a building or
structure.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign which is used as directional or to offer
for sale, lease, or rent the premises upon which such sign is placed.
   ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon a roof or parapet of a building or structure.
   ROOFLINE: The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher,
excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections.
   SIGN: Any medium, including its structure and component parts, that is used
or intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for
advertising purposes other than paint on the surface of a building.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign, banner, pendant, valance or advertising display
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light
materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited
period of time only.
   USE: The purpose for which a building, lot, sign or structure is intended,
designed, occupied, or maintained.
   WALL SIGN: Any sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or
structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane
of said wall.
   WINDOW SIGN: A sign attached to, placed upon, or painted on the surface of a
window or door of a building which is intended for viewing from the exterior of
such building.
   ZONING LOT: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat,
subdivision, or otherwise permitted by law to be used, developed, or built upon
as a single unit under single ownership or control. (Ord. 2011-02, 3-15-2011)
9-6-3: GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Conformity And Safety: If a sign does not conform with the requirements
of this chapter or if the construction, design, manner of use, or method of
anchoring or supporting any sign makes such sign unsafe, the building official
shall proceed in any manner he deems necessary to cause the removal of the sign
or the rebuilding of the sign to conform with the requirements of this chapter
or to remedy the defects herein. All signs must meet the requirements of the
international building code for wind loads, seismic loads and working stresses
and safety regulations of the city.
   B.   Clearance: There shall be a minimum clearance of ten feet (10') between
the ground or sidewalk and any part of a projecting sign, with the exception of
public necessity signs and nameplates.
   C.   Lighting Of Signs: Except for electronic message signs or as otherwise
specifically permitted, signs may be illuminated by indirect lighting, or
luminous tubes only. No lighting shall be installed in any way which will
permit direct rays of such light to penetrate onto any adjoining property in
residential zones or in any manner constituting a nuisance. Any other lighting
which constitutes a hazard to traffic or by reason of position, shape or color,
it may obstruct, interfere with, or be confused with any authorized emergency
vehicle light, traffic signal or similar device is prohibited.
   D.   Maintenance Of Signs: Signs regulated by this chapter shall be
maintained in good visual appearance and structural condition at all times. The
city and its agents shall in no way be liable for negligence or failure of the
owner, or the person responsible for maintaining any sign, to keep such signs
in good condition, or be responsible for any damage caused by defective
conditions.
   E.   Obscene And Nuisance Signs Prohibited: No signs shall be erected,
maintained or permitted to remain publicly displayed which constitute a public
nuisance as defined by law or are obscene as defined by law, or are misleading
or fraudulent.
   F.   Noise Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to use in connection with any
sign or to use for advertising purposes any radio, phonograph, whistle, bell or
any other sound or noisemaking or transmitting device or instrument for the
purpose of commercial advertising.
   G.   Pasting Or Gluing Prohibited: No sign shall be pasted or glued directly
on any wall or roof or affixed directly on any wall or roof by means of any
similar adhesive substance.
   H.   Sign Not To Cover Windows, Doors Or Similar Openings: No sign shall
cover a window, doorway or other opening providing light, ventilation or exit
facilities which are required by the building code or which are deemed by the
fire department to be necessary to give the fire department access to the
building, or to afford fire protection in the event of a fire.
   I.   Sign Setbacks: Except for projecting signs, the setback for all signs
shall be at least eighteen inches (18") from the property line as measured from
the leading edge of the sign and shall not project within two feet (2') of the
curb line. (Ord. 2011-02, 3-15-2011)
9-6-4: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
All permanent signs permitted by this chapter shall be constructed in
accordance with the provisions of the international building code, national
electrical code and this section. All signs and sign structures shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to resist wind forces as specified in the
international building code. (Ord. 2011-02, 3-15-2011)
9-6-5: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are hereby expressly prohibited for erection, construction,
repair, alteration, or relocation within the city, except as otherwise
permitted in this chapter:
   A.   Abandoned Signs: Abandoned signs as specified in this chapter.
   B.   Banners And Pennants: Banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, and other
gas filled figures, except as a temporary sign, as provided for in this
chapter.
   C.   Portable And Wheeled Signs: Portable and wheeled signs, except as a
temporary sign as provided for in this chapter.
   D.   Signs On Parked Vehicles: Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or
trailers which are parked on a public right of way, public property, or private
property so as to be visible from a public right of way where the apparent
purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity
located on the same or nearby property. However, this is not in any way
intended to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and trailers, such
as lettering on motor vehicles, where the sign is incidental to the primary use
of the vehicles or trailers.
   E.   Signs In Trees: Signs which are attached or otherwise affixed to trees
or other living vegetation.
   F.   Signs Containing Untruthful Or Misleading Information: Signs which
contain untruthful or misleading information.
   G.   Signs Which Imitate Traffic Control Devices: Signs which imitate,
interfere with, obstruct the view of, or can be confused with any authorized
traffic control sign, signal or other device.
   H.   Other Exterior Signs: Exterior signs constructed of paper or fabric
that are not totally enclosed in a weathertight protective structure.
   I.   Signs On Public Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten
or attach, paint, or place, any sign, handbill, poster, advertisement or notice
of any kind or sort, whether political or otherwise, or to cause the same to be
done in or upon the curbstone, lamppost, telephone pole, electric light or
power pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, or in or upon any portion of any sidewalk or
street.
   J.   Billboards:
      1.   Exceptions: All billboard signs are prohibited, except there shall
be recognized for the purposes of this chapter the six (6) preexisting
billboard signs, which shall be considered as conditional uses to the
commercial zones.
      2.   New Location; Permit Required: In the event signs contained in this
section are moved, a conditional use permit shall first be obtained. (Ord.
2011-02, 3-15-2011)
   K.   Off Premises Advertising: All advertising signs not related to an on
site business or other allowed use are prohibited.
      1.   Exceptions: Temporary signs may be located upon any private zoning
lot with the written consent of the owner of such property and only in
accordance with the provisions contained in section
9-6-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-02, 3-18-2014)
9-6-6: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Temporary signs may be erected and maintained in the city only in accordance
with the provisions contained in the international building code and this
section.
   A.   Number, Height And Location: There shall not be more than one temporary
sign for each zoning lot except that where a lot abuts two (2) or more streets;
then additional signs, one oriented to each abutting street, shall be
permitted. Temporary signs shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. Temporary
signs shall be located upon the zoning lot on which the special, unique, or
limited activity, service project, or sale is to occur or any other private
zoning lot with the written consent of the owner of such property. Such signs
may be located in any required yard, but shall not extend over any lot line or
within ten feet (10') of any point of vehicular access from a zoning lot to a
public roadway. All temporary signs shall be braced or secured to prevent
motion.
   B.   Special Conditions:
      1.   Business signs identifying a special, unique, or limited activity,
service project, or sale shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
total area. A temporary sign of rigid material shall not exceed twenty four
(24) square feet in area, or six feet (6') in height, nor shall any such sign
be permanently fastened to the ground. Temporary business signs may be erected
and maintained no earlier than thirty (30) days prior to the special, unique or
limited activity, service project or sale and shall be removed within thirty
(30) days of the termination of such special, unique or limited activity,
service project or sale.
      2.   Construction signs identifying the parties involved in the
construction to occur, or occurring, on a premises on which the sign is placed
shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in gross surface area for each exposed
face nor exceed an aggregate gross surface area of one hundred (100) square
feet. Temporary construction signs shall be permitted only as accessory to an
approved building permit for a project or development. Temporary construction
signs may be erected and maintained for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days
prior to the commencement of construction and shall be removed within fourteen
(14) days of the termination of construction of the project or development.
      3.   Event signs announcing a campaign, drive, activity, or event of a
civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization for noncommercial
purposes may be erected and maintained for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days prior to the date of which the campaign, drive, activity, or event
advertised is scheduled to occur and shall be removed within three (3) days of
the termination of such campaign, drive, activity, or event.
      4.   Yard sale signs advertising a yard sale, garage sale or other type
of sale of secondhand goods on private property shall not be posted for more
than forty eight (48) hours in advance of the event for which the sign is
posted and it shall be unlawful to fail to remove a yard sale sign within forty
eight (48) hours after the event for which the sign is posted. Any person may
post signs for no more than three (3) separate yard sale events per one
calendar year without obtaining a temporary business license. If more than
three (3) yard sales are to be held per calendar year, a temporary business
license shall be obtained from the city for up to an additional two (2) events
within sixty (60) days.
      5.   Real estate signs advertising the sale, lease, or rent of the
premises upon which such sign is located shall be removed within seven (7) days
of the sale or lease of the premises upon which the sign is located.
In all residential areas, temporary real estate signs shall not exceed six (6)
square feet in gross surface area for each exposed face nor exceed an aggregate
gross surface area of twelve (12) square feet.
In nonresidential areas, temporary real estate signs shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in area. Signs of rigid material shall not exceed
twenty four (24) square feet in area, or six feet (6') in height, nor shall any
such sign be permanently fastened to the ground. (Ord. 2011-02, 3-15-2011)
      6.   Campaign signs shall meet the following requirements:
         a.   Posting: It shall be lawful for any person to post a campaign
sign in the area between the sidewalk and curb and gutter of any public street
except that no sign over two feet (2') in height may be placed in any clear
view area. No campaign sign may be attached to any utility pole within a public
right of way. No campaign sign may overhang the travelway or sidewalk in a
public right of way. No campaign sign may be posted on public property within
one hundred fifty feet (150') of a polling place. (Ord. 2015-03, 6-2-2015)
         b.   Limitation Of Size Of Campaign Signs: In any residential zone,
said campaign sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and, if
detached, shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. Said sign shall not be
erected in such a manner as to constitute a roof sign. In commercial zoning
districts campaign signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area and
eight feet (8') in height.
         c.   Removal Of Illegal Campaign Signs: The ordinance enforcement
officers are authorized to remove any campaign sign found posted within the
corporate limits of the city when such sign is in violation of the provisions
of this section. For the purpose of removing campaign signs, the ordinance
enforcement officer is empowered to take all steps necessary to remove the
unauthorized sign including, but not limited to, enlisting the aid or
assistance of any other department of the city and to secure legal process to
an end that all such signs shall be expeditiously removed from any property
where posted.
         d.   Notice: Upon discovery, the ordinance enforcement officer shall
immediately notify by telephone the candidate, committee or person responsible
for the posting of any sign in violation of this section, indicating the
location of the sign and that the sign must be removed within twenty four (24)
hours. If the address or phone number of the person responsible for the
violating sign is not known, the sign shall be removed under the provisions as
set forth in subsection B6c of this section.
         e.   Storage And Return: If after twenty four (24) hours of notice
given under subsection B6d of this section any political sign has not been
removed, the ordinance enforcement officer shall remove said campaign sign and
keep a record of the location from which the sign was removed. She/he shall
store the sign in a safe location for at least thirty (30) days. The ordinance
enforcement officer shall return any campaign sign upon the payment of the fee
provided in subsection B6f of this section.
         f.   Removal Of Sign Charge: The city shall be entitled to receive the
sum of five dollars ($5.00) for every campaign sign removed by the police
department to cover the expense of removal, notice and storage. In cases where
unusual effort is needed to remove a sign, the penalty fee shall then be
assessed.
         g.   Persons Responsible: In a campaign for political office, the
candidate for such office shall be deemed the person responsible for the
posting of campaign signs, unless he/she first notifies the city recorder or
police department of another person who is responsible. In such case, the
candidate shall provide the name, address, telephone number, and signed consent
of such other responsible person. In a campaign regarding a ballot measure, the
president of the committee supporting or opposing such ballot measure shall be
deemed responsible, unless he first notifies the city recorder or police
department of some other person responsible, in the manner described above. The
candidate, or in the case of a ballot measure, the committee president or other
responsible person if so designated, shall be liable to pay any fees or costs
for the removal and storage of illegal signs, as set out herein. Further, such
candidate, committee president, or other designated person, shall be subject to
prosecution for any violation of this section.
         h.   Illegal Signs, Public Nuisance: Campaign signs in violation of
this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be abated as
such by the city. The collection of removal fees shall not preclude the city
from prosecuting any person for violating this section.
         i.   Appeal: Any person deemed responsible under this section shall
have a right to appeal any civil penalty levied to the city council. (Ord.
2011-02, 3-15-2011)
9-6-7: RESIDENTIAL USES:
For all residential uses, only the following signs are hereby permitted and
then only if accessory and incidental to a permitted or special use:
   A.   Name And Address Plates: Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in
gross surface area for each exposed face nor exceeding an aggregate gross
surface area of four (4) square feet indicating the address of the premises and
the name of the occupant.
   B.   Building Name And Address Signs: Name and address signs of buildings
containing six (6) or more residential units indicating only the name of the
building, the name of the development in which it is located, the management
thereof, and/or address of the premises shall be subject to the following:
      1.   Type: Building name and address signs may be either wall signs or
ground signs.
      2.   Number: There shall not be more than one name and address sign for
each building except that where a building abuts two (2) or more streets,
additional such signs, one oriented to each abutting street, shall be
permitted.
      3.   Area: Building name and address signs shall not exceed six (6)
square feet in gross surface area for exposed face nor exceed an aggregate
gross surface area of twelve feet (12').
      4.   Location: Building name and address signs shall not be located
closer than one-half (1/2) the minimum setback required for the zoning district
in which the sign is to be erected or within ten feet (10') of any point of
vehicular access from a zoning lot to a public roadway. The location and
arrangement of all residential development signs shall be subject to the review
and approval of the building department.
      5.   Height: Residential development signs shall not project higher than
seven feet (7'), as measured from base of sign or grade of the nearest adjacent
roadway, whichever is higher.
   C.   Advertising Signs: Signs shall be limited to an identification sign
which does not exceed two (2) square feet located on a single wall or window.
   D.   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs as specified in section
9-6-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02, 3-15-2011)
9-6-8: COMMERCIAL USES:
For all commercial uses, only the following signs are hereby permitted and then
only if accessory and incidental to a permitted or special use:
   A.   A-Frame Signs:
      1.   Location: A-frame signs are permitted in commercial zones. No A-
frame sign shall be placed upon a public right of way. No A-frame sign will be
located closer than five feet (5') to a public right of way, sidewalk,
driveway, or any motor vehicle traffic or foot traffic. A-frame signs shall
only be allowed during business hours.
      2.   Construction: The sign will be made of sturdy construction with a
two inch by four inch (2" x 4") dimensional lumber frame and three-fourths inch
(3/4") exterior grade plywood as the face material. The face shall not exceed
thirty inches by forty eight inches (30" x 48") high, the entire sign shall not
exceed sixty inches (60") high when standing. The sign will be painted to
protect it against the weather and any copy on the sign will be painted. In
case where changeable copy is desired, the message can be placed on paper and
covered with a piece of removable thirty inch by forty eight inch by one-fourth
inch (30" x 48" x 1/4") plexiglass to protect the paper sign from being damaged
by the elements. The sign will be anchored to the ground so that it cannot be
knocked or blown over. The anchorage will not be permanent in nature and will
be removed from the ground when the sign is not in use.
      3.   Number: There shall not be more than one A-frame sign for each
principal business in a multiple-business building, such as a strip mall, or
not more than one A-frame sign per twenty five feet (25') of frontage for a
single principal business building.
   B.   Awning And Canopy Signs:
      1.   Number: There shall not be more than one awning or canopy sign for
each principal building except that where the building abuts two (2) or more
streets, additional such signs, one oriented to each abutting street, shall be
permitted.
      2.   Area: The gross surface area of an awning or canopy sign shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the gross surface area of the smallest face of
the awning or canopy to which such sign is to be affixed.
      3.   Height: An awning or canopy sign shall not project higher than the
top of the awning or canopy to which such sign is to be affixed. Awning or
canopy signs shall maintain a minimum clearance of seven feet (7') to the
bottom of the valance and eight feet (8') to the frame above the sidewalk and
comply with all other clearance requirements.
   C.   Bus Bench Or Shelter Signs:
      1.   Location: Bus bench or bus shelter signs may be located in any
commercial zone and shall be considered on premises detached signs provided
that they are only located at public transportation stops as designated by the
Utah transit authority.
      2.   Number: No more than one bench or shelter may be located at
designated public transportation stops.
      3.   Area: The square footage of advertising on any bench or shelter sign
may be counted as part of the on premises detached limitations.
      4.   License: The sign company shall maintain a current business license.
Each year upon renewal of license a complete list of bench signs located in the
city shall be provided.
      5.   Repair: The city reserves the right to have any bench or shelter
sign found to be in disrepair removed within thirty (30) days after the owner
receives notice.
   D.   Advertising Benches:
      1.   Location: Advertising benches may be located in any commercial zone
and shall be considered on premises detached signs provided that they are only
located at intersections and designated public transportation stops as defined
in subsection C of this section.
      2.   Number: No more than two (2) advertising benches may be located per
intersection and no more than one advertising bench at each site.
      3.   Area: The square footage of advertising on any bench or shelter sign
may be counted as part of the on premises detached limitations.
      4.   License: The sign company shall maintain a current business license.
Each year upon renewal of license a complete list of bench signs located in the
city shall be provided.
      5.   Repair: The city reserves the right to have any bench or shelter
sign found to be in disrepair removed within thirty (30) days after the owner
receives notice.
   E.   Ground Signs, Pole Signs Or Monument Signs:
      1.   Number: There shall not be more than one ground, monument or pole
sign for each principal building except that where the building abuts two (2)
or more streets, additional such signs, one oriented to each abutting street,
shall be permitted.
      2.   Area: The gross surface area of a ground, monument or pole sign
shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet for each exposed face nor
exceed an aggregate gross area of three hundred (300) square feet.
      3.   Location: A ground, monument or pole sign may be located in any
required yard, but shall not extend over any lot line or within ten feet (10')
of any point of vehicular access from a zoning lot to a public roadway.
      4.   Height: A ground or monument sign shall not project higher than
twenty feet (20') and a pole sign shall not project higher than forty five feet
(45'), as measured from base of sign or ground of nearest adjacent roadway,
whichever is lower. A pole sign shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet
(10') between the ground and the underside of the sign located on said pole.
   F.   Projecting Signs:
      1.   Number: There shall not be more than one projecting sign for each
principal building except that where the building abuts two (2) or more
streets, additional such signs, one oriented to each abutting street, shall be
permitted.
      2.   Area: The gross surface area of a projecting sign shall not exceed
thirty (30) square feet in gross surface area for each exposed face nor exceed
an aggregate gross surface area of sixty (60) square feet.
      3.   Location: Projecting signs will be allowed to extend even with the
roofline or parapet wall of the building. When a building has more than one
level the wall on which the sign is installed will govern.
      4.   Height: Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet
(10') between the ground and any part of a projecting sign.
   G.   Roof Signs:
      1.   Number: There shall not be more than one roof sign for each
principal building except that where the building abuts two (2) or more
streets, additional such signs, one oriented to each abutting street shall be
permitted.
      2.   Area: The gross surface area of a roof sign shall not exceed one
hundred fifty (150) square feet.
      3.   Height: Roof signs must not exceed the maximum allowable height of
the building within the zone in which it is located.
      4.   Special: All roof signs shall be installed or erected in such a
manner that there is no visual support structure; no visual guide wires,
braces, or secondary supports. Roof signs shall be finished in such a manner
that the visual appearance from all sides is such that they appear to be part
of the building itself.
   H.   Wall Signs:
      1.   Number: There shall be not more than two (2) wall signs for each
principal building except that where the building abuts two (2) or more
streets, additional such signs, one oriented to each abutting street shall be
permitted.
      2.   Area: The gross surface area of wall signs shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the area of the building wall, including doors and windows, to
which the sign is to be affixed or one hundred fifty (150) square feet,
whichever is smaller.
      3.   Location: A wall sign may be located on the outermost wall of any
principal building, but shall not project more than sixteen inches (16") from
the wall to which the sign is to be affixed. The location and arrangement of
all wall signs may be subject to the review and approval of the city council.
      4.   Height: A wall sign shall not project higher than the parapet line
of the wall to which the sign is to be affixed or thirty five feet (35'), as
measured from the base of the building wall to which the sign is to be affixed,
whichever is lower.
      5.   Special Conditions: Where a principal building is devoted to two (2)
or more permitted uses, the operator of each such use may install a wall sign
upon his/her proportionate share of the building wall to which the sign is to
be affixed. The maximum gross surface area of each wall sign shall be
determined by calculating the proportionate share of the area of the building
wall, including doors and windows, to which the sign is to be affixed and
applying such proportion to the total permitted wall sign aggregate gross
surface area for the building.
   I.   Window Signs: Not more than two (2) permanent signs may be painted on
or otherwise displayed from the surface of any window, showcase, or other
similar facility per each ground floor occupancy of a building. The total area
of such signs shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total window area.
(Ord. 2011-02, 3-15-2011)
9-6-9: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Legal Nonconforming Signs: Any sign lawfully existing or under
construction on the effective date hereof which does not conform to one or more
of the provisions of this chapter may be continued in operation and maintained
in good condition indefinitely as a legal nonconforming sign subject to
compliance with the requirements of subsection B of this section.
   B.   Maintenance And Repair Of Legal Nonconforming Signs: Normal maintenance
of legal nonconforming signs including changing of necessary copy,
nonstructural repairs, and incidental alterations which do not extend or
intensify the nonconforming features of the sign shall be permitted. However,
no structural alteration, enlargement or extension shall be made to a legal
nonconforming sign unless the alteration, enlargement, or extension will result
in the elimination of the nonconforming features of the sign. If a legal
nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty
percent (50%) or more of its replacement value at that time, the sign may not
be rebuilt or used thereafter unless it conforms to all the provisions of this
chapter. In the event the damage or destruction of the nonconforming sign is
less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value at the time, the sign
may be rebuilt to its original condition and continue to be displayed. (Ord.
2011-02, 3-15-2011)
9-6-10: REMOVAL OF CERTAIN SIGNS:
   A.   Legal Action: The building official or designee shall institute any
appropriate action or proceeding in any case where any sign is illegally
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained, or in any case where any sign is used in violation of any city
ordinance including, but not limited to, the provisions of this chapter by:
      1.   Issuing Notices Of Violations And Citations: The building official
or designee may issue a written notice of violation to the person having charge
or control or benefit of any sign found to be unsafe or dangerous or in
violation of this code, particularly when the city is contemplating removal of
said sign. Such official may also issue civil citations and swear to
information against violators.
      2.   Effect Of Notice: Each notice of violation as specified in
subsection A1 of this section, may be appealed by filing a request with the
city recorder no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice of
violation to appear before the city council.
      3.   Abating And Removing Unsafe Or Dangerous Sign: If an unsafe or
dangerous sign is not repaired or made safe within five (5) working days, after
giving said notice, the city may at once abate and remove said sign and the
person having charge, control, or benefit of any such sign shall pay to Sunset
City, within thirty (30) calendar days, after written notice is mailed to such
person, the costs incurred in such removal.
   B.   Abating And Removing Illegal Signs:
      1.   Permanent signs installed on private property in violation of this
chapter shall be brought into conformance within thirty (30) calendar days of
written notice by the city, either through removal of the sign or by obtaining
a sign permit. Any sign not brought into compliance within the time period
given in the notice may at once be abated and removed by the building official
or designee. The person responsible for any such illegal sign shall be liable
for the cost incurred in the removal thereof, and the city is authorized to
effect the collection of said cost.
      2.   Temporary signs installed on private property in violation of this
chapter shall be brought into conformance within twenty four (24) hours of
written notice by the city. Any sign not brought into compliance within the
time period given in the notice may at once be abated and removed by the
building official or designee. The person responsible for any such illegal sign
shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal thereof, and the city is
authorized to effect the collection of said cost.
      3.   Any sign posted upon public property may be removed by the city
without notice.
   C.   Obsolete Signs: Any sign, whether existing on or erected after the
effective date hereof, which advertises a business no longer being conducted or
a product no longer being offered for sale in or from the premises on which the
sign is located, shall be removed or covered within thirty (30) days upon the
cessation of such business or sale of such product by the owner, agent, or
person having the beneficial interest in the building or premises on which such
sign is located.
If the enforcement officer shall find any such sign advertising a business no
longer being conducted or a product no longer being offered for sale in or from
the premises on which the sign is located has not been removed within thirty
(30) days upon the cessation of such business or sale of product, he/she shall
give written notice to the owner, agent or person having the beneficial
interest in the building or the premises on which such is located. Removal of
the sign shall be effected within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice
from the enforcement officer.
If such sign is not removed after the conclusion of such ten (10) day period,
the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to cause the sign to be removed
forthwith at the expense of the owner, agent, or person having the building or
premises on which such sign is located.
   D.   Sign Removal: For purposes of removal, the definition of "sign" shall
include all sign embellishments and structures specifically designed to support
the sign.
   E.   Sign Disposal: Any sign removed by the city pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of in
any manner deemed appropriate by the city. (Ord. 2011-02, 3-15-2011)
9-6-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction of an offense, be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2011-02, 3-15-2011)
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE POOLS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Definitions
9-7-2: Private Pools
9-7-3: Submission Of Plans And Specifications
9-7-4: Permits To Operate
9-7-5: Revocation Of Permits
9-7-6: Inspection
9-7-7: Water Supply
9-7-8: Sewer System
9-7-9: Construction Materials
9-7-10: Design Detail And Structural Stability
9-7-11: Depth Markings And Lines
9-7-12: Inlets And Outlets
9-7-13: Bottom And Side Walls
9-7-14: Overflow Gutters
9-7-15: Skimmers
9-7-16: Recirculation Systems
9-7-17: User Loading
9-7-18: Sand Type Filters
9-7-19: Diatomaceous Earth Type Filters
9-7-20: Ladders, Recessed Treads And Stairs
9-7-21: Decks And Walkways
9-7-22: Diving Areas
9-7-23: Disinfectant And Chemical Feeders
9-7-24: Lighting, Ventilation And Electrical
9-7-25: Dressing Rooms
9-7-26: Restrooms And Showers
9-7-27: Visitor And Spectator Areas
9-7-28: Lifesaving Equipment
9-7-29: Disinfection And Quality Of Water
9-7-30: Cleaning
9-7-31: Supervision Of Pools
9-7-32: Supervision Of Bathers
9-7-33: Penalty
9-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Words and terms used in this Chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them
as provided in the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code. (1997 Code)
9-7-2: PRIVATE POOLS:
   A.   Construction; Permit Required: No person shall begin construction of a
private swimming pool or shall substantially alter or reconstruct any private
swimming pool without first obtaining a City building permit. One set of plans
and specifications shall be submitted for the approval of such matters as
zoning, electrical, structural, plumbing and footage requirements.
   B.   Built According To Plans: The pool and facilities shall be built in
accordance with the plans as approved unless approval of changes has been given
in writing by the Building Inspector. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
   C.   Continuous Deck: Swimming pools shall have a continuous deck of at
least five feet (5') extending completely around the circumference.
   D.   Fencing: Swimming pools shall be surrounded by protective fence,
building or obstruction at least six feet (6') high either surrounding the pool
or the yard. The entrance way must be capable of being locked. (Ord. 11-2-3-71,
5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
   E.   Protective Covering When Not In Use: Pools when drained and not in use
shall be covered with a protective covering capable of reducing danger to
falling children.
   F.   Sewer System; Drainage: There shall be no direct physical connection
between the sewer system and any drain from the swimming pool or recirculation
system. Any swimming pool or gutter drain or overflow from the recirculation
system, when discharged to the sewer system, storm drain or other approved
natural drainage course, shall connect through a suitable air gap so as to
preclude possibility of backup of sewage or waste into the swimming pool piping
system. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-3: SUBMISSION OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Prior To Construction: No person shall begin construction of a public
pool or shall substantially alter or reconstruct any public pool without first
having submitted four (4) sets of plans and specifications to the County Health
Department for review and approval. The plans shall be prepared by an architect
or engineer licensed to practice in the State. All plans and specifications
shall be submitted in quadruplicate and the County Health Department shall
arrange for the review and approval of the plans and specifications by other
appropriate departments concerned with such matters as zoning, electrical,
structural and plumbing requirements. No permit to construct, alter or renovate
shall be issued by the County Health Department until approval is granted by
the other departments involved.
   B.   Application: The application for permit to construct or remodel a
public pool shall be on such forms as may be prescribed by the County Health
Department, together with any supporting data as may be required for the proper
review of the plans.
   C.   Built According To Plans; Inspections: The pool and facilities shall be
built in accordance with the plans as approved unless approval of changes has
been given in writing by the County Health Department. The owner or his agent
shall notify the County Health Department as specific predetermined stages of
construction and at the time of completion of the pool to permit adequate
inspections of the pool and related equipment during and after construction.
The pool shall not be placed in operation until such inspections show
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971;
1997 Code)
   D.   Criteria: The criteria to be followed by the County Health Department
in the review and approval of plans shall be as set forth in this Chapter.
   E.   Plans And Specifications: The plans shall be drawn to scale and
accompanied by proper specifications as to permit a comprehensive engineering
review of the plans including the piping and hydraulic details and shall
include:
      1.   Plan and sectional views with all necessary dimensions of both the
pool and surrounding area.
      2.   A piping diagram showing all appurtenances including treatment
facilities in sufficient detail, as well as pertinent elevation data to permit
a hydraulic analysis of the system.
      3.   The specifications shall contain details on all treatment equipment,
including catalog identification of pumps, chlorinators, chemical feeders,
filters, strainers, interceptors and related equipment. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-
1971)
9-7-4: PERMITS TO OPERATE:
No person shall operate or maintain a public pool unless he has obtained a
permit to operate such pool from the County Health Department. Such permits
shall be obtained by January 1 of each year, and shall be valid for one year
unless otherwise revoked for cause. Only persons who comply with the
regulations contained in this Chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain
such a permit. Such permits are not transferable. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-5: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
   A.   Failure To Comply: The County Health Department may revoke any permit
for operation or construction of a public pool for failure to comply with this
Chapter or in cases where the permit has been obtained through nondisclosure,
misrepresentation, or misstatement of a material fact.
   B.   Notice In Writing: Before a permit is revoked, the person to whom the
permit has been issued shall have notice in writing enumerating instances of
failure to comply with this Chapter. He shall be given an opportunity for
appeal to the County Health Department within thirty (30) days of notice
regarding the reasonableness of the revocation of the permit.
   C.   Reissuance: The permit shall be reissued upon proper application and
upon presentation of evidence that the deficiencies causing revocation have
been corrected. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-6: INSPECTION:
The County Health Department is authorized to conduct such inspections as it
deems necessary to ensure compliance with all provisions of this Chapter and
shall have right to entry at any reasonable hour to the swimming pool for this
purpose. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-7: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Requirements Of County Health Department: The water supply serving the
pool and all plumbing fixtures, including drinking fountains, lavatories and
showers, shall meet the requirements of the County Health Department for
potable water, unless waived by the County Health Department.
   B.   Protection Against Backflow: All portions of the water distribution
system serving the swimming pool and auxiliary facilities shall be protected
against backflow. Water introduced into the pool, either directly or to the
recirculation system, shall be supplied through an air gap (Uniform Swimming
Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, 1988 Edition, as updated). When such connections
are not possible, the supply shall be protected by a suitable backflow
preventer (Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, 1988 Edition, as
updated) installed on the discharge side of the last control valve to the
fixture, device or appurtenance. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
9-7-8: SEWER SYSTEM:
   A.   Adequate: The sewer system shall be adequate to serve the facility,
including bathhouse, locker room and related accommodations. (Ord. 11-2-3-71,
5-6-1971)
   B.   No Connection With Drain: There shall be no direct physical connection
between the sewer system and any drain from the pool or recirculation system.
Any pool or gutter drain or overflow from the recirculation system when
discharged to the sewer system, storm drain or other approved natural drainage
course shall connect through a suitable air gap so as to preclude possibility
of backup of sewage or waste into the pool piping system.
   C.   Discharge: The sanitary sewer serving the pool and auxiliary facilities
shall discharge to the public sewer system wherever possible. Where no such
sewer is available, the connection shall be made to a suitable disposal plant
designed, constructed and operated in accordance with the requirements of the
County Health Department. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
9-7-9: CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS:
   A.   General Requirements: Pools and all appurtenances thereto shall be
constructed of materials which are inert, nontoxic to persons, impervious,
permanent and enduring; which can withstand the design stresses, which will
provide a tight tank with a smooth and easily cleaned surface, or to which a
smooth, easily cleaned surface finish can be applied, and which may be finished
in white or light color.
   B.   Sand Bottoms Not Permitted: Sand or earth bottoms are not permitted in
pool construction.
   C.   Finish: The pool finish, including bottoms and sides, must be of white
or light colored material, nontoxic to persons, with a smooth finished surface
without cracks or joints bonded to the supporting members, excluding structural
expansion joints. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
9-7-10: DESIGN DETAIL AND STRUCTURAL STABILITY:
   A.   Responsibility Of Architect: The designing architect or engineer shall
be responsible for certifying to the structural stability and safety of the
pool.
   B.   No Limits For Length And Width: No limits are specified for length and
width of swimming pools, except that swimming pools used for competition should
meet required dimensions, and the requirements for diving areas as outlined in
Section
9-7-21 of this Chapter shall be observed. Consideration shall be given to shape
from the standpoint of safety and the need to facilitate supervision of bathers
using the pool.
   C.   Circulation: Provisions shall be made for complete, continuous
circulation of water through all parts of the swimming pool. All swimming pools
shall have a recirculation system with necessary treatment and filtration
equipment as required in this Chapter unless turnover rate requirements can be
met by continuous introduction and wasting of water supply under conditions
satisfying all other requirements of this Chapter.
   D.   Shape And Location; Safety: The shape of any swimming pool and design
and location of all appurtenances shall be such that the circulation of the
pool water and control of swimmers' safety are not impaired. Wading facilities
for children shall be served by the swimming pool recirculation system with
turnover rates of once every two (2) hours. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-11: DEPTH MARKINGS AND LINES:
Depth of water shall be plainly marked at or above the water surface on the
vertical wall of the swimming pool and on the edge of the deck or walk next to
the swimming pool at maximum points and at the points of break between the deep
and shallow portions and at intermediate one foot (1') increments of depth,
spaced at not more than twenty five feet (25') intervals measured peripherally.
The depth in the diving areas will be appropriately marked. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-
6-1971)
9-7-12: INLETS AND OUTLETS:
   A.   Outlet At Deepest Point: All pools shall be provided with an outlet at
the deepest point to permit the pool to be completely and easily emptied.
Openings must be covered by a proper grating which is not readily removable by
bathers. Outlet openings of the grating in the floor of the pool shall be at
least four (4) times the area of discharge pipe or provide sufficient area so
the maximum velocity of the water passing the grate will not exceed one and
one-half feet (11/2') per second. The maximum not over one inch (1").
   B.   Multiple Outlets: In pools with deep water at or near one end, multiple
outlets shall be provided where the width of the pool is more than thirty feet
(30'). In such cases, outlets shall be spaced not more than thirty feet (30')
apart, nor more than fifteen feet (15') from side walls.
   C.   No Direct Connection To Sewer: No direct connections to sewers shall be
permitted and all drains from the pool to sewers shall be broken at a point
where any sewage which may backup from the sewer with overflow to waste instead
of reaching the pool.
   D.   Devices For Draining: Devices for draining pools shall be sized to
prevent the surcharging of the sanitary sewer.
   E.   Location Of Inlets: Inlets for fresh and/or repurified water shall be
located to produce uniform circulation of water and to facilitate the
maintenance of a uniform disinfectant residual throughout the entire pool,
without existence of dead spots. Inlets from the circulation system shall be
flush with the pool wall and submerged at least five feet (5') below the water
level, or not to exceed three inches (3") above pool floor. Where water from
the public water system is added to the pool, cross-connections between the
public water system and the pool water shall be eliminated by pumping makeup
water from a pump suction well or admitting water to the pool by means of an
air gap connection preferable located under a low diving board. (Ord. 11-2-3-
71, 5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
   F.   Placement: Inlets shall be placed every ten feet (10') around pool
perimeter. Modifications will be acceptable for small pools if ample
recirculation of fresh water is assured.
   G.   Design: Each inlet shall be designed as an unadjustable orifice with
sufficient head loss to ensure balancing of flow through all inlets. (Ord. 11-
2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-13: BOTTOM AND SIDE WALLS:
   A.   Slope: The slope of the bottom of any portion of the swimming pool
having a water depth of less than five feet (5') shall not be more than one
foot (1') in twelve feet (12') and said slope shall be uniform. In portions
with a depth greater than five feet (5'), the slope shall not exceed one foot
(1') in three feet (3').
   B.   Vertical Depth Or Distance: Walls of a swimming pool shall be either:
1) vertical for water depths of at least six feet (6'); or 2) vertical for a
distance of three feet (3') below the water level which the wall may be curved
to the bottom with a radius not greater than the difference between the depth
at that point and three feet (3'); provided, that vertical is interpreted to
permit slopes not greater than one foot (1') horizontally for each five feet
(5') of depth of side wall (11 degrees from vertical).
   C.   Safety Ledges: Safety ledges, when provided on vertical walls in the
deep portion of the swimming pool, shall be not over four inches (4") wide, at
least four feet (4') below the water surface, and shall slope one-half inch (1/
2") in four inches (4") toward the pool. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-14: OVERFLOW GUTTERS:
   A.   Required: Overflow gutters shall be required on all swimming pools
having a surface area of over one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet.
Pools having a surface area of less than one thousand six hundred (1,600)
square feet shall be provided either with overflow gutters or skimmers.
   B.   Extend Around Pool: Overflow gutters shall extend completely around the
swimming pool, except at steps or recessed ladders. The overflow gutters shall
also serve as a handhold. This gutter shall be capable of continuously removing
one hundred percent (100%) or more of the recirculated water and return it to
the filter. All overflow gutters shall be connected to the recirculation system
through a properly designed surge tank. The gutter, drains, and return piping
to the surge tank shall be designed to rapidly remove overflow water caused by
recirculation displacement, wave action or other causes produced from the
maximum pool bathing load. The opening into the gutter beneath the coping shall
be not less than three inches (3"). Where large gutters are used, they shall be
designed to prevent entrance or entrapment of bathers' arms or legs. The
overflow edge or lip shall be rounded and not thicker than two and one-half
inches (21/2") for the top two inches (2"). The overflow outlets shall be
provided with outlet pipes which shall in any case be at least two inches (2")
in diameter. The outlet fittings shall have a clear opening in the grating at
least equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the cross-sectional area of the
outlet pipe.
   C.   Roll-Out Or Deck Level: Nothing in this Section shall preclude the use
of roll-out or deck level type swimming pools. Such designs shall conform to
the general provisions relating to overflow rates. The design of the curb and
handhold shall conform to accepted standards, and the approval of the County
Health Department shall be based on detailed review of this feature of
construction and evaluated in the light of proposed use of the pool. (Ord. 11-
2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-15: SKIMMERS:
Skimmers complying in all respects with the standards of the Uniform Swimming
Pool, Spa, and Hot Tub Code are permitted on public swimming pools with not
more than one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet of water surface area,
providing approved handholds are installed and sufficient motion to the pool
water is induced by the pressure return inlets. At least one skimming device
shall be provided for each five hundred (500) square feet of water surface area
or fraction thereof. Where two (2) or more skimmers are required, they shall be
so located as to minimize interference with each other. Handholds shall consist
of bullnosed coping not over two and one-half inches (21/2") thick for the
outer two inches (2") or an equivalent approved handhold. The handholds must be
no more than nine inches (9") above the normal water line. Skimming devices
shall be built into the pool wall and shall meet the following general
specifications: (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
   A.   Design: The piping and other pertinent components of skimmers shall be
designed for a total capacity of at least eighty percent (80%) of the required
filter flow of the recirculation system and no skimmer shall be designed for a
flow-through rate of less than thirty (30) gallons per minute or 3.75 gallons
per minute per lineal inch of weir.
   B.   Automatically Adjustable: The skimmer weir shall be automatically
adjustable and shall operate freely with continuous action to variations in
water level over a range of at least four inches (4"). The weir shall operate
at all flow variations.
   C.   Removable And Cleanable Basket: An easily removable and cleanable
basket or screen through which all overflow water must pass shall be provided
to trap large solids.
   D.   Prevention Of Airlock: The skimmer shall be provided with a device to
prevent airlock in the suction line. If an equalizer pipe is used, it shall
provide an adequate amount of water for pump suction should the water of the
swimming pool drop below the weir level; provided, that if any other device,
surge tank or arrangement is used, a sufficient amount of water for pump
suction shall be assured.
   E.   Equalizer Pipe; Size Requirements: Where the equalizer pipe is used, it
shall be sized to meet the capacity requirements of the filter and pump and
shall in no case be less than two inches (2") in diameter. This pipe shall be
located about one foot (1') below the lowest overflow level of the skimmer. It
shall be provided with a valve or equivalent device that will remain tightly
closed under normal operating conditions.
   F.   Sturdy Materials: The skimmer shall be of sturdy, corrosion resistant
materials. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-16: RECIRCULATION SYSTEMS:
   A.   Required: A recirculation system, consisting of pumps, filter, water
conditioning and disinfection equipment and other accessory equipment shall be
provided which will clarify and disinfect the swimming pool volume of water in
eight (8) hours or less, thus providing a minimum turnover of at least three
(3) times in twenty four (24) hours, except that the recirculation rate shall
be increased to provide a six (6) hour turnover for swimming pools subjected to
heavy bather loads.
   B.   Design: All piping shall be designed to reduce friction losses to a
minimum and to carry the required quantity of water at a reasonable velocity.
Piping shall be of nontoxic material, resistant to corrosion, and also to
withstand operating pressures. Pipes shall be identified by color code or tags.
   C.   Strainers: The recirculation system shall include a strainer to prevent
hair, lint, etc., from reaching the pump. Strainers shall be corrosion
resistant with openings not more than one-eighth inch (1/8") in size providing
a free flow area at least four (4) times the area of pump suction line and
shall be readily accessible for frequent cleaning.
   D.   Vacuum Cleaning System: A vacuum cleaning system shall be provided.
When this system is an integral part of the recirculation system, sufficient
connections shall be located in the walls of the swimming pool, at least eight
inches (8") below the water line.
   E.   Rate Of Flow Indicator: A rate of flow indicator, reading in gallons
per minute, shall be installed and located, preferably on the swimming pool
return line, so that the rate of recirculation and backwash rate will be
indicated. The indicator shall be capable of measuring flows from a few gallons
per minute up to at least one and one-half (11/2) times the design flow rate,
and shall be accurate within ten percent (10%) of true flow and shall be easy
to read. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
   F.   Pumps: Pumps shall be of adequate capacity to provide the required
number of turnovers of swimming pool water as specified in the Uniform Swimming
Pool, Spa, and Hot Tub Code, and shall be so located as to eliminate the need
for priming. The pump or pumps shall be capable of providing flow adequate for
the backwashing of filters. Under normal conditions, the pump or pumps shall
supply the recirculation rate of flow at a dynamic head which includes, in
addition to usual equipment, fittings, and friction losses, an additional loss
of fifteen feet (15') for sand filters or gravity diatomite filters, and forty
feet (40') for pressure diatomite filters, as well as pool inlet orifice less
of about fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
   G.   Heaters: Swimming pools equipped with heaters shall have a fixed
thermometer in the recirculation line at the heater outlet and another near the
outlet to the pool. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-17: USER LOADING:
   A.   Computing: For the purposes of computing user loading, those portions
of the swimming pool five feet (5') or less in depth shall be designed as
"nonswimmer" areas. Portions of the pool over five feet (5') in depth shall be
designed as the "swimming" area.
   B.   Determination: In order to compute swimmer and bather capacity,
swimming pool areas shall be determined as follows.
      1.   Ten (10) square feet of pool water surface area shall be provided
for each nonswimmer expected at time of maximum load.
      2.   Twenty four (24) square feet shall be provided for each swimmer
expected at time of maximum load.
      3.   Three hundred (300) square feet of pool water surface area shall be
reserved around each diving board or diving platform and this area shall not be
included in computing the area of the swimming section.
   C.   Exception: The County Health Department shall make additional allowance
for bathers in cases of swimming pools with extensive deck areas used by
patrons for lounging or sun bathing. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-18: SAND TYPE FILTERS:
   A.   Requirements: The following requirements are equally applicable to
either gravity or pressure sand type filters, all of which shall comply in all
respects with the standards of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code.
Sand filter underdrains shall be designed to provide equal distribution of wash
water. Specially designed units of proved adequacy, such as "Wheeler" bottoms,
will be accepted. Pipe underdrain systems shall consist of a central manifold
and laterals with drilled orifices. The ratio of total area of all orifices to
sand bed area shall not exceed tolerances allowed by the Uniform Swimming Pool,
Spa and Hot Tub Code. Total cross-sectional area of all laterals shall be at
least twice the total area of all orifices and the cross-sectional area of the
manifold shall be at least one and one-half (11/2) times (preferably 2 times)
the total cross-sectional area of all laterals. Orifices in the manifold shall
be drilled along the top and provided with umbrella strainers. All other
orifices shall be drilled on the underside of laterals. Orifice and lateral
spacing shall be about equal, and variations from nominal orifice spacing shall
not exceed three-quarter inches (3/4"). If the manifold size is larger than the
piping to which it connects outside the filters, reducers shall be used for the
transition. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
      1.   Gravel supporting the sand bed in sand filters shall consist of at
least four (4) layers, suitably graded from a coarse size of two and one-half
inches (21/2") above strainers. The bottom course shall extend above the top of
laterals or strainer nozzles. Gravel shall consist of hard rounded particles.
      2.   Filter sand should consist preferable of clean silica grains and the
sand bed shall be at least twenty four inches (24") deep. Effective size shall
be between 0.35 millimeter and 0.55 millimeter and the uniformity coefficient
shall not exceed 1.7. It is desirable to support the filter sand on a three
inch (3") layer of torpedo sand having an effective size between 0.8 millimeter
and two (2) millimeters and a uniformity coefficient of not more than 1.7.
   B.   Gravity Filters: Wash water troughs for gravity filters shall be
designed to handle the full wash water flow of fifteen (15) gallon per minute
square foot of filter surface area without submergence. The lip of the trough
(or normal operating water level in the case of gravity vacuum diatomite
filters) shall be at least thirty six inches (36") below the pool overflow
through lip or such other distance as is necessary to ensure delivery of full
filtration flow to the filter either through the overflow through drainage
system or through the main pool drain with water standing six inches (6") over
the wash water trough lip. Troughs shall be so spaced that each trough serves
the same filter surface area and so that maximum horizontal travel of wash
water to trough lip does not exceed three feet (3'). Troughs shall be set far
enough above the sand surface to provide a free space between trough bottom and
sand surface of at least one-half (1/2) the sand bed depth. In pressure filters
a pipe outlet may be used in lieu of a wash water trough, provided the outlet
is placed high enough to ensure low lateral velocities of wash water above the
surface of the expanded sand bed, assuming fifty percent (50%) expansion.
Filter walls must extend vertically at least to this assumed level of the
expanded sand surface.
   C.   Pressure Filters: Pressure sand type filters shall be designed for a
filter rate not to exceed three (3) gallons per minute per square foot of bed
area at time of maximum head loss with sufficient area to meet the design rate
of flow required by prescribed turnover.
   D.   Pressure Gauges: The filter system shall be provided with influent and
effluent pressure gauges and air-relief valves at or near the high point of the
filter or piping system.
   E.   Valves And Piping: The filter system shall be designed with necessary
valves and piping to permit:
      1.   Filtering to swimming pool.
      2.   Individual backwashing of filters to waste at a rate of not less
than fifteen (15) gallons per minute per square foot of filter area.
      3.   Isolation of individual filters for repairs while other units are in
service.
      4.   Complete drainage of all parts of the system.
      5.   Necessary maintenance, operation and inspection in a convenient
manner.
   F.   Access Opening: Each pressure type filter tank shall be provided with
an access opening of not less than a standard eleven inch by fifteen inch (11"
x 15") manhole cover.
   G.   Means Of Dosing With Chemicals: Suitable means of dosing recirculated
water with necessary chemicals shall be provided.
   H.   Pressure Safety: On pressure type filters, the tank and its integral
parts shall be constructed of substantial material capable of withstanding
continuous anticipated usage and shall be designed for a pressure safety factor
of four (4) based on the maximum shutoff head of the pump. This shutoff head
for design purposes shall in no case be considered less than fifty (50) pounds
per square inch. The manufacturer shall certify compliance with this
requirement. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-19: DIATOMACEOUS EARTH TYPE FILTERS:
   A.   Comply With Standards: All diatomaceous earth type filters, whether of
the vacuum or pressure type, shall comply in all respects with the standards of
the Uniform Swimming, Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code covering such filters, and
sufficient filtering area shall be provided to meet the design pump capacity as
required by the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code. Diatomaceous earth
filters shall be so designed that elements can be hosed down during each
washing cycle. Any design which provides the equivalent in washing
effectiveness will be acceptable. Where necessary, a hose bib shall be provided
in the vicinity of the filter to facilitate the washing operation. (Ord. 11-2-
3-71, 5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
   B.   Rate Of Filtration: The design rate of filtration shall not be greater
than 2.0 gpm square feet of effective filtering surface without continuous body
feed, and no greater than 2.5 gpm square feet with continuous body feed.
   C.   Accurate Device: Where body feed is provided, the device shall be
accurate to within ten percent (10%) and dependable, and shall be capable of
continually feeding within a calibrated range, adjustable from two (2) to six
(6) ppm, at the design capacity of the recirculation pump.
   D.   Filtering Area: Filtering area, where fabric is used, shall be
determined on the basis of effective filtering surfaces as created by the
septum supports with no allowances for areas of impaired filtration, such as
broad supports, folds or portions which may bridge.
   E.   Materials: The filter and all component parts shall be of such
materials, design and construction to withstand normal continuous use without
significant deformation, deterioration, corrosion or wear which could adversely
affect filter operation.
   F.   Design And Construction: The filter shall be so designed and
constructed, or provision made, to preclude the introduction of appreciable
quantities of filter-aid into the pool during precoating operations.
   G.   Tank Requirements: The tank containing the filter elements shall be
constructed of steel, plastic, or other suitable material, which will
satisfactorily provide resistance to corrosion, with or without coating.
Pressure type filters shall be designed for a minimum working pressure of fifty
(50) pounds per square inch with a four (4) to one safety factor. Vacuum type
filters shall be designed to withstand the pressure developed by the weight of
the water contained therein and closed vacuum type filters shall, in addition,
be designed to withstand the crushing pressure developed under a vacuum of
twenty five inches (25") of mercury with a safety factor of 1.5 in both
instances. The septa of elements which support the filter-aid shall be of
corrosion-resistant material. The septa shall be constructed to be resistant to
rupture under conditions of the maximum differential pressure between influent
and effluent which can be developed by the circulating pump and of adequate
strength to resist any additional stresses developed by the cleaning operation.
   H.   Use Of Dissimilar Metals: Where dissimilar metals, which may set up
galvanic electric currents, are used in the filters, provisions shall be made
to resist electrolytic corrosion. The filters shall be designed in such a
manner that they may be easily disassembled with allowances made for adequate
working space above and around the filter to allow the removal and replacement
of any part and for proper maintenance.
   I.   Filter Plant: The filter plant shall be provided with such pressure,
vacuum or compound gauges as are required to indicate the condition of the
filter. In vacuum type filter installations where the circulating pump is two
(2) horsepower or higher, an adjustable high vacuum automatic shut-off shall be
provided to prevent damage to the pump by cavitation.
   J.   Equipped For Cleaning: All filters shall be equipped for cleaning by
one or more of the following methods: backwashing, air-bump-assist backwashing,
spray wash (mechanical or manual) or agitation.
   K.   Drainage: Provisions shall be made for completely and rapidly draining
the filter. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-20: LADDERS, RECESSED TREADS AND STAIRS:
   A.   Location: Steps or ladders shall be provided at the shallow end of the
swimming pool if the vertical distance from the bottom of the pool to the deck
or walk is over two feet (2'). Recessed steps or ladders shall be provided at
the deep portion of the swimming pool, and if the pool is over thirty feet
(30') wide, such steps or ladders shall be installed on each side.
   B.   Steps; Design: Steps leading into the swimming pool shall be on nonslip
design, have a minimum tread of twelve inches (12") and a maximum rise or
height of ten inches (10"). There shall be no abrupt drop off or submerged
projection into the pool, unless guarded by handrails.
   C.   Ladder; Design: Swimming pool ladders shall be corrosion resistant and
shall be equipped with nonslip treads. All ladders shall be so designed as to
provide a handhold and shall be rigidly installed. There shall be a clearance
of not more than five inches (5") nor less than three inches (3") between any
ladder and the pool wall. If steps are inserted in the walls or if stepholes
are provided, they shall be of such design that they may be cleaned readily and
shall be arranged to drain into the pool to prevent the accumulation of dirt
thereon. Stepholes shall have a minimum tread of five inches (5") and a minimum
width of fourteen inches (14").
   D.   Handrails: Where steps, stepholes, or ladders are provided within the
swimming pool, there shall be a handrail at the top of both sides thereof,
extending over the coping or edge of the deck.
   E.   Diving Board Supports: Supports, platforms and steps for diving boards
shall be of substantial construction and of sufficient structural strength to
safely carry the maximum anticipated loads. Steps shall be of corrosion
resistant material, easily cleanable, and of nonslip design. Handrails shall be
provided at all steps and ladders leading to diving boards more than one meter
above the water, except those set at fifteen degrees (15°) or more from
vertical. Platforms and diving boards which are over one meter high shall be
protected with guard railings. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-21: DECKS AND WALKWAYS:
A continuous deck at least five feet (5') (and preferably 8 or more feet) wide
shall extend completely around the swimming pool. The deck shall be sloped away
from the pool to drain at a grade of one-fourth inch (1/4") to three-eighths
inch (3/8") per lineal foot and shall have a nonslip surface. Deck drains
connected to the recirculation system or gutters shall be permitted only with
specific permission of the County Health Department. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-22: DIVING AREAS:
   A.   Dimensions: The dimensions of the swimming pool in the diving area
shall conform to the following table:
 
Height Of Board Meters Minimum Water Depth At End  Minimum Pool Width At End Of
                       Of Board And 12 Feet Beyond Board And 12 Feet Beyond
0.0 - 2.0              81/2 feet                   20 feet
2.1 - 3.0              10 feet                     30 feet
3.1 or more            111/2 feet                  30 feet
 
   B.   Head Room: At least fifteen feet (15') free and unobstructed head room
shall be provided above diving boards.
   C.   Horizontal Separation: Horizontal separation of ten feet (10') shall be
provided between diving boards and side walls except this may be reduced to
eight feet (8') for surface boards. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-23: DISINFECTANT AND CHEMICAL FEEDERS:
   A.   Requirements: The swimming pool shall be equipped with a chlorinator,
hypochlorinator or other disinfectant feeder or feeders which meet the
following requirements:
      1.   Shall be of sturdy construction and materials which will withstand
wear, corrosion or attack by disinfectant solutions or vapors and which are not
adversely affected by repeated regular adjustments or other conditions
anticipated in the use of the device. The feeder shall be capable of being
easily disassembled for cleaning and maintenance. The design and construction
shall be such as to preclude stoppage from chemicals intended to be used or
foreign materials that may be contained therein. The feeder shall incorporate
failure proof features so that the disinfectant cannot feed directly into the
swimming pool, the pool piping system, water supply system or the swimming pool
enclosure under any type of failure of the equipment or its maintenance.
      2.   Shall be capable of supplying at least the equivalent of one pound
of chlorine per eight (8) hours for each ten thousand (10,000) gallons of
swimming pool capacity under conditions of operation to be anticipated at the
proposed installation. This requirement may be reduced for special purpose
swimming pools.
      3.   Shall have a graduated and clearly marked dosage adjustment to
provide flows from full capacity of twenty five percent (25%) of such capacity.
The device shall be capable of continuous delivery to within ten percent (10%)
of the dosage at any setting.
      4.   When the disinfectant is introduced at the section side of the pump,
a device or method shall be provided to prevent air lock of the pump or
recirculation system.
   B.   Chlorine Gas: When compressed chlorine gas is used, the following
additional features shall be provided:
      1.   The chlorine and chlorinating equipment shall be in a separate well-
ventilated room. Such room shall not be below ground level and shall be
provided with vents near the floor which terminate out-of-doors. The door of
the room shall not open to the outside.
      2.   The chlorinator equipment shall be of rugged design, capable of
withstanding wear without developing leaks.
      3.   Chlorine cylinders shall be anchored to prevent their falling over.
A valve stem wrench shall be maintained on the chlorine cylinder so the supply
can be shut off quickly in the case of an emergency. Valve protection hood
shall be kept in place except when the cylinder is connected.
      4.   The chlorine feeding device shall be designed so that during
accidents or interruptions of the water supply, leaking chlorine gas will be
conducted to the out-of-doors.
      5.   The chlorine shall be a solution feed type, capable of delivering
chlorine at its maximum rate without releasing chlorine gas to the atmosphere.
(Injector water shall be furnished from the pool recirculation system with
necessary pressure increase supplied by a booster pump.)
      6.   The chlorinators shall be designed to prevent the backflow of water
into the chlorine solution container.
      7.   A gas mask designed for use in a chlorine atmosphere and of a type
approved by the U.S. Bureau of Mines shall be provided. In addition,
replacement canisters shall be provided and a record shall be kept of gas mask
usage to ensure that the mask will be serviceable when needed.
      8.   The gas mask shall be kept in a closed cabinet, accessible without a
key, located outside of the room in which the chlorinator is maintained.
      9.   Installation of chlorinator equipment, and operation thereof, shall
be carried on by and under the supervision of personnel experienced with
installation and operation of such equipment.
   C.   Hypochlorite Solution: When a hypochlorite solution is used to be fed
through hypochlorinator equipment, such equipment shall also provide the
following additional features:
      1.   Feed shall be positive under all conditions of pressure in the
circulating system, and without artificial constriction of the pump suction
line whether this line is under vacuum or pressure head.
      2.   Regulation shall be provided to ensure constant feed with varying
supply or back pressure.
      3.   Positive features to prevent backflow from recirculation system to
the solution container, and provision for reducing to a minimum the entry into
swimming pool of free calcium released from calcium hypochlorite.
      4.   Provision to prevent siphoning of hypochlorite solution when the
recirculation pump and hypochlorinator are both turned off. (This applies to
above swimming pool level installations only.)
   D.   Equipment Design And Material: Equipment and piping used to apply
chemicals to the water shall be of such size, design, and material that they
may be cleaned and will be free from clogging, preferably of the positive
displacement type. All material used for such equipment and piping shall be
resistant to action of chemicals to be used therein. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-24: LIGHTING, VENTILATION AND ELECTRICAL:
   A.   Underwater Lighting: Where underwater lighting is used, not less than
0.5 watts shall be employed per square foot of swimming pool water surface
area. Such lights shall be spaced to provide illumination so that all portions
of the pool, including the bottom, may be readily seen without glare.
   B.   Area Lighting: Area lighting shall provide at least 0.6 watts per
square foot of deck area. If such lighting is used for night swimming, area and
swimming pool lighting combined shall provide at least two (2) watts per square
foot of pool area.
   C.   Wiring: All electrical wiring shall conform with the national
electrical code 1  of the National Underwriters Laboratory and applicable local
codes.
   D.   Grounding: Each underwater light shall be individually grounded by
means of a screwed or bolted connection to the metal junction box from which
the branch circuit to the individual light proceeds. Such junction boxes shall
not be located in the swimming pool deck.
   E.   Overhead Wiring: No overhead electrical wiring shall pass within twenty
feet (20') of the swimming pool enclosure.
   F.   Adequate Ventilation: All indoor swimming pools, bathhouses, dressing
rooms, shower rooms, and toilet spaces shall be adequately ventilated either by
natural or mechanical means. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 9, chapter 1 of this code.
9-7-25: DRESSING ROOMS:
   A.   Division Of Bathhouses: Bathhouses to be used simultaneously by both
sexes shall be divided into two (2) parts separated by a tight partition, each
designated for men or women. The entrances and exits shall be screened to break
line of sight.
   B.   Floors: Floors of bathhouses shall be of smooth finish material with
nonslip surface, impervious to moisture, and sloped to a drain. Junctions
between walls and floors shall be coved.
   C.   Partitions: Walls and partitions shall be of smooth, impervious
material, free from cracks or open joints. Partitions between dressing rooms
shall terminate at least ten inches (10") above the floor or shall be placed on
continuous raised masonry or concrete bases at least four inches (4") high.
Lockers shall be set either on solid masonry bases four inches (4") high or on
legs with bottom of locker at least ten inches (10") above the floor. Lockers
shall be properly vented.
   D.   Exception: The requirement relating to bathhouse, dressing rooms,
toilet facilities and showers may be waived when facilities are conveniently
available to swimming pool patrons. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-26: RESTROOMS AND SHOWERS:
   A.   Restroom and shower facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
uniform plumbing code.
   B.   Drinking fountain: Minimum of one to be located in swimming pool area.
   C.   Showers shall be supplied with water at a temperature of at least
ninety degrees Fahrenheit (90°F) at a rate of at least three (3) gallons per
minute. Thermostatic, tempering, or mixing valves shall be installed if
necessary to prevent scalding of the bathers. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-27: VISITOR AND SPECTATOR AREAS:
   A.   Separation: There shall be absolute separation between the spaces used
by visitors and spectators from spaces used by bathers.
   B.   Food Or Drink Not Permitted: No food or drink shall be permitted in the
immediate area of the swimming pool or on the decks surrounding the pool. (Ord.
11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-28: LIFESAVING EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Lifeguard Platform Or Chair: Swimming pools operated primarily for
unorganized use and having an area of more than two thousand two hundred fifty
(2,250) square feet of water surface area shall be provided with an elevated
lifeguard platform or chair. In pools with four thousand (4,000) square feet or
more of water surface area, additional elevated chairs or stations shall be
provided, located so as to provide a clear unobstructed view of the pool bottom
in the area under surveillance.
   B.   Unit Requirements: One unit of lifesaving equipment shall consist of
the following: a ring buoy not more than fifteen inches (15") in diameter to
which shall be attached a sixty foot (60') length of three-sixteenth inch (3/
16") manila rope; a life pole or shepherd's crook type of pole having blunted
ends with minimum length of twelve feet (12'); a separate throwing line of one-
quarter inch (1/4") rope with length not less than one and one-half (11/2)
times the maximum width of pool. Not less than one unit of equipment, as above,
shall be provided at every public swimming pool. One unit shall be presumed to
be adequate for two thousand (2,000) square feet of water surface area, and one
additional unit shall be provided for each additional two thousand (2,000)
square feet, or major fraction thereof of water surface area.
   C.   First Aid Kit: Every swimming pool shall be equipped with a standard
twenty four (24) unit first aid kit which shall be kept filled and ready for
use.
   D.   Mounting: Lifesaving equipment shall be mounted in conspicuous places,
distributed around swimming pool deck, at lifeguard chairs, or elsewhere,
readily accessible, its function plainly marked, and kept in repair and ready
condition. Bathers or others shall not be permitted to tamper with, use for any
purpose other than its intended use, or remove such equipment from its
established location.
   E.   Warning Sign: Where no lifeguard service is provided, a warning sign
shall be placed in plain view and shall state "Warning-No Lifeguard on Duty"
with clearly legible letters, at least four inches (4") high. In addition the
sign shall also state "Children Should Not Use Pool Without an Adult in
Attendance".
   F.   Room For Emergency Care: Every swimming pool shall have a readily
accessible room or area designated and equipped for emergency care. (Ord. 11-2-
3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-29: DISINFECTION AND QUALITY OF WATER:
   A.   Continuous Maintenance: Swimming pools when in use shall be
continuously disinfected by a chemical which imparts an easily measured, free
available residual effect. When chlorine is used, a free chlorine residual of
at least 0.4 ppm shall be maintained throughout the pool whenever it is open
for use. If other halogens are used, residuals of equivalent disinfecting
strength shall be maintained. A testing kit for measuring the concentration of
the disinfectant, accurate to within 0.1 ppm, shall be provided at each
swimming pool.
   B.   Acceptance Of Other Methods: The County Health Department may accept
other disinfecting materials or methods when they have been adequately
demonstrated to provide a satisfactory residual effect which is easily measured
and to otherwise be equally as effective under conditions of use as the
chlorine concentration required herein, and not be dangerous to public health,
create objectionable physiological effects, or impart toxic properties to the
water.
   C.   Alkaline Condition: The swimming pool water shall be maintained in an
alkaline condition as indicated by a pH of not less than 7.2 and not over 8.2.
A pH testing kit accurate to the nearest 0.2 pH unit shall be provided at each
swimming pool. The alkalinity of the water shall be at least fifty (50) ppm as
measured by the methylorange test.
   D.   Sufficient Clarity: The water shall have sufficient clarity at all
times so that a black disc, six inches (6") in diameter, is readily visible
when placed on a white field at the deepest point of the swimming pool. Failure
to meet this requirement shall constitute grounds for immediate closing of the
pool. Recirculation equipment shall be operated continuously. (Ord. 11-2-3-71,
5-6-1971)
   E.   Samples: Not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the samples covering
any considerable period of time shall either: 1) contain more than two hundred
(200) bacteria per milliliter, as determined by the standard (35°c) agar plat
count; or 2) show positive test (confirmed test) for coliform organisms in any
of the five 10-milliliter portions of a sample or more than 1.0 coliform
organisms per fifty (50) ml. when the membrane filter test is used. All samples
shall be collected, dechlorinated, and examined as required by the County
Health Department. The County Health Department shall arrange for the
collection and examination of samples on a routine basis when the swimming pool
is in active use. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
   F.   Chemicals: Chemicals used in controlling the quality of water shall be
demonstrated as imparting no toxic properties to the water. Such chemicals as
may be used for algae control shall be approved for use by the County Health
Department. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-30: CLEANING:
   A.   Removal Of Visible Dirt: Visible dirt on the bottom of the swimming
pool shall be removed every twenty four (24) hours or more frequently as
required.
   B.   Removal Of Scum Or Floating Matter: Visible scum or floating matter on
the swimming pool surface shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours by
sloughing or other effective means. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-31: SUPERVISION OF POOLS:
   A.   Competent Operator: Every swimming pool shall be operated under the
close supervision of a competent operator.
   B.   Operating Records: Proper operating records, which may include the
following as required by the County Health Department, shall be kept daily
showing:
      1.   Total bather loads.
      2.   Peak bather load.
      3.   Volume of fresh water added.
      4.   Operating periods of recirculation pumps and filters and
corresponding rate of flow meter readings.
      5.   Amounts of chemicals used.
      6.   Disinfectant residuals.
      7.   pH readings.
      8.   Maintenance (and malfunctioning) of equipment.
   C.   Limitation Of Bather Load: Bather load shall be limited at all times as
necessary to ensure adequate safety of bathers and suitable pool water quality.
(Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-32: SUPERVISION OF BATHERS:
   A.   Qualified Attendant: A qualified attendant, trained in first aid and
resuscitation, shall be on duty at all times when the swimming pool is open to
use by bathers. Such attendant shall be in full charge of bathing and have
authority to enforce all rules of safety and sanitation. When the swimming pool
is not open for use, access to the pool shall be prohibited. (Ord. 11-2-3-71,
5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
   B.   Personal Regulations: The following personal regulations shall be
enforced:
      1.   All persons using the swimming pool shall take a cleansing shower
bath in the nude, using warm water and soap, and thoroughly rinsing off all
soap suds, before entering the swimming pool room or enclosure. A bather
leaving the pool to use the toilet shall take a second cleansing bath before
returning to the swimming pool room or enclosure.
      2.   Any person having an infectious or communicable disease shall be
excluded from a public swimming pool. Persons having considerable area of
exposed sub-epidermal tissue, open blisters, cuts, etc., shall be warned that
these are likely to become infected and advised not to use the pool.
      3.   Spitting, spouting of water, blowing the nose, etc., in the swimming
pool shall be strictly prohibited.
      4.   No running, boisterous or rough play, except supervised water
sports, shall be permitted in the pool, on the runways, diving boards, floats,
platforms, or in dressing rooms, shower rooms, etc.
      5.   Suitable placards embodying the above personal regulations and
instructions and those relating to suits and towels shall be conspicuously
posted in the swimming pool room or enclosure and in the dressing rooms and
offices at all swimming pools. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971)
9-7-33: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each and every violation of the provisions of this Chapter
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 11-2-3-71, 5-6-1971; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 8
DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW FOR PERMITTED USES
SECTION:
9-8-1: Purpose
9-8-2: Application For Development Plan Review
9-8-3: Definitions
9-8-4: Requirements For Remodeling And Change Of Use To A Permitted Use In An
Existing Structure On A Developed Site
9-8-5: Requirements For New Construction Of A Single- Or Two- Family Dwelling
9-8-6: Requirements For New Construction Of An Undeveloped Or Redeveloped Site
Of Commercial And Multi-Family Uses Or Remodeling Of Existing Structures
9-8-7: Design And Development Plan Review; Decision Process
9-8-8: Final Design And Development Plan Requirements
9-8-9: Appeal Procedure
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the criteria whereby the
city reviews permitted use applications prior to building permit issuance or
approval of the use for which the application is made. This process does not
include any provisions for subdivision review, which is subject to the
requirements of the Sunset City ordinance. A use otherwise permitted may be
denied if it does not meet the required standards of this code.
   B.   To assure that a high level of quality and durability is maintained as
development occurs in the city, this chapter also includes design and material
criteria. General minimum standards for design, building materials, appearance
and landscaping are required to enhance the character of the city. (Ord. 2002-
05, 4-2-2002)
9-8-2: APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW:
All permitted use applications shall be processed by the city business office.
Incomplete applications, or those requiring modifications will be returned to
the applicant. Building permits will not be issued until a permitted use
application has been approved. (Ord. 2002-05, 4-2-2002)
9-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
   DETAILED PLAN: All plans, studies, plats, statements, reports and
information required by all applicable provisions of this code.
   SITE PLAN: A plan drawn to scale showing at a minimum main and accessory
buildings in relation to one another, open space on site, required buffer
spaces, easements, and right of way and to include the following information:
   A.   Date, north arrow and appropriate scale to reflect adequately and
clearly the detail necessary to describe the use. The drawing shall be accurate
in terms of scale and dimensions;
   B.   The legal description of subject property;
   C.   The dimensions and location of existing and proposed improvements,
including, but not limited to, buildings, fencing, hard surfacing and
landscaping;
   D.   Motor vehicle access, including individual parking stalls, circulation
patterns and curb cuts;
   E.   Any driveway or intersecting street across the street from the proposed
development and driveways and streets within one hundred fifty feet (150') of
the development site; and
   F.   The location, height and size of proposed signs, lighting and
advertising devices, if applicable. (Ord. 2002-05, 4-2-2002)
9-8-4: REQUIREMENTS FOR REMODELING AND CHANGE OF USE TO A PERMITTED USE IN AN
EXISTING STRUCTURE ON A DEVELOPED SITE:
Application for remodeling and change of use to a permitted use in an existing
structure on a developed site shall be accompanied by and shall comply with the
following:
   A.   Appropriate application form and fee.
   B.   One paper copy and an electronic copy of the site plan and building
plans, unless a greater number of copies is required by the city due to the
number of reviewing agencies.
   C.   The following design criteria shall be met:
      1.   Sign shall be compatible with the building with regard to
aesthetics, size, design, etc., as determined by the city sign ordinance. The
setback shall comply with the applicable provisions of the sign ordinance.
      2.   Building additions shall be architecturally integrated with the
existing buildings as to design and materials.
      3.   All required on site parking shall be provided.
      4.   All landscaping must be brought into conformance with the current
city regulations. (Ord. 2002-05, 4-2-2002; amd. Ord. 2021-01, 6-1-2021)
9-8-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION OF A SINGLE- OR TWO- FAMILY DWELLING:
Applications for new construction of a single- or two-family dwelling in Sunset
City shall be accompanied by and shall comply with the following:
   A.   Appropriate application form and fees.
   B.   One paper copy and an electronic copy of the detailed plan shall be
required, which plan shall include a site plan and an architectural plan with
appropriate drawings of adequate scale showing building materials, exterior
elevations and floor plans of all proposed structures.
   C.   The following design criteria shall be required:
      1.   Both the exterior building design and the exterior building
materials of all buildings shall be of sufficient quality, durability, and
resistance to the elements to satisfy the purpose of this chapter. Exterior
siding materials may include, but shall not be limited to, brick, concrete,
glass, metal lap, vinyl lap, tile, stone, stucco and/or wood. All exterior
materials shall be installed in a professional workmanlike manner and
maintained.
      2.   The roof of each dwelling shall have a minimum pitch of four inches
to twelve inches (4"–12"). At nongable ends of the roof, there shall be an
overhang at the eaves of not less than twelve inches (12") inclusive of rain
gutters. For homes with cantilevered rooms, sixty percent (60%) of the eave's
length shall have a twelve inch (12") eave. The roof overhang shall be measured
perpendicular to the vertical side of the dwelling. Unfinished galvanized steel
or aluminum roofing shall not be permitted. These pitch and overhang provisions
shall not apply to porch covers, bay windows, or similar appendages.
      3.   Each dwelling shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in depth at
the narrowest point. The depth shall be considered to be the lesser of the two
(2) primary dimensions of the dwelling exclusive of attached garages, bay
windows, room additions, or other similar appendages.
      4.   Any previously occupied dwelling which is to be moved from an
existing location to a lot within Sunset City shall be inspected by the
building official of Sunset City, or his designated representative, prior to
the move to ensure that it meets applicable building codes.
      5.   Prefabricated or modular homes or structures shall have their plans
inspected by the building official of Sunset City, or his designated
representative, prior to the move to ensure that they meet applicable building
codes.
      6.   Landscaping on residential lots shall comply with the following:
         a.   Landscaping shall be installed in front yards between the front
line of the house and the sidewalk on the entire width of the lot excluding the
driveway. On corner lots, landscaping shall be installed in all areas between
the sidewalk and the side of the house between the front property line and the
rear property line which are visible from the public right of way.
         b.   Landscaping shall include at least one tree and a combination of
lawn, shrubs or ground cover. Ground cover may include vegetative vines, low
spreading shrubs, or annual or perennial flowering or foliage plants. Ground
cover may also include mineral or nonliving organic permeable material or
nonliving organic permeable material in not more than fifty percent (50%) of
the net landscaped areas. Mineral ground cover may include such materials as
rocks, boulders, gravel, or brick over sand. Species, size, and placement of
landscape elements shall be determined by the homeowner.
      7.   Final grading of individual lots shall be performed in such a way
that excess water shall be contained entirely on the site or directed to an
improved street or directed to an approved drainage inlet, drainage channel or
drainage easement. Excess water shall not be allowed to drain onto adjacent
private property unless approved as part of an overall system, as reflected in
the subdivision approval or otherwise. Residents shall cooperate to ensure that
drainage water is properly channeled to and through the proper easements. Rain
gutters, in addition to those required by the building code, may be required.
      8.   All dwellings shall meet any additional state or federal
requirements to be classified and taxed as real property.
      9.   All single-family detached dwellings shall have a minimum area of
one thousand (1,000) square feet on the main floor, or floors. A basement shall
not be considered as a main floor. Measurements to determine the minimum area
of a dwelling shall be taken from the outside of foundation walls.
      10.   The site plan shall reflect all easements on the property. (Ord.
2002-05, 4-2-2002; amd. Ord. 2021-01, 6-1-2021)
9-8-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION OF AN UNDEVELOPED OR REDEVELOPED SITE
OF COMMERCIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY USES OR REMODELING OF EXISTING STRUCTURES:
Applications for new construction on an undeveloped or redeveloped site of
commercial and multi-family permitted uses or remodeling of existing structures
shall be accompanied by the following:
   A.   Appropriate application form and fees.
   B.   Three (3) paper copies and an electronic copy of the detail plan shall
be required and shall include the following:
      1.   A site plan which also shows:
         a.   The location of neighborhood box units for mail delivery,
screened trash receptacles and loading areas;
         b.   As a minimum, all curb cuts and intersections within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of the subject property. A greater distance may be required
by the city. Proposed rights of way in, and adjacent to, the subject property
shall be shown;
         c.   Exterior lighting for structures, walkways and parking lots. Such
lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties;
         d.   If open space is proposed, show all areas to be reserved or
dedicated as common park areas or as sites for schools or other public
buildings. Include a statement concerning the development schedule and method
by which open space is to be preserved;
         e.   The development phasing and associated schedule, if phasing is
anticipated. Phasing shall be carefully developed so that each phase can
adequately function on its own;
         f.   The proposed and existing easements and their type, on and
adjacent (within 50 feet) to the subject property. Include any solar access
easements;
         g.   The site plan shall include a table indicating the total area of
the site and the percentage of that total which is occupied by structures,
parking and service areas, and usable open space;
         h.   All existing and proposed fences including type, height and
location;
         i.   Proposed location and size of sewer and water lines as approved
by the city engineer.
      2.   A preliminary grading and drainage plan which shall:
         a.   Be completed by a professional engineer. Existing and proposed
contours at one foot (1') intervals are required unless a variation from the
one foot (1') topographic interval is allowed by the city. The final grading
plan must be approved by the city prior to the issuance of first building
permit;
         b.   Show waterways and ditches on and adjacent to the subject
property and within fifty feet (50'). Piping or relocation shall be approved in
writing by the appropriate ditch company and/or independent water users before
issuance of the building permit.
      3.   A landscape plan shall include plant location, type, size and
quantities.
      4.   An architectural plan which shall include appropriate drawings of
adequate scale showing building materials, exterior elevations and proposed
colors. Garish or bright colors (i.e., orange, bright yellow, or fluorescent
colors) should only be used as accents and not the main color. In no case shall
such coloring exceed five percent (5%) of each wall area.
      5.   Include any other information, exhibits or models that the applicant
deems pertinent.
      6.   Any other information, plans or modifications specifically required
by the following departments, divisions or other agencies shall be attached or
incorporated in the final development plan:
         a.   Sunset City:
            (1)   Building inspection division.
            (2)   Fire department.
            (3)   Public works department.
            (4)   Police department.
         b.   County agencies.
         c.   State agencies.
         d.   Federal and other agencies.
         e.   Public utilities.
      7.   A traffic impact study may be required by the city, and must be
prepared by a registered traffic engineer. The traffic study shall include an
analysis of on site circulation, capacities of existing streets, number of
additional trips which will be generated, origin/destination studies and peak
home traffic generation and movements.
   C.   The following design criteria shall be required:
      1.   All requirements of sections
9-8-4 and
9-8-5 of this chapter, unless modified by any of the following items:
         a.   A minimum of ten percent (10%) of any commercial site and thirty
percent (30%) of a multiple-family residential site shall be landscaped. The
landscaped buffer required along public streets by this code may be included in
computing the percentage of landscaping. Upon request, landscaping requirements
may be reduced by the city when, due to the size of the parcel, the amount of
landscaping required is unreasonable and cannot be located in useful locations.
         b.   Landscaping shall be distributed throughout the project by
placing landscaping along street frontages, throughout parking areas and
adjacent to service and delivery areas.
         c.   For the purpose of buffering and site compatibility with
surrounding development, commercial and industrial projects may require
additional landscaping and architectural integration. Landscaping percentages
and buffer strips may be increased to ensure compatibility. Site compatibility
is particularly important when commercial or industrial projects are developed
adjacent to residential and professional office zones.
         d.   Fencing may be required depending on the adjacent land use and
the applicant's security needs. Where visual barrier fencing containing wood,
metal, plastic or vinyl strips is either proposed by the applicant or required
by the city, such strips shall be properly secured. Screening of any outside
storage shall be required if appropriate, with a combination of fencing, walls,
live plants and/or earth berming. Fences shall be constructed so that
significant variations in top line, bottom line and/or height does not occur
due to erratic grading of the site. (Ord. 2002-05, 4-2-2002)
      2.   The following criteria is applicable to developments:
         a.   Exterior Masonry: Masonry will be required on the exterior of all
developments. The minimum area (A) of masonry required (measured in square
feet) will be determined by multiplying the outside perimeter (P) of the
foundation (measured in feet), including the garage, by four feet (4') as
follows:
            P x 4 = A
The planning commission shall determine the type of masonry to be used that
would meet architectural standards of appearance and conformity with
surrounding structures.
         b.   Facade Variations: Structures greater than sixty feet (60') but
less than one hundred twenty feet (120') in length must exhibit a prominent
shift in the facade of the structure so that no greater than seventy five
percent (75%) of the length of the building facade appears unbroken. Each shift
shall be in the form of either a ten foot (10') change in building facade
alignment or a ten foot (10') change in roofline height, or a combined change
in facade and roofline totaling ten feet (10'). Structures which exceed one
hundred twenty feet (120') in length on any facade shall provide a prominent
shift in the mass of the structure at each one hundred twenty foot (120')
interval (or less if the developer desires) reflecting a change in the function
or scale. The shift shall be the form of either a fifteen foot (15') change in
the building facade alignment or fifteen foot (15') change in roofline. A
combination of both the roofline and facade change is encouraged. To that end,
if the combined change occurs at the same location of the building place a
fifteen foot (15') total change will be considered as full compliance.
         c.   Screening: All developments shall hide/screen all mechanical
equipment. (Ord. 2002-05, 4-2-2002; amd. Ord. 2021-01, 6-1-2021)
9-8-7: DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW; DECISION PROCESS:
   A.   The applicant shall prepare and make a submission to the city
consistent with the standards contained in this chapter. The city shall review
said submission for compliance with the regulations set forth herein. The
applicant shall not alter the terrain or remove any vegetation from the
proposed site or engage in any site development or building construction until
the necessary approvals as outlined herein have been obtained.
   B.   Proposed site plans shall be delivered by the applicant, as referred by
the business office, to such city departments, special districts, governmental
boards, bureaus, utility companies, and other agencies which will provide
public and private facilities and services to the site for their information
and comment. The business office is responsible for coordinating the comments
received from all public and private entities, and shall decide to which
agencies to refer proposed site plans.
   C.   The business office shall review the site plan for conformance to the
standards outlined herein; for conformance with the general plan and the zoning
ordinance; for environmental impacts which may be associated with the design;
and shall process the site plan and reports as provided for in this chapter.
   D.   The public works department shall make comments concerning: flood
control requirements; engineering requirements for street widths, grades and
alignments; whether the proposed public improvements conform to the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and regulations;
and shall be responsible for the approval and inspection of all public
improvements.
   E.   The city shall notify the applicant within a reasonable time of receipt
of the application of the city's decision and shall either: 1) issue a building
permit, or 2) advise the applicant of the approval of the application, or 3)
advise the applicant of the additional items required by the city in order to
act upon the application. (Ord. 2002-05, 4-2-2002)
9-8-8: FINAL DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
The following information shall be required prior to a permitted use being
approved and the business office issuing any building permits:
   A.   Revised site plan incorporating all preliminary review comments and
requirements.
   B.   Final landscape plan.
   C.   Final building construction plans.
   D.   Complete engineering plans, including final construction drawings for
streets, utilities, drainage and grading.
   E.   Installation of on site and off site improvements or satisfactory
arrangements concerning bonding as required by this code. (Ord. 2002-05, 4-2-
2002)
9-8-9: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   The applicant or any other person or entity adversely affected by a
decision administering or interpreting a zoning ordinance may appeal, to the
appeal authority that decision applying the zoning ordinance by alleging that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
official in the administration or interpretation of the zoning ordinance. (Ord.
2015-08, 11-4-2015)
   B.   The person or entity making the appeal has the burden of proving that
an error has been made. (Ord. 2002-05, 4-2-2002)
   C.   A person may not appeal, and the appeal authority may not consider, any
zoning ordinance amendments. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-4-2015)
   D.   Appeals may not be used to waive or modify the terms or requirements of
the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2002-05, 4-2-2002)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Definitions
10-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known as THE ZONING REGULATIONS OF SUNSET CITY, UTAH.
(Zoning Ord.)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Scope: This Title is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the
present and future inhabitants of the City by including, among other things,
the lessening of congestion in the streets or roads, securing safety from fire
and other dangers, providing adequate light and air, classification of land
uses and distribution of land development and utilization, protection of the
tax base, securing economy in governmental expenditures, fostering of the
City's agricultural and other industries and the protection of both urban and
rural development.
   B.   Interpretation: In interpreting and applying the provisions of this
Title, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum
requirements for the purpose set forth.
   C.   Restrictive Provisions: This Title shall not nullify the more
restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements, ordinances or laws, but shall
prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive. (Zoning
Ord.)
10-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, certain words and terms are defined as follows:
words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular
number include the plural and the plural the singular; words not included
herein but defined in the Building Title 1  shall be construed as defined
therein.
   AGRICULTURE, LIMITED: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops,
horticulture and gardening, but not including the keeping or raising of
domestic animals and fowl, except household pets, and not including any
agricultural industry or business, such as fruit packing plants, fur farms,
animal hospitals or similar uses.
   AIRPORT: Any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing
and taking off of aircraft.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION, ESTABLISHED: The elevation in feet above mean sea level
of the highest point of the landing area of an airport.
   AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or natural growth or use of land which
obstructs or restricts the air space required for the safe flight of aircraft
landing, taking off or maneuvering at or in the vicinity of an airport, or
which is otherwise hazardous to such landing, taking off or maneuvering of
aircraft.
   AIRPORT LANDING AREA: The specially prepared surface within the boundaries
of an airport designed for aircraft landing and taking off operations.
   AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT: The existing control tower or a point upon which a
tower would normally be erected on an airport.
   ALLEY: A public thoroughfare less than twenty six feet (26') wide.
   APARTMENT HOTEL: Any building which contains dwelling units and also
satisfies the definition of a "hotel", as defined in this Section.
   APARTMENT HOUSE: A building designed to be occupied by more than four (4)
families.
   APARTMENT MOTEL: Any building or group of buildings which contains dwelling
units and also satisfies the definition of a "motel", as defined in this
Section.
   BASEMENT: A story partly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story
for height measurement where more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above
the average level of the adjoining ground or where more than three-fourths (3/
4) of any wall is above the level of the adjoining ground.
   BOARDING HOUSE: A building where, for compensation, meals are provided for
at least five (5) but not more than fifteen (15) persons.
   BUBBLER: An irrigation head that delivers water to the root zone by
"flooding" the planted area, usually measured in gallons per minute. Bubblers
exhibit a trickle, umbrella or short stream pattern.
   BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building, customarily incidental to and
located upon the same lot occupied by the main building. On any lot upon which
is located a dwelling, any building which is incidental to the conducting of
any agricultural use shall be deemed to be an accessory building.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to
the plate line of a pitch or hip roof.
   BUILDING, MAIN: The principal building or one of the principal buildings
upon a lot, or the building or one of the principal buildings housing the
principal use upon the lot.
   CHECK VALVE: A device used in sprinkler heads or pipe to prevent water from
draining out of the pipe through gravity flow. Used to prevent pollution or
contamination or the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the
secondary irrigation system.
   COURT: An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings, and which is bounded on two (2) or more sides
by such building or buildings. The width of a court is its least horizontal
dimension, measured between opposite sides in the same general direction as the
yard or lot line on which the court opens. The length of a court is its least
horizontal dimension measured at right angles to its width.
   DRIP EMITTER: Drip irrigation fittings that deliver water slowly at the root
zone of the plant, usually measured in gallons per hour.
   DWELLING: A building designed and used for residential purposes, including
one-, two-, three- and four- family dwelling units, but not including
apartments, boarding houses, hotels, lodging houses or motels.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: See definition of Apartment House.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more related or connected rooms occupied by or
designed for residential purposes by one household.
   EVAPOTRANSPIRATIO N (ET): The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent
soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time,
expressed in inches per day, month or year.
   FAMILY FOOD PRODUCTION: The keeping of not more than one cow; two (2) sheep;
one pig (over 2 months old); twenty (20) rabbits; twenty five (25) chickens;
twenty five (25) other barn yard fowl, including pheasants and pigeons;
provided, that an additional number of fowl equal to five (5) times the number
listed herein may be kept for each eight thousand (8,000) square feet in the
lot in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   GARAGE:
      Private: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of not
more than four (4) automobiles used by the occupants of the dwelling unit to
which it is accessory; provided, that one property occupied by a multiple
dwelling containing more than four (4) dwelling units, the capacity of such
private garage shall not provide more than one and one-half (11/2) times as
many spaces for automobiles as there are number of dwelling units. A private
garage having any part of one or more walls or the roof common to a dwelling
shall be considered a part of the dwelling, i.e., an attached garage. Any
attached garage shall be subject to the same front and side yard regulations as
apply to the dwelling to which it is accessory. For a detached private garage,
i.e., not attached to the dwelling, located at least fifteen feet (15') to the
rear of a dwelling to which it is accessory, the side yard may be reduced to
not less than one foot (1'). A private detached garage shall not be located
closer than twenty five feet (25') to any existing dwelling on adjacent
property.
      Public: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage,
designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or
storing motor driven vehicles.
   GRADE:
   A.   For buildings adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk
at the center of that wall adjoining the street.
   B.   For buildings adjoining more than one street, the average of elevations
of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls adjoining streets.
   C.   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of
the ground (finished surface) adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
All walls approximately parallel to and not more than five feet (5') from a
street line are to be considered as adjoining a street.
   GRADING PLAN: The Grading Plan shows all finish grades, spot elevations as
necessary and existing and new contours with the developed landscape area.
   GROUND COVER: Material planted in such a way as to form a continuous cover
over the ground that can be maintained at a height not more than twelve inches
(12").
   HARDSCAPE: Patios, decks and paths. Does not include driveways and
sidewalks.
   HOME OCCUPATION: An income producing use conducted entirely within a
dwelling or garage which is clearly incidental, secondary and compatible to the
residential use of the premises. In general, a home occupation is an accessory
use so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal
circumstances, should not be aware of its existence.
   HORSES, RIDING: Horses maintained by occupants of dwellings for riding
purposes of a noncommercial nature. Two (2) horses may be kept on lots or plots
of one acre or more. No riding horses may be kept on lots of less than one
acre, nor increased in number on lots of less than one acre where they are
maintained at the time of the effective date hereof. One additional riding
horse may be kept for each one-half (1/2) acre of ground exceeding one acre.
   HOTEL: A building designed or occupied as the more or less temporary abiding
place of fifteen (15) or more individuals who are, for compensation, lodged,
with or without meals, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any
individual room or suite.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals and fowl customarily kept within the home including,
but not limited to, dogs, cats, hamsters, guinea pigs, parakeets and canaries.
Said animals shall be for family use only and not raised for commercial
purposes. Animals normally associated with being kept outdoors and/or normally
associated with agricultural areas such as horses, cows, goats, sheep, pigs,
rabbits, chickens, ducks, geese or other farm animals shall not be allowed as
household pets.
   IRRIGATION PLAN: The irrigation plan shows the components of the irrigation
system with water meter size, backflow prevention (when outdoor irrigation is
supplied with culinary water), precipitation rates, flow rate and operating
pressure for each irrigation circuit, and identification of all irrigation
equipment.
   JUNKYARD: The use of any lot, portion of lot or tract of land for the
storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap
material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, or
other vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof; provided, that this definition
shall not be deemed to include such uses which are clearly accessory and
incidental to any agricultural use permitted in the district.
   KENNEL: An establishment having three (3) or more dogs, six (6) months or
older, for the purpose of boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, letting for
hire, training for a fee or selling.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person who holds a certificate to practice landscape
architecture in the State of Utah. Only a Landscape Architect can legally
create commercial landscape plans.
   LANDSCAPE DESIGNER: A person who may or may not hold professional
certificates for landscape design/architecture and cannot legally create
commercial landscape plans. Landscape Designers generally focus on residential
design and horticultural needs of home landscapes.
   LANDSCAPE PLAN DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE: The preparation of a graphic and
written criteria, specifications, and detailed plans to arrange and modify the
effects of natural features such as plantings, ground and water forms,
circulation, walks and other features to comply with the provisions of this
ordinance. The Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall include a project
data sheet, a Planting Plan, an Irrigation Plan, and a Grading Plan.
   LANDSCAPE ZONE: A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar
water needs, areas with similar microclimate (i.e., slope, exposure, wind,
etc.) and soil conditions, and areas that will be similarly irrigated. A
landscape zone can be served by one irrigation valve, or a set of valves with
the same schedule.
   LANDSCAPING: Any combination of living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines,
ground covers, flowers, or grass; natural features such as rock, stone, or bark
chips; and structural features, including but not limited to, fountains,
reflecting pools, outdoor art work, screen walls, fences or benches.
   LOCALSCAPES®: A locally adaptable and environmentally sustainable urban
landscape style that requires less irrigation than traditional Utah landscapes
(see www.Localscapes.com).
   LODGING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to
five (5) or more, but not exceeding fifteen (15) persons in contradistinction
to hotels open to transients.
   LOT: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building or group
of main buildings and accessory buildings, together with such yards, open
spaces, lot width and lot area as are required by this title, and having
frontage upon a street. Except for group dwellings, where more than one
dwelling is placed on a lot, each dwelling structure shall be provided with the
minimum frontage, lot area, front yard, rear yard and side yards as are
required for one such dwelling on a lot in the same zone.
   MOTEL: A building or group of buildings containing dwelling units designed
for temporary use by automobile tourists or transients with appropriate garage
or parking facilities. This definition also applies to auto courts and motor
lodges.
   MOTOR LODGE: See definition of Motel.
   MULCH: Any material such as rock, bark, wood chips or other materials left
loose and applied to the soil.
   NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks,
springs, gullies or washes which are natural drainage channels as determined by
the building inspector, in which areas no buildings shall be constructed.
   NONCONFORMING USE: The use of any building or premises contrary to the use
regulations of this title for the zone in which the building or premises is
located.
   PARKING LOT: An open area, other than a street, used for the temporary
parking of more than four (4) automobiles and available for public use, whether
free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
   PARKING SPACE: Space within a building, lot or parking lot for the temporary
parking or storage of one automobile.
   PARK STRIP: A typically narrow landscaped area located between the back-of-
curb and sidewalk.
   PLANTING PLAN: A Planting Plan shall clearly and accurately identify and
locate new and existing trees, shrubs, ground covers, turf areas, driveways,
sidewalks, hardscape features, and fences.
   POP-UP SPRAY HEAD: A sprinkler head that sprays water through a nozzle in a
fixed pattern with no rotation.
   PRECIPITATION RATE: The depth of water applied to a given area, usually
measured in inches per hour.
   PRESSURE COMPENSATING: A drip irrigation system that compensates for
fluctuating water pressure by only allowing a fixed volume of water through
drip emitters.
   RUNOFF: Irrigation water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape area
to which it is applied, and which flows onto other areas.
   SMART AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: An automatic timing device used to
remotely control valves in the operation of an irrigation system using the
internet to connect to a real time weather source or soil moisture sensor.
Smart Automatic Irrigation Controllers schedule irrigation events using either
evapotranspiration or soil moisture data to control when and how long
sprinklers or drip systems operate and will vary based on time of year and
weather/soil moisture conditions.
   STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor or ceiling next above.
      Half: A story with at least two (2) of its opposite sides situated in a
sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the
floor immediately below it.
   STREET: A public or private thoroughfare which affords principal means of
access to abutting properties.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
   TRAILER, AUTOMOBILE: A vehicle with or without motive power, designed to be
used for human habitation.
   TURF: A surface layer of earth containing grass species with full root
structures that are maintained as mowed grass.
   USE: The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
      Accessory: A subordinate use, customarily incident to and located upon
the same lot occupied by the main use.
      Conditional: A use or occupancy of a building, or use of land, permitted
only when authorized upon issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to
the limitations and conditions specified therein as provided in chapter 6 of
this title intended to allow compatible integration of uses which may be
suitable only in certain locations within a particular zone, or only upon
certain conditions and/or design criteria being achieved.
      Permitted: Any use lawfully occupying land or buildings as authorized in
the zone regulations and for which no conditional use permit is required.
   WATER-CONSERVING PLANT: A plant that can generally survive with available
rainfall once established although supplemental irrigation may be needed or
desirable during spring and summer months.
   YARD: Any open space on a lot other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
      Front: An open space on the same lot with a building, between the front
line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the front lot or street line and
extending across the full width of the lot.
      Rear: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between
the rear line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the rear line of the lot
and extending the full width of the lot.
      Side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between
the side line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the side line of the lot
and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
(Zoning Ord.; amd. Ord. 16-18-78, 6-22-1978; Ord., 10-26-1978; 1997 Code; Ord.
2005-02, 1-18-2005; Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9, Chapter 1 of this Code.
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-2-1: Designated Officer Of Enforcement
10-2-2: Powers And Duties
10-2-3: Amendments
10-2-4: Issuance Of Licenses And Permits
10-2-5: Penalty
10-2-1: DESIGNATED OFFICER OF ENFORCEMENT:
The Building Inspector is hereby designated and authorized as the officer
charged with the enforcement of this Zoning Title, but the City Council may, by
resolution or ordinance from time to time, entrust such administration, in
whole or in part, to any other officer of the City without amendment to this
Title. From the time of the effective date hereof, the Building Inspector shall
not grant a permit for the construction or alteration of any building or
structure if such construction or alteration would be in violation of any of
the provisions of this Title; nor shall any City officer grant any permit or
license for the use of any building or land if such use would be in violation
of this Title. (Zoning Ord.; 1997 Code)
10-2-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect or cause to be
inspected all buildings in the course of construction or repair. He shall
enforce all of the provisions of this Title, entering actions in the court when
necessary. His failure to do so shall not legalize any violation of such
provision. The Building Inspector shall not issue any permit unless the plans
of and for the proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or
use fully conform to all zoning regulations then in effect. (Zoning Ord.)
10-2-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The City Council may from time to time amend the number,
shape, boundaries or area of any district or districts or of any zone, or any
regulation of or within such district or districts or zones, or any other
provision of this Title, but any such amendment shall not be made or become
effective unless the same shall have been proposed by or be first submitted for
the approval, disapproval, or suggestions of the Planning Commission, and if
disapproved by such Commission, within thirty (30) days after such submission,
such amendment to be effective shall receive the favorable vote of not less
than a majority of the entire membership of the City Council.
   B.   Public Hearing Required: Before finally adopting any such amendment,
the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least fifteen (15)
days' notice of the time and place of which shall be given by at least one
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the County. (Zoning Ord.)
10-2-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
All departments, officials and public employees of the City which are vested
with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the
provisions of this Title and shall issue no such permit or licenses for uses,
buildings or other purposes where the same would be in conflict with the
provisions of this Title, and any such permit or license, if issued in conflict
with the provisions of this Title shall be null and void. (Zoning Ord.)
10-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person, whether as principal or agent, employed or otherwise, violating, or
causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this Title
shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. Such person shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during which any portion of any violation of
this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be
punishable as herein provided. (Zoning Ord.; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Purpose
10-3-2: Additional Use Regulations
10-3-3: Additional Yard Regulations
10-3-4: Additional Height Regulations
10-3-5: Annexation; Classification Of Land
10-3-6: Visual Traffic Clearance Triangle
10-3-7: Animals; Placement
10-3-8: Building Regulations; Water And Sewer
10-3-9: Off-Street Parking Space Regulations
10-3-10: Yard Variances; Residential Zones
10-3-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this Chapter qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the zoning regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
(Zoning Ord.)
10-3-2: ADDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
The requirements of this Title as to minimum building site area shall not be
construed to prevent the use for a single- family dwelling of any lot or parcel
of land in the event that such lot or parcel of land is held in separate
ownership at the effective date hereof. (Zoning Ord.)
10-3-3: ADDITIONAL YARD REGULATIONS:
   A.   May Be Waived; Circumstances: On any lot held under a separate
ownership from adjacent lots and of record at the time of the effective date
hereof, the side yard requirements may be waived to the extent that the
buildable width of such lot is not reduced to less than twenty five feet (25'),
except that at least a four foot (4') side yard is required on each side of any
interior lot and the side yard on the street side of a corner lot must be at
least ten feet (10').
   B.   Open And Unobstructed: Every part of a required yard shall be open to
the sky, unobstructed except for accessory buildings in a rear yard and except
for the ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and
other ornamental features.
   C.   Chimneys, Flues And Fire Escapes: Open or lattice enclosed fire
escapes; fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening upon fire towers
projecting into a yard not more than five feet (5') and the ordinary
projections of chimneys and flues are permitted. (Zoning Ord.)
10-3-4: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Public Buildings Or Hotels: Public, semi-public or public service
buildings or hotels, when authorized in a zone, may be erected to a height not
exceeding City standards, if the building is set back from each otherwise
established building line at least one foot (1') for each additional foot of
building above the normal height limit requirement for the zone in which the
building is erected. (Zoning Ord.; 1997 Code)
   B.   Main Buildings: No main building shall be erected to a height less than
eight feet six inches (8'6").
   C.   Exceptions To Limit: Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of
elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to
operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights,
towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, water tanks, wireless
masts, theater lofts, silos or similar structures may be erected above the
height limits herein prescribed, but no space above the height limit shall be
allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. (Zoning Ord.)
10-3-5: ANNEXATION; CLASSIFICATION OF LAND:
Annexed land shall be classified in the same zone as that designated for
contiguous land. (Zoning Ord.)
10-3-6: VISUAL TRAFFIC CLEARANCE TRIANGLE 1 :
   A.   Corner Triangle Defined: No solid fence, shrubs, or other obstructions
to view between the heights of two feet (2') and seven feet (7') shall be
allowed within the triangular area at the corner formed by measuring a distance
of forty feet (40') along both frontage lot lines back from the point of
intersection of said lines.
   B.   Driveway Triangle Defined: No view obstructing fence, wall hedge, or
planting exceeding two feet (2') in height above the level of the driveway
shall be located in a triangular area bounded by lines drawn from a point on
the center line of the driveway, set back fifteen feet (15') from the front
property line to points on the back of the curb in front of the property, forty
feet (40') either side of the center line of the driveway, except that trees
may be located or maintained in such area where pruned to a height greater than
seven feet (7'). Nonview obstructing fences not exceeding four feet (4') in
height may also be allowed in this area. (Ord. 96-03, 12-3-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  10-10-2 of this Title.
10-3-7: ANIMALS; PLACEMENT:
No animals or fowl shall be kept or maintained closer than forty feet (40')
from a dwelling, and no barn, coop, pen or corral shall be kept closer than
forty feet (40') to any street. (Zoning Ord.)
10-3-8: BUILDING REGULATIONS; WATER AND SEWER:
Domestic water supply and sewage disposal shall comply with the Board of Health
requirements as represented by a certificate of approval from said County Board
of Health in all applications for a building permit where either an approved
supply of piped water under pressure or a sewer is not available. (Zoning Ord.;
1997 Code)
10-3-9: OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS:
There shall be provided at the time of erection of any main building or at the
time any main building is enlarged or increased in capacity, minimum off-street
parking space with adequate provision of ingress and egress by standard sized
automobiles, as follows:
   A.   Dwellings: In all residential districts there shall be provided in a
private garage or in an area properly located for a future garage, space for
the parking of two (2) automobiles for each new single dwelling unit or one and
one- half (11/2) parking spaces for automobiles for each new dwelling unit in a
building containing two (2) or more residential dwelling units, or for each
dwelling unit added in the case of the enlargement of an existing building.
   B.   Buildings: For a new building or for any enlargement or increase in
seating capacity, floor area or guest rooms of any existing main building there
shall be at least one permanently maintained parking space of not less than two
hundred (200) square feet of new area as follows:
      1.   Places Of Assembly: For church, high school, college and university
auditoriums and for theaters, general auditoriums, stadiums and other similar
places of assembly, at least one parking space for every four (4) fixed seats
provided in said buildings.
      2.   Hospitals And Clinics: For hospitals, at least one parking space for
each two (2) beds capacity, including infants' cribs and children's beds. For
medical and dental clinics, at least ten (10) parking spaces; provided, that
three (3) additional parking spaces shall be provided for each doctor or
dentist having offices in such clinic in excess of three (3) doctors or
dentists.
      3.   Motels: For tourist courts and apartment motels, at least one
parking space for each individual sleeping or living unit; for hotels and
apartment hotels at least one parking space for each two (2) sleeping rooms, up
to and including the first twenty (20) sleeping rooms, and one parking space
for each three (3) sleeping rooms over twenty (20).
      4.   Restaurants: For restaurants or establishments serving meals,
lunches or drinks to patrons either in their cars or in the building, and for
dance hall and recreational places of assembly, at least one space for each
serving unit, a serving unit to be one stool, booth or table.
      5.   Dance Halls: For dance halls and recreational places of assembly,
one space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor space of the
building.
      6.   Mortuaries; Liquor Stores: For mortuaries, at least thirty (30)
parking spaces; for liquor stores, at least twenty (20) parking spaces.
      7.   Retail Stores: For retail stores selling direct to the public, one
parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor space in the
building. (Zoning Ord.)
   C.   Location To Dwelling Or Building: Parking space as required above shall
be on the same lot with the main building, or in the case of buildings other
than dwellings may be located not farther than three hundred feet (300')
therefrom and within the same block unless reviewed by the planning commission
and approved by the city council as a conditional use in an adjacent block.
(Ord. 98-08, 9-15-1998)
   D.   Commercial Zones: For any building in a commercial zone, at least fifty
percent (50%) of the lot shall be utilized for off street parking.
   E.   Public Parking Areas: Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public
parking area shall be paved with an asphaltic or concrete surfacing and shall
have appropriate bumper guards where needed as determined by the building
inspector. Any lights used to illuminate said parking areas shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in any
residential zone. (Zoning Ord.)
10-3-10: YARD VARIANCES; RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
The appeal authority may grant variances to front and side yard setback
regulations for any residential zone under the following conditions: (Ord.
2015-08, 11-4-2015)
   A.   Request Of Contractor; Requirements: A subdivider or building
contractor who is going to construct twenty (20) or more homes in any one
approved subdivision makes a request for such a variance and the request be
accompanied by a house location plat showing the location of houses to be
constructed, and a written description of the front yard setback and the side
yard setback for each lot, both of which shall be filed with the county
recorder as amendments to the subdivision plat in which the construction is to
take place.
   B.   Design Improvement: The plans and request indicate an effort to avoid
stereotyped row houses, and would improve the overall design and utilization of
the lots affected by the requested variance.
   C.   Minimum Distance Between Blank Walls: The minimum side yard distance
between dwellings be reduced only in cases where a blank wall of one dwelling
is opposite a blank wall of an adjoining dwelling for a distance of at least
seventy five percent (75%) of the combined lengths of blank (windowless) wall
space. In no case shall the minimum distance between dwellings be less than
twelve feet (12'). (Zoning Ord.)
   D.   Minimum Front Setback: The minimum front setback so permitted be thirty
feet (30') in residential R-1, and thirty feet (30') in residential R-3 zones.
(Zoning Ord.; amd. 1997 Code)
   E.   Changes After Construction Not Permitted: Changes in house locations
will not be permitted once construction is commenced. (Zoning Ord.)
CHAPTER 4
ZONES AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Zones Established
10-4-2: District And Zone Boundaries
10-4-1: ZONES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Classification: For the purpose of this title, the City is divided into
classes of zones as follows:
      Residential Zone R-1
      Residential Zone R-3
      Commercial Zone C-1
      Commercial Zone C-2
      Communication Zones C-2-C
      Boulevard Mixed Use Zone BMU
(Ord. 2017-07, 11-21-2017)
   B.   Height Limiting Zones: In addition to the zones hereinabove
established, all the land within the incorporated boundaries of the City and
within fifty thousand feet (50,000') of the established airport reference point
at Hill Air Force Base, is hereby divided into height limiting zones, the
boundaries of which and the height applicable thereto to be as provided herein
and/or as shown on a map or maps entitled "zoning map of Sunset City", which
maps are a part hereof as provided in subsection
10-4-2A of this chapter. (Zoning Ord.)
10-4-2: DISTRICT AND ZONE BOUNDARIES:
   A.   Applicability To Zoning Map: The boundaries and height restrictions
applicable thereto of each of the districts of the City which are hereby zones,
and the zones therein, are hereby established as shown on the map or maps
entitled "zoning map of Sunset City", or as hereafter amended, which map or
maps, and all boundaries, notations and other data shown thereon are made by
this reference as much a part of this title as if fully described and detailed
herein. The said map or maps shall be filed in the custody of the City Recorder
and may be examined by the public subject to any reasonable regulations
established by the City Recorder. (Zoning Ord.; amd. 1997 Code)
   B.   Uncertainty; Applicable Rules: Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundary of any district or zone therein, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Wherever the boundary is indicated as being approximately upon the
centerline of a street, alley or block, or along a property line, unless
otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the centerline of such street, alley
or block, or such property line, shall be construed to be the boundary.
      2.   Wherever such boundary line is indicated as being approximately at
the line of any river, irrigation canal, or other waterway or railroad right-
of-way, or any section line, then in such case the center of such stream, canal
or waterway, or of such railroad right-of-way, or the boundary line of such
public land or such section line shall be deemed to be the boundary.
      3.   Where such boundary lines cannot be determined by the above rules,
their location may be found by the use of the scale appearing upon the map.
(Zoning Ord.)
      4.   Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the
boundary location, the Appeal Authority shall interpret the map. (Ord. 2015-08,
11-4-2015)
CHAPTER 5
ZONE REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-1
SECTION:
10-5A-1: Permitted Uses
10-5A-2: Conditional Uses
10-5A-3: Area, Height And Width Regulations
10-5A-4: Yard Regulations
10-5A-5: Rental Apartments In R-1 Zoned Single-Family Dwelling Homes
10-5A-6: Household Pets
10-5A-7: Chickens In Single-Family Residential Zones; Ownership And Maintenance
10-5A-1: PERMITTED USES:
In residential zone R-1, no building or land shall be used and no building
shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for other
than one or more of the following uses:
   Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to those listed below.
   Churches, except temporary revival tents or buildings.
   Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
   Home occupation.
   Household pets. (See section
10-5A-6 of this article for regulations on household pets.)
   Libraries, museums, art galleries.
   Limited agricultural uses.
   Public parks, public recreational grounds and buildings; public buildings,
public utilities.
   Public schools; private educational institutions having a curriculum similar
to that ordinarily given in public schools; child daycare or nursery.
   Signboard, one unlighted, not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area,
appertaining to the lease or sale of the property, also a bulletin board not
exceeding eighteen (18) square feet in area erected upon the premises of a
church or other institution for the purpose of displaying the name and
activities of services therein; provided, that such signboard must be set
within ten feet (10') of the building lines; one identification sign not
exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area for buildings other than dwellings.
   Single-family dwellings.
   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings must be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction. (Ord., 10-17-1988)
10-5A-2: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit, as provided in
chapter 6 of this title:
Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business. (Ord. 16-18-78, 6-22-1978)
10-5A-3: AREA, HEIGHT AND WIDTH REGULATIONS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be not less than eight
thousand (8,000) square feet for any main building.
   B.   Building And Dwelling Height: No building shall be erected to a height
greater than two (2) stories or twenty eight feet (28'), except as otherwise
provided herein, and no dwelling structure shall be erected to a height less
than eight feet six inches (8'6").
   C.   Minimum Width: The minimum width of any lot for a main building shall
be seventy five feet (75') at a distance of thirty feet (30') back from the
front lot line. (Ord., 10-17-1988)
10-5A-4: YARD REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: The minimum side yard for any dwelling shall be eight feet
(8'), and the total width of the two (2) required side yards shall be not less
than eighteen feet (18'). Other main buildings shall have a minimum side yard
of twenty feet (20'), and the total width of the two (2) side yards shall be
not less than forty feet (40'). Except as provided in the definition of private
garages, accessory buildings shall have a side yard of not less than one foot
(1') measured from the eave, and shall be located not closer than twenty five
feet (25') to a dwelling on adjacent property. On corner lots, the side yard
which faces on a street shall be not less than twenty feet (20') for both main
and accessory buildings.
   B.   Front Yard: The minimum setback for main buildings shall be thirty feet
(30'), or the average of the existing buildings where fifty percent (50%) of
the frontage is developed, but in no case less than fifteen feet (15'). The
minimum setback line for accessory buildings shall be at least ten feet (10')
in the rear of the main buildings.
   C.   Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard for any main building shall be thirty
feet (30') and for accessory buildings one foot (1') measured from the eave,
and shall be located not closer than ten feet (10') from a dwelling on adjacent
property; provided, that on corner lots which rear upon the side yard of
another lot, accessory buildings shall be located not closer than twenty feet
(20') to such side yard. Accessory buildings must provide facilities for the
discharge of all roof drainage onto the subject lot or parcel of land.
   D.   Corner Lots: All corner lots shall have a minimum frontage of eighty
feet (80'). (Ord. 2003-04, 3-18-2003)
10-5A-5: RENTAL APARTMENTS IN R-1 ZONED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING HOMES:
A conditional nonconforming use permit shall not be granted to change single-
family dwellings into multiple-family dwellings for rental use by constructing
or dividing the dwelling into apartments and/or separate living units. Those
being rented or were constructed for rental use as of September 16, 1988, may
be granted a nonconforming use permit upon compliance with the following
conditions:
   A.   Number Of Families Or Persons: Not more than one family lives in the
apartment or that the number of single (unmarried) individuals living in the
apartment does not exceed the number recommended by the uniform building code.
   B.   Legal Nonconforming Rights: Any legal nonconforming apartment that is
unoccupied for one year will become ineligible to rent.
   C.   Separate Utility Fees: Separate garbage, water and sewer fees are to be
paid per rental or living unit.
   D.   Compliance With Building Codes 1 : Building codes will be complied
with.
   E.   Adequate Facilities: The heating and hot water facilities will be
adequate to meet the demands for all apartments or living units within the
dwelling.
   F.   Smoke Detectors; Fire Extinguishers: All rental or living areas will
have operable smoke detectors and fire extinguishers.
   G.   Off Street Parking: Adequate hard surfaced off street parking shall be
provided for automobiles or other vehicles. No vehicles shall be parked on the
lawn.
   H.   Number Of Allowed Pets: The number of pets for all apartment or living
areas does not exceed the number allowed for a single-family dwelling.
   I.   Failure To Comply: Failure to comply with the above conditions and
regulations will result in the denial of permission to rent the apartment or
living area and loss of nonconforming conditional use status.
   J.   Exception To Provisions: This amendment does not apply to those
residents who provide living quarters for immediate members of the family.
(Ord. 2001-08, 10-2-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 9, chapter 1 of this code.
10-5A-6: HOUSEHOLD PETS:
The city of Sunset hereby adopts by reference, the Davis County comprehensive
animal control ordinance, as amended, with the following exceptions:
   A.   In addition to the number of dogs and cats allowed in the Davis County
comprehensive animal control ordinance, one seeing eye, search and rescue or
other aid dog may be allowed under the following circumstances:
      1.   A conditional use permit is issued by the planning commission. In
addition to the typical items considered by the planning commission for a
conditional use, the following shall also be reviewed:
         a.   The location and size of any outdoor pens, runs or enclosures;
         b.   The owner's demonstrated ability to keep the additional animal in
a clean and healthy environment, and in a manner that is not contrary to the
general health and welfare of the citizenry;
         c.   The animals will be kept in accordance to all Davis County health
and Davis County animal control requirements; and
         d.   The premises shall be subject to inspection annually by the
community development department.
      2.   The aid dog is certified to serve in the capacity intended by the
independent and qualified agency. Aid dogs that are in the process of being
trained shall have not more than six (6) months to become certified unless a
longer period is granted by the planning commission. The certification of the
aid dog is subject to inspection annually by the community development
department. Failure to obtain the certification in the prescribed time period,
and maintenance of it thereafter, shall result in the revocation of the
conditional use permit.
   B.   A dwelling may have a total of six (6) animals (not including animals
listed in subsection A of this section) or fowl customarily kept within the
home including, but not limited to, hamsters, guinea pigs, parakeets, canaries,
etc. Said animals shall be for family use only and not raised for commercial
purposes. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
10-5A-7: CHICKENS IN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES; OWNERSHIP AND
MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The keeping and maintenance of residential chickens is allowed within
the City only as provided in this title.
   B.   Any chicken kept as provided by this title shall not be deemed a
household pet.
   C.   A City license is required for the keeping of chickens allowed by this
title.
      1.   A license shall be a one-time application and shall be signed by the
property owner.
      2.   A license does not run with the land.
      3.   There shall be an annual license fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00).
      4.   Application for, and acceptance of a license is prima facie evidence
that a person agrees to abide by all the conditions and regulations of this
title.
      5.   A license may be revoked for any violation of this title.
      6.   Applicant shall submit a site plan to the Sunset City Offices.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any chicken in a manner
contrary to the provisions of this title.
   E.   A chicken shall be kept strictly for familial gain from the production
and consumption of eggs, and there shall be no sale or income resulting from
the keeping of a chicken.
   F.   Up to six (6) hens may be kept on a residential lot in accordance with
the following:
      1.   A chicken shall only be kept on a property containing a single-
family detached dwelling unit.
      2.   A chicken shall be kept in a coop or enclosed area at all times.
      3.   No chicken shall be permitted to roam outside a coop or enclosed
area.
      4.   A coop shall be covered, ventilated, and rodent and predator
resistant.
      5.   A coop shall not be constructed of scrap or dilapidated materials.
      6.   The coop shall be built with a finished, all weather exterior
material.
      7.   It is unlawful to keep a rooster or crowing hen.
      8.   No lot smaller than eight thousand (8,000) square feet shall be used
for the keeping of chickens.
      9.   Any coop or enclosure shall be located in the rear yard of the main
dwelling.
      10.   Any coop or enclosure shall be located at least forty feet (40')
from any primary residential dwelling on an adjoining property, and at least
five feet (5') from any property line.
      11.   No coop shall be taller than seven feet (7'), at its highest point.
      12.   Any time a heating device is employed in a pen or coop, such pen or
coop must be separated at least ten feet (10') from any dwelling structure.
      13.   Any coop and any roaming area shall be maintained in a neat and
sanitary condition and shall be cleaned as necessary to prevent a detectable
odor at the property line.
      14.   Chicken feed shall be stored and dispensed in a rodent-proof and
predator-proof container.
      15.   No growth or vegetation other than sod grass is permitted within
five feet (5') of any coop.
      16.   The area within five feet (5') of the perimeter of any coop shall
be unobstructed, except that the rear of a coop may be attached to another
structure.
      17.   A chicken may not be kept, and a coop may not be constructed, on
any property that is in violation of a City ordinance or where the owner or
resident is being prosecuted for a violation.
      18.   No coop, pen, cage, or similar structure shall exceed one hundred
fifty (150) square feet (includes coop space and chicken run).
   G.   Any chicken that is outside of an approved coop or enclosed area may be
confiscated by any agent of the City. (Ord. 2022-02, 5-17-2022)
ARTICLE B. RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-3
SECTION:
10-5B-1: Permitted Uses
10-5B-2: Conditional Uses
10-5B-3: Area, Height And Width Regulations
10-5B-4: Yard Regulations
10-5B-1: PERMITTED USES:
In residential zone R-3, no building or land shall be used and no building
shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for other
than one or more of the following uses:
   Any use permitted in residential zone R-1. (Zoning Ord.; amd. Ord. 16-18-78,
6-22-1978; 1997 Code)
10-5B-2: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in
chapter 6 of this title:
   Multiple-family dwellings.
   Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including privately
owned commercial amusement business.
   Two-, three- and four-family dwellings. (Ord. 16-18-78, 6-22-1978; amd. 1997
Code)
10-5B-3: AREA, HEIGHT AND WIDTH REGULATIONS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be not less than eight
thousand (8,000) square feet for the first unit and one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet for each additional unit.
   B.   Building And Dwelling Height: Same as for residential zone R-1.
   C.   Minimum Width: The minimum width of any lot for a main building shall
be seventy feet (70') at a distance thirty feet (30') back from the front lot
line. (Zoning Ord.)
10-5B-4: YARD REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: The minimum side yard for any dwelling shall be eight feet
(8'), and the total width of the two (2) required side yards shall be not less
than eighteen feet (18'). Other main buildings shall have a minimum side yard
of twenty feet (20'), and the total width of the two (2) side yards shall be
not less than forty feet (40'). Except as provided in the definition of private
garages, accessory buildings shall have a side yard of not less than one foot
(1') measured from the eave, and shall be located not closer than fifteen feet
(15') from a dwelling on adjacent property. On corner lots, the side yard which
faces on a street shall be not less than twenty feet (20') for both main and
accessory buildings.
   B.   Front And Rear Yards: Same as for residential R-1. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-18-
2003)
ARTICLE C. COMMERCIAL ZONE C-1
SECTION:
10-5C-1: Uses
10-5C-2: Conditions For Allowing Specific Uses
10-5C-3: Area And Frontage Regulations
10-5C-4: Height Regulations
10-5C-5: Coverage Regulations
10-5C-6: Yard Regulations
10-5C-1: USES:
In Commercial Zone C-1, no building or land shall be used and no building shall
be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for other than
one or more of the following uses:
Uses P - Permitted C - Conditional N - Not Allowed
Uses                                      P - Permitted C - Conditional N - Not
                                          Allowed
Accessory buildings and uses customarily  P
incidental to a permitted use
Accounting office                         P
Air conditioning, sales and service       N
Altering, pressing, and repairing of      P
wearing apparel
Ambulance base station                    C
Amusement arcade                          C
Animal hospital, small animals only and
provided conducted within completely      N
enclosed building
Antique, import or souvenir shop          C
Archery shop and range, provided
conducted within completely enclosed      C
building
Art and artists supply store              P
Athletic and sporting goods store,
excluding sale or repair of motor         P
vehicles, motor boats or motors
Athletic club                             N
Auction establishment                     N
Automobile, new or used, sales and        C
service
Automobile parts sales                    C
Automobile repair including paint, body
and fender, brake, muffler, upholstery    N
of, transmission work, provided conducted
within completely enclosed building
Awning sales and service                  N
Baby formula service                      C
Baker manufacture limited to goods        P
retailed
Bakery goods manufacturing                C
Bank and financial institution            P
Barber shop                               P
Beauty culture school                     C
Beauty parlor for cats and dogs           N
Beauty shop                               P
Beer parlor, sale of draft beer           N
Bicycle sales and service                 P
Billiard parlor                           N
Blueprinting or photostating              C
Boat sales and service                    C
Book store, retail                        C
Bookbinding                               C
Bottling and distributing plant           N
Bowling alley                             C
Building materials sales or yard          N
Bus terminal/mass transportation terminal C
Cafe or cafeteria                         P
Camera store                              P
Candy manufacture                         C
Candy store, confectionery                P
Car wash, laundry type                    N
Car wash, manual spray                    N
Carbonated water sales                    C
Carpenter and cabinet shop                N
Carpet and rug cleaning                   N
Carpet, rug and linoleum service          C
Cash register sales and service           C
Catering establishment                    C
China, crystal and silver shop            P
Christmas tree sales                      C
Church                                    N
Church, temporary revival                 N
Circus, carnival or other transient       N
amusement
Cleaning and dyeing establishment         N
Clinics, medical or dental                P
Clothing and accessory store              P
College or university                     C
Communication equipment building          N
Contractor shop, provided work conducted  N
within a completely enclosed building
Costume rental                            C
Dairy products store                      P
Dance hall                                N
Data processing service and supply        C
Day care center                           P
Delicatessen                              P
Dental office                             P
Department store                          P
Detective agency                          P
Diaper service, including cleaning        C
Doughnut shop                             P
Drapery and curtain store                 C
Drive-it-yourself agency or business      N
Drug store                                P
Dry cleaning establishment                C
Dry cleaning pickup station               P
Dwelling, single-family to be used by
employee of businesses in conjunction
with any commercial establishment, said   C
dwelling unit to be a part of the
business structure
Educational institution                   C
Electrical and heating appliances and      
fixture
sales and service                         N
Electronic equipment sales and service    C
Employment agency                         P
Express and transfer service              N
Fabric and textile store                  P
Film exchange establishment               P
Five and ten cent store                   P
Fix-it-shop                               N
Florist shop                              P
Frozen food lockers, incidental to a      N
store or food business
Fruit and vegetable stand                 P
Furniture sales and repair                N
Garden supplies and plant materials sales N
Gift store                                P
Glass sales and service                   C
Government buildings or uses,             N
nonindustrial
Greenhouse and nursery, soil and lawn     N
care
Grocery store                             P
Gunsmith                                  C
Gymnasium                                 N
Hardware stores                           C
Health club                               C
Health food store                         P
Hobby and crafts store                    P
Hospital                                  N
Hospital supplies                         P
Hotel                                     N
House cleaning and repair                 N
House equipment display                   C
Household appliance sales and incidental  C
Ice cream manufacture                     N
Ice cream parlor                          P
Ice manufacture and storage               N
Ice store or vending station              P
Insulation sales                          N
Insurance agency                          P
Interior decorator and designing          P
Janitor service and supply                P
Jewelry store sales and service           P
Knitting mills                            N
Laboratory, dental or medical             C
Laundry or dry cleaners, laundromat-type  N
Lawn mower sales and service              N
Leather goods, sales and service          P
Legal office                              P
Library                                   P
Linen store                               P
Linen supply service                      C
Locksmith                                 P
Lodge or social hall                      C
Lounge                                    N
Luggage store                             P
Lumber yard                               N
Machine shop                              N
Meat, fish and seafood store              N
Medical office                            P
Millinery                                 P
Miniature golf                            P
Mobile home sales lot and service         N
Monument work and sales                   N
Mortuary                                  P
Motel                                     N
Motorboat sales and service               C
Motorcycle and motor scooter sales and    N
service
Museum                                    P
Music store                               P
Needlework, embroidery or knitting store  P
Newsstand                                 C
Night club or social club                 N
Notions store                             P
Novelty store                             C
Nursery school                            N
Office in which goods or merchandise are
not commercially created, exchanged or    P
sold
Office machines sales and service         C
Office supply                             P
Optometrist, optician or oculist          P
Ornamental iron sales or repair           N
Paint or wallpaper store                  N
Parking lot or garage for passenger       C
automobiles
Pawnshop                                  N
Penny arcade                              C
Pest control and extermination            N
Pet and pet supply store                  N
Pharmacy                                  P
Photo studio                              P
Photographic supplies                     P
Physician or surgeon                      P
Pie manufacture                           C
Plumbing shop                             N
Pony ring, without stables                C
Pool hall                                 N
Popcorn or nut shop                       P
Post office                               P
Printing, lithographing, publishing, or   C
reproductions sales and services
Professional office                       P
Public utilities office                   C
Public utilities substation               N
Radio, television and video tape and film C
sales and service
Radio, television station                 N
Real estate agency                        P
Reception center or wedding chapel        C
Recreation center                         C
Recreational vehicle sales and service    C
Recreational vehicle storage              N
Rental agency for home and garden         N
equipment
Restaurant                                P
Restaurant, drive-in                      C
Roller skating rink                       C
Roofing sales or shop                     N
Secondhand store                          C
Seed and feed store, retail               N
Service station, automobile excluding
painting body and fender and upholstery   N
work
Service station, automobile, with          
rotating brush
car wash as accessory use                 N
Sewing machine sales and service          C
Sheet metal shop and retinning, provided
all operations conducted within           N
completely enclosed building
Shoe repair or shoe shine shop            C
Shoe store                                P
Shooting gallery                          N
Supermarket                               P
Swimming pool, public or commercial       C
Tailor shop                               P
Tavern                                    N
Taxidermist                               N
Telegraph office                          P
Temporary building for uses incidental to
construction work. Such building shall be P
removed upon the completion of the
construction work.
Theater, indoor                           P
Theater, outdoor                          N
Tobacco shop                              P
Tool design (precision) repair and        N
maintenance
Toy store, retail                         P
Trade or industrial school                C
Travel agency                             P
Upholstery shop                           N
Used car lot                              N
Variety store                             P
Ventilating equipment sales and service   N
Warehouse storage                         C
Water conditioning supply sale            N
Welding shop                              N
Wholesale business                        C
Window washing establishment              N
 
(City Council Minutes, 4-1-1997; amd. 1997 Code; Ord. 98-09, 9-15-1998)
10-5C-2: CONDITIONS FOR ALLOWING SPECIFIC USES:
   A.   Outside Storage Prohibited: There shall not be allowed or permitted in
this Zone the outside storage of goods, wares, merchandise, wrecked
automobiles, junk, surplus goods and wares, boxes, crates, canvas or other
similar items; it being specifically required that all goods so stored shall be
inside proper buildings meeting all zoning and building standard requirements
and inspections of the City.
   B.   Retail Establishments; Special Provisions: The specified stores, shops
or businesses in subsection A of this Section shall be retail establishments
and shall be permitted only under the following conditions:
      1.   All products produced, whether primary or incidental, shall be sold
at retail on the premises.
      2.   Any exterior sign displayed shall pertain only to a use conducted
within the building or lot or shall appertain to the lease or sale of the
property; such sign shall be attached flat against a wall of the building or
the enclosing wall, fence or hedge and parallel to its horizontal dimension,
and shall not exceed thirty six (36) square feet in area. One such sign only,
or its equivalent in square footage in not more than three (3) signs, shall be
permitted on each wall, fence or hedge facing a street or a parking lot. In no
case shall a sign project above the height of the building.
      3.   Any products displayed outside of the enclosure of the business
whether for sale or advertisement shall only be allowed during business hours.
(Ord. 98-10, 10-20-1998)
10-5C-3: AREA AND FRONTAGE REGULATIONS:
There shall be no area and frontage regulations, except off- street parking
loading and unloading spaces, in accordance with the appropriate sections of
this Code. (Zoning Ord.)
10-5C-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall be erected to a height greater than two and one-half (2 1/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35'). (Zoning Ord.)
10-5C-5: COVERAGE REGULATIONS:
No building or structure or group of buildings with their accessory building
shall cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lot. (Zoning Ord.;
amd. 1997 Code)
10-5C-6: YARD REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards:
      1.   Dwellings: For dwellings, the minimum side yard for any dwelling
shall be thirty feet (30'), and the total width of the two (2) required side
yards shall be not less than seventy feet (70'). (Zoning Ord.)
      2.   Other Buildings: For other buildings, none, except that wherever a
building is built upon a lot adjacent to a residential zone boundary, there
shall be provided a side yard of not less than ten feet (10') on the side of
the building adjacent to the boundary line, and on corner lots, the side yard
which faces the street shall be not less than twenty feet (20'). (Zoning Ord.;
amd. 1997 Code)
   B.   Front Yard: The minimum depth of the front yard for all buildings,
walls or fences more than two feet (2') in height shall be ten feet (10').
   C.   Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard for all buildings shall be fifteen
feet (15'). (Zoning Ord.)
ARTICLE D. COMMERCIAL ZONE C-2
SECTION:
10-5D-1: Uses
10-5D-2: Conditions For Allowing Specific Uses
10-5D-3: Area And Frontage Regulations
10-5D-4: Yard Regulations
10-5D-5: Height Regulations
10-5D-6: Distance Between Buildings
10-5D-7: Lot Coverage
10-5D-8: Parking
10-5D-9: Signs
10-5D-10: Approvals Required
10-5D-11: Other Requirements
10-5D-12: Prohibition Of Sound Walls Or Barriers
10-5D-1: USES:
In Commercial Zone C-2, no building or land shall be used, and no building
shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for other
than one or more of the following uses:
P - Permitted
C - Conditional
Uses
Uses
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use        P
Ambulance base station                                                        P
Amusement arcade                                                              P
Animal hospital, small animals only and provided conducted within completely  C
enclosed building
Antique, import or souvenir shop                                              P
Archery shop and range, provided conducted within completely enclosed         P
building
Art and artist supply store                                                   P
Athletic and sporting goods store                                             P
Auction establishment                                                         P
Automobile parts sales                                                        P
Automobile, RV, motorcycle, OHV, or boat sales, service                       C
Automotive repair including, but not limited to, paint, body, brake, muffler,
upholstery and transmission, provided conducted within completely enclosed    C
building
Awning sales and service                                                      P
Baker, manufacture and goods retailed                                         P
Bank and financial institution                                                P
Barber/beauty shop, cosmetology, nails, tanning                               P
Beer bar, tavern, lounge or night club                                        C
Bicycle sales and service                                                     P
Blueprinting or photostating                                                  P
Bottling and distributing plant                                               C
Bowling alley                                                                 P
Building materials sales or yard                                              C
Bus terminal/mass transportation terminal                                     C
Car wash                                                                      C
Carpet and linoleum, sales, service and cleaning                              P
Church                                                                        P
Clothing/shoe repair                                                          P
Communication equipment building (cell tower hub building)                    P
Contractor shop, provided work conducted within a completely enclosed         C
building
Convenience store                                                             P
Costume rental                                                                P
Data processing service and supply                                            P
Daycare, pre-school                                                           C
Dwelling, single-family, to be used by employee of businesses in conjunction
with any commercial establishment, said dwelling to be a part of the business C
structure
Education institution, excluding trade and industrial                         P
Education institution, trade and industrial                                   C
Electrical, air conditioning, heating appliances and fixture sales and        P
service
Electronic equipment sales and service                                        P
Employment agency                                                             P
Equipment rental                                                              C
Film processing plant                                                         P
Florist shop                                                                  P
Food services                                                                 P
Freezer storage facility                                                      C
Furniture sales and repair                                                    P
Garden supplies and plant materials sales, greenhouse, nursery and lawn care  C
Glass sales and service                                                       P
Government building or use, nonindustrial                                     P
Gun range, indoor                                                             C
Gunsmith                                                                      P
Gymnasium, health or athletic club, recreation center, swimming pool (public  P
or commercial)
Hobby and craft store                                                         P
Hotel/motel                                                                   C
Insulation sales and installation                                             P
Interior decorator and designing                                              P
Janitor service and supply                                                    P
Jewelry sales and service                                                     P
Laboratory, dental or medical                                                 P
Landscaping material sales and design                                         C
Laundromat, dry cleaners, linen supply service                                P
Lawn mower sales and service                                                  P
Leather goods, sales and service                                              P
Library                                                                       P
Loan establishment, payday or title                                           C
Locksmith                                                                     P
Machine, sheet metal or precision tool design shop                            C
Mixed use                                                                     C
Mobile business                                                               P
Mobile home sales and service                                                 C
Monument sales and service                                                    P
Mortuary                                                                      P
Museum                                                                        P
Office in which goods or merchandise are not commercially created, exchanged  P
or sold
Office machine sales and service                                              P
Ornamental iron sales and service                                             P
Pawnshop                                                                      C
Pest control and extermination                                                P
Pet and pet supply store                                                      C
Pet grooming                                                                  P
Pharmacy                                                                      P
Photo studio                                                                  P
Plumbing shop                                                                 P
Pool/billiard, dance, lodge or social hall                                    C
Post Office                                                                   P
Printing, lithographing, publishing or reproductions sales and service        P
Public utilities office                                                       P
Public utilities substation                                                   C
Radio, television station                                                     P
Real estate agency                                                            P
Reception center or wedding chapel                                            P
Retail sales                                                                  P
Roofing sales or shop                                                         P
Skate park or rink                                                            C
Storage - RV, warehouse or units                                              C
Supermarket                                                                   P
Tattoo establishment                                                          P
Taxidermist                                                                   C
Theater, indoor                                                               P
Wholesale business                                                            P
Window washing establishment                                                  P
 
(Ord. 2018-02, 5-15-2018)
10-5D-2: CONDITIONS FOR ALLOWING SPECIFIC USES:
   A.   Outside Storage Prohibited: There shall not be allowed or permitted in
this zone the outside storage of goods, wares, merchandise, wrecked
automobiles, junk, surplus goods and wares, boxes, crates, canvas or other
similar items; it being specifically required that all goods so stored shall be
inside proper buildings meeting all zoning and building standard requirements
and inspections of the City.
   B.   Retail Establishments; Special Provisions: Retail establishments shall
be permitted only under the following conditions:
      1.   All products produced, whether primary or incidental, shall be sold
at retail on the premises.
      2.   Any exterior sign displayed shall pertain only to a use conducted
within the building or lot or shall appertain to the lease or sale of the
property.
      3.   Any products displayed outside of the enclosure of the business
whether for sale or advertisement shall only be allowed during business hours.
(Ord. 2018-02, 5-15-2018)
10-5D-3: AREA AND FRONTAGE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Width: The minimum lot width, as measured at the front setback
line, shall be thirty five feet (35').
   B.   Lot Width, Corner Lots: Each corner lot shall have a minimum lot width,
as measured at the front setback line, of forty five feet (45'). (Ord. 2018-02,
5-15-2018)
10-5D-4: YARD REGULATIONS:
   A.   Front Yard: The minimum front yard setback for all buildings shall be
five feet (5').
   B.   Side Yards:
      1.   Adjacent To Residential Zone: None, except where the side lot line
or side parcel line is immediately adjacent to a residential zone, a side yard
of equal width to that required for the widest side yard in the adjoining
residential zone shall be provided on the side adjacent to the residential
zone. A side yard may not be required for lots or parcels if the residential
zone is used for City parks, school grounds or churches.
      2.   Side Yard, Corner Lots: The minimum side yard for all buildings on
corner lots shall be ten feet (10') on the side adjacent to a street. However,
a structure cannot be located within the clear view area outlined in section
10-10-2 of this title.
   C.   Rear Yard: None required, except where the rear of the lot or parcel is
immediately adjacent to a residential zone, a rear yard of equal width to that
required for the rear yard in the adjoining residential zone shall be provided.
A six foot (6') access must also be provided. A rear yard may not be required
for lots or parcels if the residential zone is used for City parks, school
grounds or churches.
   D.   Accessory Buildings: No accessory building shall be located in the
required front yard area. The minimum distance between accessory buildings and
main building, or other accessory buildings, shall be six feet (6') at the
closest points. Accessory buildings shall be located at least two feet (2')
away from any side or rear property line. (Ord. 2018-02, 5-15-2018)
10-5D-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No main building shall be erected to a height greater than thirty five feet
(35') without first obtaining a conditional use permit. All new structures
exceeding two (2) stories in height shall be served with elevators or
escalators in addition to the stairways otherwise required by law. No accessory
building shall exceed twenty feet (20') in height or the maximum height of the
main building, whichever is lower. (Ord. 2018-02, 5-15-2018)
10-5D-6: DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
The minimum distance between main buildings on the same lot or parcel shall be
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2018-02, 5-15-2018)
10-5D-7: LOT COVERAGE:
Lot coverage by all buildings, including main and accessory buildings, shall be
not more than sixty percent (60%) of the total lot or parcel area. (Ord. 2018-
02, 5-15-2018)
10-5D-8: PARKING:
See section
10-3-9 of this title. (Ord. 2018-02, 5-15-2018)
10-5D-9: SIGNS:
See section
9-6-8 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-02, 5-15-2018)
10-5D-10: APPROVALS REQUIRED:
   A.   Site Plan: Site plan approval shall be required for all new buildings
and changes of use in existing buildings in the C-2 Commercial Zone.
   B.   Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit shall be required for
all businesses and uses listed in this article as "C - conditional use".
   C.   Development Agreement: A development agreement shall be required for
all new development in the C-2 Commercial Zone. All applications for a rezone,
preliminary plat, or site plan approval shall be conditioned upon final
approval of the development agreement by the City Council.
   D.   See title 9, chapter 8 of this Code for all other approvals required.
(Ord. 2018-02, 5-15-2018)
10-5D-11: OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Restrictions: No area needed to meet the lot width, frontage, area,
setback or other requirements of this article may be divided, sold, or leased
separate from such lot or building.
   B.   Design Standards: All new site development or construction in the C-
2 Commercial Zone shall incorporate the appropriate design standards described
in title 9, chapter 8 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-02, 5-15-2018)
10-5D-12: PROHIBITION OF SOUND WALLS OR BARRIERS:
The erection of sound walls or barriers in Commercial Zone C-2 on property
abutting Interstate 15 is prohibited. (Ord. 2018-02, 5-15-2018)
ARTICLE E. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
10-5E-1: Definition
10-5E-2: Purpose
10-5E-3: Location
10-5E-4: Sign Restriction
10-5E-1: DEFINITION:
"Sexually Oriented Business" shall be defined as provided in Section
3-7-4 of this Code. (Ord. 98-06, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
10-5E-2: PURPOSE:
The City Council finds that there is a compelling interest in restricting
sexually oriented businesses due to convincing documented evidence that a
concentration of sexually oriented businesses and adult businesses have a
deleterious effect on both the existing businesses and the surrounding
residential areas adjacent to such sexual oriented businesses, causing
increased crime and a diminution in property values. To respond to these
concerns and an increase in public concern, the City Council has enacted this
Article to restrict sexually oriented businesses as set forth herein. (Ord. 98-
06, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
10-5E-3: LOCATION:
Sexually oriented businesses as defined above, shall be allowed only in a C-
2 Zone. Further, no sexually oriented business shall be located within a six
hundred foot (600') radius of any of the following: civic buildings, schools,
churches, parks, and/or residences. No sexually oriented business shall be
located within a five hundred foot (500') radius of any other business, or
commercial establishment including any other sexually oriented business. (Ord.
98-06, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
10-5E-4: SIGN RESTRICTION:
The use of signs by a sexually oriented business shall be limited as follows:
   A.   No more than one 1-sided sign shall be allowed on any sexually oriented
business premises.
   B.   Only flat wall signs shall be permitted for sexually oriented
businesses.
   C.   There shall be no off-premises signs to advertise sexually oriented
businesses.
   D.   No sign on any sexually oriented business premises shall be allowed to
exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
   E.   No animation shall be permitted on or around any sexually oriented
business sign or on the exterior walls or roof of a sexually oriented business
premises.
   F.   No descriptive art or design depicting adult activity related to, or
inferring the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sexually oriented
business sign, and such sign shall contain alphanumeric copy only.
   G.   Painted signs or painted wall advertising shall not be allowed on or
upon any sexually oriented business premises.
   H.   Signs other than those specifically allowed for sexually oriented
businesses are not allowed to be constructed or placed on the premises, There
shall be no temporary sign, banner, light, decorated window, spotlight, or
other device to draw attention to the business location of any sexually
oriented business. (Ord. 98-06, 9-15-1998, eff. 9-16-1998)
ARTICLE F. BOULEVARD MIXED USE ZONE (BMU)
SECTION:
10-5F-1: Purpose
10-5F-2: Boulevard Mixed Use Requirements
10-5F-3: Vertical Structure Of Land Uses
10-5F-4: Parking
10-5F-5: Permitted Materials
10-5F-6: Prohibited Uses
10-5F-7: Development Requirements
10-5F-1: PURPOSE:
The Boulevard Mixed Use Zone (BMU) is designed to encourage infill and
redevelopment opportunities while creating a mix of retail, office and
residential uses. Commercial uses are limited to convenience retail, service
and professional offices. Building heights are limited to five (5) stories of
habitable use from finished grade to roofline. (Ord. 2017-07, 11-21-2017)
10-5F-2: BOULEVARD MIXED USE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Proposed developments within the BMU Zone shall submit the following
items to the City before project approval can be given:
      1.   Design/development guidelines, at a minimum, addressing the
following:
         a.   General site engineering (e.g., storm drainage, provision of
utilities, erosion control, etc.);
         b.   Architectural guidelines, including building setbacks, height,
massing and scale, site coverage by buildings, materials and colors;
         c.   Landscaping and open space standards and requirements;
         d.   Signage;
         e.   Exterior lighting;
         f.   Parking, vehicular circulation and access to the site;
         g.   Rights of access within the center, use of cross easements,
pedestrian links, etc.;
         h.   Development phasing and improvement/amenities to be completed
with each phase;
         i.   Outdoor storage, sales, and equipment;
         j.   Fencing and walls;
         k.   Street alignment and requirements; and
         l.   Special features for the Boulevard Mixed Use Zone.
      2.   Development agreement between developer and Sunset City.
      3.   Anticipated project timeline. (Ord. 2017-07, 11-21-2017)
10-5F-3: VERTICAL STRUCTURE OF LAND USES:
   A.   The design and functioning of the areas in the Mixed Use Zone may be
designed to achieve either a vertical or horizontal structure of activity along
Main Street.
      1.   Vertically Mixed: The following broad categories generally describe
the character of a vertical structure. First floor uses primarily being small
retail and service businesses and offices. The dominant orientation of doors
and windows shall be toward the primary streets central to the Mixed Use Zone
areas, i.e., Main Street. Individual or shared entrances for upstairs
residential units may be located at the first floor level, with parking garage
access at the side or rear, away from Main Street. Plazas may be located
adjacent to the primary streets. Upper floor uses may contain offices and
residential dwelling units, including home occupations as permitted. Balconies,
decks, and rooftop gardens are encouraged.
      2.   Horizontally Mixed: Horizontal structure combines single-use
buildings in a range of land uses within one block. In more urban areas, this
approach avoids the financing and coding complexities of vertical layered uses
while achieving the goal of mixing uses in one place. In less urban areas,
horizontal mixed-use offers the advantage of sharing utilities and amenities
while providing an easier to build and entitle mix of uses within a walkable
block circumscribed by thoroughfares. (Ord. 2017-07, 11-21-2017)
10-5F-4: PARKING:
   A.   Sunset City desires to encourage the redevelopment of smaller sites by
providing a more flexible approach to parking and to make efficient use of
available on-street parking. The amount of off-street parking required may be
reduced by an amount that can be demonstrated may be in demand at different
intervals of time throughout the day.
   B.   Minimum required residential on-site parking:
      1.   Studio: One space.
      2.   One bedroom: 1.5 spaces.
      3.   Two bedroom unit: Two (2) spaces.
      4.   Three bedroom unit: Two (2) spaces.
      5.   Guest parking: One space per eight (8) units.
   C.   Minimum required commercial/retail on-site parking: Two (2) spaces per
one thousand (1,000) square feet. (No additional parking is required for a
change of use in an existing building, even where the existing parking may be
nonconforming. Additional parking must be provided in accordance with these
standards for any building addition that adds new habitable or leasable floor
area. Amount of additional parking shall be calculated based upon new square
footage only.) (Ord. 2017-07, 11-21-2017)
10-5F-5: PERMITTED MATERIALS:
   A.   Primary building materials shall be durable and project an image of
permanence. Appropriate materials include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Brick, stone, or other masonry products;
      2.   Steel;
      3.   Stucco;
      4.   Cast concrete;
      5.   Split face block;
      6.   Composite siding;
      7.   Steel, corrugated metal;
      8.   Glass; or
      9.   Other comparable materials as proposed by builder. (Ord. 2017-07,
11-21-2017)
10-5F-6: PROHIBITED USES:
   A.   In the BMU Zone the following uses are expressly prohibited:
      Automobile, truck, recreational vehicle storage, repair, fuel and/or
sales.
      Industrial uses.
      Marijuana facilities.
   B.   Until parcels are developed or re-developed, existing uses and parking
are permitted within the BMU. (Ord. 2017-07, 11-21-2017)
10-5F-7: DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Size: No minimum lot size is required. No maximum lot coverage
limit. All lots must be functional and meet the minimum setback and parking
requirements.
   B.   Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Orientation And Setbacks On Main Street:
         a.   The front building setback shall be a minimum of zero (0) and a
maximum of fifty five feet (55').
         b.   At corner locations, the Main Street frontage shall be deemed the
front, and a principal public entrance door(s) shall be located in the front
wall facing Main Street or at the corner of the block adjacent to the sidewalk.
         c.   At non-corner locations, the principal public entrance door shall
be located in the front wall facing Main Street, at a building corner adjacent
to the sidewalk, or within twenty feet (20') of the sidewalk edge in a side
wall.
         d.   Sidewalks may be used for patron seating areas appurtenant to a
permitted or conditional use, when such outdoor use area designation is
approved in accordance with the conditional use permit standards in this
chapter.
      2.   Side Setbacks: The minimum building setback at a side lot line shall
be zero (0). At corner locations, the maximum building setback at a side lot
line with frontage on a public street shall be twenty feet (20').
      3.   Rear Setback: The minimum building setback at a rear lot line shall
be zero (0); however, no building or associated parking and loading areas shall
be permitted to encroach within or otherwise limit off-street vehicular
circulation via shared drive aisles approved in conjunction with submitted
development plans.
   C.   Height Of Buildings:
      1.   Building heights are limited to five (5) stories of habitable space
above finished grade. This does not include roof top amenities such as roof top
gardens, pergolas, staircases, elevators, etc.
      2.   Taller buildings may be recommended for approval to the City Council
by the Planning Commission as a conditional use; permit approval conditions may
include specific adjustments to setbacks and limitations on building volume,
particularly for upper stories.
   D.   Street Scape/Landscaping/Sidewalks:
      1.   Along Main Street, all mixed use developments shall incorporate
combinations of the following:
         a.   Street trees in grates or raised planters;
         b.   Lamp posts every one hundred feet (100');
         c.   Ten foot (10') wide sidewalks with five feet (5') being on
owner's property and five feet (5') being on City right-of-way;
         d.   Patterns scored sidewalk in the concrete;
         e.   Bollards; and
         f.   Parking lot/parking garage screening and/or vegetative screening.
      2.   Trash and refuse containers shall be concealed behind buildings and
away from Main Street. (Ord. 2017-07, 11-21-2017)
ARTICLE G. TOWN CENTER ZONE (TC)
SECTION:
10-5G-1: Purpose
10-5G-2: Town Center Zone Requirements
10-5G-3: Vertical Structure Of Land Uses
10-5G-4: Parking
10-5G-5: Permitted Materials
10-5G-6: Prohibited And Conditional Uses
10-5G-7: Development Requirements
10-5G-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The Town Center Zone (TC) is designed to encourage infill and
redevelopment opportunities while creating a mix of retail, office, and
residential uses. Commercial uses are limited to convenience retail, café or
restaurant, service, and professional offices. The TC Zone is intended to
provide a focal point that accommodates neighborhoods with retail, service, and
residential uses in compact, walkable urban form.
   B.   The following are generally appropriate form elements in this Zone:
      1.   Attached;
      2.   Medium to large footprint;
      3.   Simple wall plane along street;
      4.   Buildings at the right-of-way;
      5.   Small to no side setbacks;
      6.   Up to five (5) stories; and
      7.   Diverse mix of frontages. (Ord. 2019-04, 8-20-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-
04, 10-20-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 6-15-2021)
10-5G-2: TOWN CENTER ZONE REQUIREMENTS:
Proposed developments within the TC Zone shall submit the following items to
the City before project approval can be given:
   A.   Design/development guidelines, at a minimum, addressing the following:
      1.   General site engineering (e.g., storm drainage, provision of
utilities, erosion control, etc.);
      2.   Architectural guidelines, including building setbacks, height,
massing and scale, site coverage by buildings, materials and colors;
      3.   Landscaping and open space standards and requirements;
      4.   Signage;
      5.   Exterior lighting;
      6.   Parking, vehicular circulation and access to the site;
      7.   Rights of access within the center, use of cross easements,
pedestrian links, etc.;
      8.   Development phasing and improvement/amenities to be completed with
each phase;
      9.   Outdoor storage, sales, and equipment;
      10.   Fencing and walls;
      11.   Street alignment and requirements; and
      12.   Special features for the Town Center Zone.
   B.   Development agreement between developer and Sunset City.
   C.   Anticipated project timeline. (Ord. 2020-04, 10-20-2020; amd. Ord.
2021-02, 6-15-2021)
10-5G-3: VERTICAL STRUCTURE OF LAND USES:
The design and functioning of the areas in the mixed-use zone will be designed
to achieve a vertical structure of activity in the zone. The following broad
categories generally describe the character of the TC Zone:
   A.   Ground-floor uses shall be a minimum twenty five percent (25%)
commercial office or retail uses.
      1.   Where development plans may include multiple structures, this
requirement may be calculated against the total ground floor space of the
development, instead of each individual building, as allowed by the Planning
Commission and City Council.
      2.   Up to one hundred percent (100%) residential use may be allowed by
the Planning Commission and City Council, but the purpose is to create a mix of
retail, office and residential use.
   B.   The dominant orientation of doors and windows shall be toward the
public streets and common areas.
   C.   Individual or shared entrances for upstairs residential units may be
located at the first-floor level, with parking garage access at the side, rear
or underneath the structure.
   D.   Plazas may be located adjacent to the public streets.
   E.   Upper floor uses may contain offices and residential dwelling units,
including home occupations as permitted.
   F.   Balconies, decks, and rooftop gardens are encouraged. (Ord. 2019-04, 8-
20-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 10-20-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 6-15-2021)
10-5G-4: PARKING:
   A.   Sunset City desires to encourage the redevelopment of smaller sites by
providing a more flexible approach to parking and to make efficient use of
available on-street parking. Shared use parking shall be encouraged. The amount
of off-street parking required may be reduced by an amount that can be
demonstrated may be in demand at different intervals of time throughout the
day.
   B.   Total parking requirement for mixed-use developments may be reduced
with "shared" spaces dedicated to residential in the evening and retail or
commercial use during daytime hours. There must be a mitigation or management
measure in place to accommodate this, such as permit parking, stall monitoring,
or other management measure approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council.
   C.   Minimum Required Residential On-Site Parking:
      1.   Studio: One (1) space;
      2.   One (1) Bedroom: One and one half (1.5) spaces:
      3.   Two (2) bedroom unit: Two (2) spaces;
      4.   Three (3) bedroom unit: Two (2) spaces; and
      5.   Guest Parking: One (1) space per eight (8) units.
   D.   Minimum Required Commercial/Retail On-Site Parking: Two (2) spaces per
one thousand (1,000) square feet. No additional parking is required for a
change of use in an existing building, even where the existing parking may be
nonconforming. Additional parking must be provided in accordance with these
standards for any building addition that adds new habitable or leasable floor
area. Amount of additional parking shall be calculated based upon new square
footage only. (Ord. 2019-04, 8-20-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 10-20-2020; amd.
Ord. 2021-02, 6-15-2021)
10-5G-5: PERMITTED MATERIALS:
Primary building materials shall be a mix of durable materials and project an
image of permanence. Appropriate materials include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Brick, stone, or other masonry products;
   B.   Steel;
   C.   Stucco;
   D.   Cast concrete;
   E.   Split face block;
   F.   Composite siding;
   G.   Steel, corrugated metal;
   H.   Glass; or
   I.   Other comparable material as proposed by builder. (Ord. 2019-04, 8-20-
2019; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 10-20-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 6-15-2021)
10-5G-6: PROHIBITED AND CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The following uses are expressly prohibited:
      1.   Industrial uses, including fabrication, manufacturing, and
warehousing;
      2.   Drive-through services;
      3.   Utilities;
      4.   Automobile, truck, recreational vehicle storage, repair, fuel and/or
sales.
   B.   The following uses will require conditional permit:
      1.   Retail, dining, or entertainment uses requiring a floor area of more
than ten thousand (10,000) square feet;
      2.   Animal boarding;
      3.   Day care or other care facilities;
      4.   Recreation facilities; and
      5.   Medical and recreational drug, marijuana, tobacco, e-cigarette, or
vape production, distribution, dispensary, or sales facilities.
   C.   Until parcels require a new conditional use permit are developed or re-
developed, existing uses and parking are permitted within the TC Zone. (Ord.
2019-04, 8-20-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 10-20-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 6-15-
2021)
10-5G-7: DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Dimensions:
      1.    Lot area – No minimum lot size is required. No maximum lot coverage
limit. All lots must be functional and meet the minimum setback and parking
requirements;
      2.   Lot width - no minimum or maximum; and
      3.   Frontage build-out - sixty percent (60%) minimum, ninety percent
(90%) maximum. Upon request, when sixty percent (60%) minimum is unreasonable,
it may be reduced by the Planning Commission and City Council.
   B.   Primary Building Setbacks:
      1.   Front - none;
      2.   Side - none, except where the side lot line is immediately adjacent
to a residential zone used for housing, it must be ten feet (10');
      3.   Side (corner/alley) - see section
10-3-6 for visual traffic clearance triangle;
      4.   Rear - none, except where the rear lot line is immediately adjacent
to a residential zone, it must be fifteen feet (15'); and
      5.   Attached garage/carport (from front facade) - none.
   C.   Accessory Building Setbacks:
      1.   Front - forty feet (40') maximum from rear property line;
      2.   Side - three feet (3') minimum;
      3.   Side - interior - zero foot (0') minimum;
      4.   Rear - three feet (3');
      5.   Rear (from alley) - fifteen feet (15'); and
      6.   Detached garage/carport (from front facade) - minimum required by
Fire Code.
   D.   Building Form:
      1.   Primary building height - two (2) stories minimum, five (5) stories
maximum;
      2.   Accessory building height - two and one half (2.5) stories or thirty
five feet (35'); and
      3.   Within twenty feet (20') of the rear or side lot line adjacent to
residential zones, buildings are to be no more than one (1) story taller than
the height of adjacent buildings. Buildings can then tier up one (1) story for
every twenty feet (20') farther from the lot line.
   E.   Parking Pad Location:
      1.   Front setback -
         a.   Mixed Use: maximum ten percent (10%) of the required parking -
fifteen-foot (15') minimum setback, ninety percent (90%) - forty-foot (40')
setback.
         b.   For a one hundred percent (100%) residential use: one hundred
percent (100%) of the required parking - forty-foot (40') minimum setback.
      2.   Side setback (corner/alley) - eight feet (8') minimum, including
buffer; and
      3.   Rear setback - three feet (3') minimum, including buffer.
   F.   Encroachments To Setbacks:
      1.   Shopfront awning - allowed to back of curb;
      2.   Architectural features - three feet (3') maximum; and
      3.   Signs - see section
9-6-8.
   G.   Other Requirements:
      1.   Meet requirements of section
9-8-6: requirements for new construction of an undeveloped or redeveloped site
of commercial and multi-family uses or remodeling of existing structures.
      2.   At corner locations, the arterial road shall be deemed the front,
and principal public entrance doors shall be located in the front wall facing
the arterial street or at the corner of the block adjacent to the sidewalk.
      3.   Sidewalks may be used for patron seating areas appurtenant to a
permitted or conditional use, when such outdoor use area designation is
approved in accordance with the conditional use permit standards in this
chapter.
      4.   No building or associated parking and loading areas shall be
permitted to encroach within or otherwise limit off-street vehicular
circulation via shared drive aisles approved in conjunction with submitted
development plans.
      5.   Height restrictions contained herein do not include roof top
amenities such as roof top gardens, hand rails, pergolas, stair cases,
elevators, air conditioners, and the like.
      6.   Taller buildings may be approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council. Approval may include specific adjustments to setbacks and limitations
on building volume, particularly for upper stories.
      7.   Any buildings wider than on hundred fifty feet (150') must be
designed to read as a series of buildings no wider than seventy five feet (75')
each.
      8.   Loading docks, overhead doors, and other service entries shall be
screened and not to be located on primary street facades.
      9.   A building form with a chamfered corner is allowed only on corner
lots and only if a corner entry is provided.
   H.   Street Scape, Landscaping, And Sidewalks: Along public streets, all
mixed use developments shall incorporate all of the following:
      1.   Street trees, in grates or raised planters, evenly spaced between
lamp posts at minimum thirty five feet (35') intervals.
      2.   Lamp posts every one hundred feet (100').
      3.   Ten-foot (10') wide sidewalks from the back of curb (owner's right-
of-way is included in this calculation).
      4.   Parking lot/parking garage screening and/or vegetative screening.
         a.   Landscape walls shall have masonry or stucco finish.
         b.   No planting strips allowed between sidewalk and building.
      5.   Trash and refuse containers shall be concealed behind buildings and
away from public streets, but not within ten feet (10') of residences.
Dumpsters shall be stored either:
         a.   Within a separate walled and gated enclosure. Materials for the
enclosure should be reinforced concrete or reinforced masonry with bollards as
protection from traffic.
         b.   Within the building out of sight.
      6.   Opaque walls or fences of at least six feet (6') in height are
required along all property lines which are adjacent to a residential zone or
use or public right-of-way. (Ord. 2019-04, 8-20-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 10-20-
2020; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 6-15-2021)
CHAPTER 6
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose And Intent
10-6-2: Conditional Use Permit Required
10-6-3: Application; Procedure
10-6-4: Basis For Issuance
10-6-5: Determination
10-6-6: Building Permit; Application
10-6-7: Expiration; Extension
10-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of conditional uses is to allow in certain areas
compatible integration of uses which are related to the permitted uses of the
zone, but which may be suitable and desirable only in certain locations in that
zone due to conditions and circumstances peculiar to that location and/or upon
certain conditions which make the uses suitable and/or only if such uses are
designed, laid out and constructed on the proposed site in a particular manner.
(Ord. 16-18-78, 6-22-1978)
10-6-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses listed as conditional
uses in the zone regulations. A conditional use permit may be revoked by the
City Council after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission upon
failure to comply with the conditions imposed with the original approval of the
permit. (Ord. 16-18-78, 6-22-1978)
10-6-3: APPLICATION; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Made To Planning Commission: Application for a conditional use permit
shall be made to the Planning Commission.
   B.   Information Submitted: Detailed location, site and building plan shall
accompany the complete application forms, which are provided by the City. For
structures in existence, only a location plan need be provided.
   C.   Consideration: The application, together with all pertinent
information, shall be considered by the Planning Commission at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.
   D.   Public Hearing: The Planning Commission may call a specific public
hearing on any application after adequate notice if it is deemed in the public
interest.
   E.   Recommendation To City Council: The Planning Commission shall forward
to the City Council its recommendation for the denial or issuance of the
conditional use permit with any proposed conditions of approval; it shall also
forward detailed minutes of any public hearing that was held in conjunction
with the matter. (Ord. 16-18-78, 6-22-1978)
10-6-4: BASIS FOR ISSUANCE:
The City Council shall not authorize a conditional use permit unless evidence
is presented to establish:
   A.   Necessity: That the proposed use of the particular location is
necessary or desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute
to the general well-being of the community; and
   B.   Compatibility: That such use will not, under the circumstances of the
particular case and the conditions imposed, be detrimental to the health,
safety and general welfare of persons nor injurious to property and
improvements in the community, but will be compatible with and complimentary to
the existing surrounding uses, buildings and structures when considering, but
not limited to, effect on adjacent property values, traffic, esthetics,
pollution, parking, landscaping, location of structure on parcel and signs; and
   C.   Compliance: That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and
conditions specified in this Title for such use; and (Ord. 16-18-78, 6-22-1978)
   D.   Conformity: That the proposed use conforms to the goals, policies,
intent and governing principles of the Master Plan. (Ord. 16-18-78, 6-22-1978;
1997 Code)
10-6-5: DETERMINATION:
   A.   By City Council: The City Council may deny or permit a conditional use
to be located within any zone in which the particular conditional use is
permitted. In authorizing any conditional use, the City Council shall impose
such requirements and conditions necessary for the protection of adjacent
properties and the public welfare.
   B.   Decision Final: The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord.
16-18-78, 6-22-1978)
10-6-6: BUILDING PERMIT; APPLICATION:
Following the issuance of a conditional use permit, the Building Inspector
shall review the permit and the conditions attached. Based on this review and
compliance with any other items that might develop in the pursuance of his
duties, the Building Inspector may approve an application for a building permit
and shall ensure that development is undertaken and completed in compliance
with said conditional use permit and building permit. (Ord. 16-18-78, 6-22-
1978)
10-6-7: EXPIRATION; EXTENSION:
Unless there is substantial action under a conditional use permit within a
period of one year of its issuance, the conditional use permit shall expire.
The Planning Commission may grant a single extension not to exceed six (6)
months under exceptional circumstances. (Ord. 16-18-78, 6-22-1978)
CHAPTER 7
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
10-7-1: When Allowable
10-7-2: Repairs And Structural Alterations
10-7-3: Destruction Of Or Damage To Nonconforming Buildings
10-7-1: WHEN ALLOWABLE:
Any lawful use of buildings or land at the time of the original passage hereof,
that does not conform to the regulations prescribed herein, shall be deemed a
nonconforming use and such use may be continued, but if such nonconforming use
is discontinued for a period of one year or more, except for residential
structures or accessory farm structures, any future use of said building or
land must be in conformity with the provisions of this Title. A nonconforming
use, if changed to a conforming use may not thereafter be changed back to any
nonconforming use. (Zoning Ord.)
10-7-2: REPAIRS AND STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS:
Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming building;
provided, that the floor space of such building is not increased. (Zoning Ord.)
10-7-3: DESTRUCTION OF OR DAMAGE TO NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS:
A nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or partially destroyed
by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God, or the public
enemy, to the extent of not more than one and one-half (11/2) times its
assessed value at the time, may be destroyed and the occupancy or use of such
building, structure or part thereof, which existed at the time of such partial
destruction, may be continued or resumed; provided, that such restoration is
started within a period of one year and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
In the event such damage or destruction exceeds one and one-half (11/2) times
the assessed value of such nonconforming building or structure, no repairs or
reconstruction shall be made except in the case of residences or accessory farm
buildings, unless every portion of such building or structure is made to
conform to all regulations for new buildings in the zone in which it is
located. (Zoning Ord.)
CHAPTER 8
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
10-8-1: Purpose And Intent
10-8-2: Permitted Uses
10-8-3: Area Regulations
10-8-4: General Requirements
10-8-5: Submission Of Application
10-8-6: Planning Commission Considerations
10-8-7: Action Taken; Approval
10-8-8: Issuance Of Building Permit
10-8-9: Time Limit
10-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Diversification: A planned residential unit development (PRUD) is
intended to allow for diversification in the relationship of various uses and
structures, to permit more flexibility, to encourage new and imaginative
concepts in the design of neighborhood and housing projects in urban areas. To
this end, the development should be planned as one complex land use rather than
an aggregation of individual unrelated buildings located on separate unrelated
lots.
   B.   Compliance: Substantial compliance with the zoning regulations and
other provisions of this Zoning Title in requiring adequate standards related
to the public health, safety and general welfare shall be observed, without
unduly inhibiting the advantages of large scale site planning for residential
and related purposes. (Zoning Ord.)
10-8-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Residential Zones: A PRUD shall be permitted in all residential zones,
and notwithstanding any other provisions as hereinafter set forth, shall be
applicable if any conflict exists.
   B.   Development Plan: An overall development plan for a PRUD showing
building types, location, size, heights, number of residential units, access
roads, open spaces, parking and landscaping may be approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council and building permits issued in accordance with such
plan, even though the residential uses, housing types, and the location of the
buildings proposed differ from the residential uses, housing types, and
regulations governing such uses in effect in the zone in which the development
is proposed, provided the provisions of this Chapter are complied with.
   C.   Nonresidential Uses; Exception: Accessory nonresidential uses may be
included in the development to provide the necessary service to the residents
of the development as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.
(Zoning Ord.)
10-8-3: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Minimum: The minimum area for a PRUD shall be as follows:
      6 acres in a R-1 Zone
      4 acres in a R-3 Zone
(Zoning Ord.; amd. Ord. 16-3-1, 8-3-1982)
   B.   Dwelling Units: The number of dwelling units in a PRUD may be ten
percent (10%) higher than the number of dwelling units permitted by the area
regulations of the zone in which the PRUD is located in accordance with the
following:
      1.   Land for schools, churches and other nonresidential service type
uses and land used exclusively for access to the usable area of a PRUD shall
not be included in the area used for determining the number of allowable
dwelling units.
      2.   The amount of bonus, if any, shall be determined by the Planning
Commission after considering the proposed site in relation to public services
and facilities, surrounding residential density and land use, adequacy of
traffic access, topographic considerations and other related conditions.
   C.   Compliance: All proposed residential developments, with the exception
of normal land subdivision, within the City equal to or in excess of the
minimum area requirements for a PRUD as set forth in subsection A of this
Section shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter and be developed as a
PRUD. Land to be developed as a normal subdivision will be subject to the
provisions of the Subdivision Title 1 . (Zoning Ord.)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 11 of this Code.
10-8-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Ownership: The development shall be in single or corporate ownership or
the application filed jointly by the owners of the property.
   B.   Affect Of Adjacent Property: The property adjacent to the PRUD shall
not be adversely affected and to this end, the Planning Commission may require,
in the absence of appropriate physical boundaries, that uses of least intensity
or greatest compatibility be arranged around the boundaries of the project.
Yard and height requirements of the adjacent zone shall apply on the periphery
of the project.
   C.   Determination Of Site Development Standards; Signs: Site development
standards and sign regulations shall be determined when approving the site
development plan.
   D.   Preservation Of Open Space: The City Council, upon recommendation of
the Planning Commission, shall require the preservation, maintenance, and
ownership of open space utilizing at the City's option one of the following
methods:
      1.   Dedication of the land as a public park or parkway system; or
      2.   Granting to the City a permanent open space easement on and over
said private open spaces to guarantee that the open space remain perpetually in
recreational use, with ownership and maintenance being the responsibility of a
homeowners' association, established with articles of association and bylaws
which are satisfactory to the City; or
      3.   Complying with the provisions of Condominium Ownership Act of 1963,
title 57, chapter 8, Utah Code Annotated, as amended, which provides for the
payment of common expenses for the upkeep of common areas and facilities.
Recreational uses and facilities may be developed within the common open space
areas on compliance with a recreation and landscaping plan approved as part of
the approved final development plan of the PRUD.
      4.   If the second or third method, subsection D2 and D3 of this Section,
is utilized to maintain the open spaces, but the organization established fails
to maintain the open spaces in reasonable order and condition, the City may, at
its option, do or contract to have done the required maintenance and shall
assess ratably the open space and individually owned properties within the
PRUD. Such assessment shall be a lien against property and shall be filed with
the County Recorder, or the City may bring suit to collect the maintenance
fees, together with reasonable attorney fees and costs.
      5.   The developer shall be required to provide a surety or cash bond,
escrow or bank letter of credit, in an amount determined by the City Engineer,
guaranteeing the completion of the development of the open space, or a phase
thereof. When completed in accordance with the approved plan, the bond shall be
released. If uncompleted at the end of two (2) years, the City will review the
progress and may proceed to use the bond funds to make the improvements to the
open space areas in accordance with the approved plan. The bond shall be
approved by the Mayor and by the City Attorney and shall be filed with the City
Recorder.
      6.   Where access roads create corner lots of adjoining parcels of land,
the location of the access road shall be located so as to maintain the minimum
corner lot side yard requirements of the zone in which the corner lot is
located, plus an additional ten foot (10') planting and walking area.
      7.   If the PRUD is to be subsequently divided either as a "subdivision"
into phase development parcels or separately owned and operated units, such
division boundaries shall be indicated on the development plan and preliminary
subdivision approval concurrently obtained in the case of a "subdivision".
      8.   The Subdivision Title of the City as it now or hereafter exist
applies to all developments.
      9.   Once the overall development plan showing details of buildings,
structures and uses has been approved by the City Council after recommendations
from the Planning Commission, no changes or alterations to such development
plans or uses shall be made without first obtaining approval of the Planning
Commission. Major revisions require City Council approval.
      10.   The area shall be adaptable to a unit type development and shall
not contain within or through it any ownership or physical barrier which would
tend to impair the unit cohesiveness. (Zoning Ord.)
10-8-5: SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Contents: An application for a PRUD shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission and shall be accompanied by an overall development plan showing
uses, dimensions and locations of proposed structures, areas reserved for
public uses such as schools, playground, landscaping, recreational facilities
and open spaces, areas reserved and proposals for accommodating the design and
character of the proposed development.
   B.   Additional Information: Such other information shall be included as may
be necessary to determine that the contemplated arrangement of uses make it
desirable to apply regulations and requirements differing from those ordinarily
applicable under this Zoning Title. (Zoning Ord.)
10-8-6: PLANNING COMMISSION CONSIDERATIONS:
In considering the proposed PRUD, the Planning Commission shall consider:
   A.   Design: The design of buildings and their relationship on the site and
their relationship to development beyond the boundaries of the development.
   B.   Streets: Which streets shall be public and which shall be private, the
entrances and exits to the development and the provisions for internal and
external traffic circulation and off-street parking.
   C.   Landscaping: The landscaping and screening as related to the several
uses within the development and as a means of its integration into its
surroundings.
   D.   Signs; Lighting: The size, location, design and nature of signs if any,
and the intensity and direction of area or flood lighting.
   E.   Density: The residential density of the proposed development and its
distribution as compared with the residential density of the surrounding lands,
either existing or as indicated on the Zoning Map or Master Plan proposals of
the City as being a desirable future residential density.
   F.   Time Limit: The demonstrated ability of the proponents of the planned
residential unit development to financially carry out the proposed project
under total or phase development proposals within the time limit established.
(Zoning Ord.)
10-8-7: ACTION TAKEN; APPROVAL:
   A.   Planning Commission: The Planning Commission, subject to the
requirements of this Chapter, may recommend approval or denial, or approval
with conditions, of the proposed PRUD to the City Council.
   B.   City Council: The City Council, after holding a public hearing thereon,
may approve or disapprove the application for a PRUD. In approving an
application, the City Council may attach such conditions including a limitation
of time during which the permit remains valid, as it may deem necessary to
secure the purposes of this Chapter. Approval of the City Council, together
with any conditions imposed, constitutes approval of the proposed development
as a "permitted use" in the zone in which it is proposed. (Zoning Ord.)
10-8-8: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT:
The Building Department shall not issue any permit for the proposed building or
use within the project unless such building or use is in accordance with the
approved development plan and any conditions imposed. Approved development
plans shall be filed with the Planning Commission, City Engineer, Public Works
Director and City Recorder. (Zoning Ord.; 1997 Code)
10-8-9: TIME LIMIT:
Unless there is substantial action leading toward completion of a PRUD or an
approved phase thereof within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of
approval, as determined by the City Council, such approval shall expire, unless
after reconsideration of the progress of the project, a six (6) month extension
is approved. (Zoning Ord.)
CHAPTER 9
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
10-9-1: License Required
10-9-2: Required Conditions
10-9-3: Home Childcare Regulations
10-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Scope: To assure compliance with the provisions of this title and to
protect the character of residential neighborhoods in the City, a home
occupation license shall be issued to select businesses before a dwelling unit
or garage in a residential zone may be used for business purposes. Home
occupations will be limited to two (2) licenses per dwelling unit.
      1.   Only the following home based businesses are required to obtain and
maintain a current City business license and meet all requirements of title 3,
"Business And License Regulations", of this Code:
         a.   In-home child or adult care and preschool businesses.
         b.   Businesses that require or attract more than ten (10) vehicle
trips per day, including but not limited to package delivery, client visits,
and employee trips.
         c.   Any business that is required to have a fire inspection due to
possible hazardous storage or activities.
         d.   Any business that is required to obtain a license from another
governmental agency including, but not limited to, the Utah or Davis County
Department of Health, Utah Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing,
United States Department of Agriculture or United States Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
         e.   Any intrinsically commercial operation, such as residential
hosting or home bed and breakfast.
   B.   Procedure: The Business Licensing Clerk and City Recorder may, upon
application, issue a home occupation license, which shall state the permitted
home occupation. The initial license shall not be issued until the Business
Licensing Clerk and City Recorder are satisfied that the applicant will meet
all of the conditions required. (Ord. 2017-11, 11-21-2017)
10-9-2: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
Each of the following conditions must be observed at all times by the holder of
a home occupation license:
   A.   Physical Change: The home occupation will not physically change the
dwellings to the extent that it would alter the residential character of the
premises or the residential atmosphere of the neighborhood in which it is
located. Furthermore, it shall not disturb the peace and quiet, including radio
and television reception, of the neighborhood by reason of color, design,
materials, construction, lighting, sounds, noises or vibrations.
   B.   Permissible Footage: The home occupation activity shall be conducted
wholly within the home of the applicant or an enclosed garage if said structure
is located on the premises of the applicant and the total permissible footage
(length and width of outside main building measurements) to be used for the
home occupation shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total square
footage of the house, excluding garage and basement area.
   C.   Inventory And Supplies: Inventory and supplies for the home occupation
shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the permitted area.
   D.   Signs And Advertising: No sign or advertising will be displayed on the
premises, except one attached flat against the building or displayed in a
window and does not exceed four (4) square feet in area.
   E.   Vehicles: All maintenance or service vehicles and equipment, or any
vehicle bearing advertising related to the home occupation or any other similar
vehicle shall be stored on the premises.
   F.   Conformance With Codes: There shall be complete conformity with Fire,
Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Health Codes and to all State and City
ordinances.
   G.   Hazards To Safety: The home occupation shall not be associated with
noise, dust, odors, noxious fumes, glare or other hazards to safety and health
which are emitted and may be discernible beyond the premises.
   H.   Dangerous Materials: The home occupation shall not create a hazard by
using flammable, explosive or other dangerous materials or by keeping, raising
or storing animals which are capable of inflicting harm or discomfort or
endangering the health and safety of any person or property.
   I.   Excess Demand For Utilities: The home occupation shall not create a
demand for Municipal or utility services or community facilities in excess of
those usually and customarily provided for residential uses. (Ord. 2017-11, 11-
21-2017)
10-9-3: HOME CHILDCARE REGULATIONS:
Any childcare operation conducted on property where the primary use is a
residence must be a licensed family childcare provider in accordance with Utah
State Rule R430-90 licensed family childcare, and hold a current Sunset City
home occupation business license. The above rule is supplemented as follows:
   A.   The childcare operation shall comply with all provisions of a home
occupation except that a childcare business shall not be restricted to twenty
five percent (25%) of the living area of the home and additionally may use yard
space for play purposes, so long as the use otherwise complies with the
restrictions on home occupations.
   B.   A home childcare business shall be limited to not more than eight (8)
children including the provider's own children under the age of four (4). No
more than two (2) of the children may be under the age of two (2). (Ord. 2017-
11, 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 10
FENCES
SECTION:
10-10-1: Definitions
10-10-2: Clear-View Area
10-10-3: Fence Standards For A Single-Family Or Two-Family Dwelling
10-10-4: Fence And Wall Standards In All Other Developments
10-10-5: Grade Differential
10-10-6: Other Regulations
10-10-7: Nonconforming Rights
10-10-8: Penalty
10-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   FENCE: A tangible barrier or obstruction of any material, with the purpose
or intent, or having the effect of preventing passage and/or view across the
property or perimeter line. It includes hedges and walls.
      Opaque: A fence constructed of solid vinyl, masonry or wood that is one
hundred percent (100%) site obstructing.
      Open Style: A fence that is at least seventy five percent (75%) open
which does not present a visual barrier/hazard for pedestrians or drivers,
including but not limited to non-slatted chain link, picket, corral or wrought
iron.
       View-Obstructing: A fence constructed of wood, vinyl, masonry or chain
link with slats. Gaps are required to be no wider than may naturally occur.
Examples: unavoidable gaps between abutting cedar plank fencing, or between
slats inserted into chain link fence.
   YARD: An open space on a lot other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward by structures.
        Front Yard: The area between the back of the curb and the primary
structure.
        Rear Yard: The area between the back property line and the primary
structure.
      Side Yard: The area between the side of the primary structure and the
side property line. (Ord. 2017-09, 11-21-2017)
10-10-2: CLEAR-VIEW AREA:
   A.   Street intersection: The area of land determined by measuring forty
feet (40') from the point of juncture of street curb lines, and then connecting
the termini of those lines forming a triangle that encompasses a portion of the
street right-of-way and the adjoining lot.
   B.   Intersection of driveway and street: The area of land determined by
first establishing the point of intersection of the driveway edge and the
street property line, then measuring ten feet (10') along the property line
away from the driveway, and ten feet (10') along the edge of the driveway in
toward the property. A line is then drawn from the termini of the two (2)
lines, forming a triangle. This is accomplished on both sides of the driveway.
   C.   Within the above clear-view areas, the following shall apply:
      1.   Solid fences, walls, signs, sight obscuring vegetation, and/or other
sight obscuring devices shall not exceed two feet (2') in height above the
level of the curb.
      2.   Open style fences shall not exceed four feet (4') in height above
the level of the curb.
      3.   Tree trunks shall not be located within the clear-view area; however
tree canopies may extend into the clear view area if they are trimmed at least
nine feet (9') above the elevation of the sidewalk and thirteen feet (13')
above the elevation of the street. It is unlawful to allow any vegetation or
other growth to block any traffic sign, traffic signal, street light, or other
public safety device, regardless of whether it is located in a clear-view area
or not. (Ord. 2017-09, 11-21-2017)
10-10-3: FENCE STANDARDS FOR A SINGLE-FAMILY OR TWO-FAMILY DWELLING:
The following shall apply to any single-family or two-family dwelling on an
individual lot:
   A.   On an interior lot, a fence located within a minimum rear and/or side
yard setback shall be a maximum of six feet (6') in height.
   B.   In the minimum front yard setback area, a fence shall be a maximum of
four feet (4') in height, except as further restricted in a clear-view area.
   C.   On a corner lot, a street side yard and/or street rear yard may be
enclosed by a fence to the same extent as a minimum rear yard or minimum side
yard setback on interior lot, except as further restricted in a clear-view
area.
   D.   Fences shall not be placed upon public property or in a public right-
of-way. Fences shall be placed a minimum of one foot (1') from sidewalks. (Ord.
2017-09, 11-21-2017)
10-10-4: FENCE AND WALL STANDARDS IN ALL OTHER DEVELOPMENTS:
With the exception of a single-family or two-family dwelling on an individual
lot, the following shall apply to any lot or parcel within Sunset City:
   A.   A wall or fence shall be a maximum of six feet (6') in height, with the
exception that any wall or solid fence located within twenty feet (20') of a
public street shall be a maximum of three feet (3') in height, and any "open
style" fence located within twenty feet (20') of a public street shall be a
maximum of four feet (4') in height.
   B.   Opaque walls or fences of at least six feet (6') in height are required
along all property lines which are adjacent to a residential zone or use or
public right-of-way. The exact location, height and type of materials of the
wall or fence shall be approved by the Planning Commission as part of the site
plan approval process.
   C.   Any outdoor storage area shall be screened from view by a minimum six
foot (6') high opaque wall or fence constructed of, or finished with, materials
to match or complement the main building material of the site.
   D.   Any roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from public
view by an opaque parapet wall or similar device that is no lower in height
than six inches (6") below the height of the mechanical equipment on the
exposed side or sides.
   E.   Any loading or delivery facility shall be screened from street view by
a six foot (6') high opaque wall or fence constructed of wood, brick, vinyl,
masonry, or similar material as approved by the Planning Commission.
   F.   A fence or wall of six feet (6') in height shall be required along the
rear lot line of a reverse frontage lot. In conjunction with a subdivision plat
or planned unit development a fence along the rear lot line of a reverse
frontage lot may have a maximum height of eight feet (8') with specific
approval of the Planning Commission. Such fence or wall shall be constructed of
masonry, wood, vinyl, or similar material as determined by the Planning
Commission.
   G.   Fences shall not be placed upon public property or in a public right-
of-way. Fences shall be placed a minimum of one foot (1') from sidewalks. (Ord.
2017-09, 11-21-2017)
10-10-5: GRADE DIFFERENTIAL:
In instances where there is a grade differential along a property line
separating two (2) lots as a result of a retaining wall or topographic feature,
a fence, hedge, wall, or other permitted screening device may be erected to the
maximum height permitted on either side of the property line. Also, in
instances where a fence runs along a sloped property line, a pre-manufactured
rectangular fence panel of up to ten feet (10') in length or less may be
installed horizontally to vertical posts such that one end of the panel is at
grade level, and the other end is no more than two-tenths (0.2) of a foot above
grade level for each linear foot of fence panel. The area beneath the bottom of
the fence and the ground may be filled or remain open, and the panel height may
be the maximum permitted on either side of the property line. (Ord. 2017-09,
11-21-2017)
10-10-6: OTHER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Fences shall not be of hazardous or potentially dangerous materials or
construction such as barbed wire, razor wire, electrified, etc., except in
agricultural uses, as permitted in this chapter or as otherwise approved in the
site plan approval process in commercial, performance, or light manufacturing
areas. Hazardous or potentially dangerous materials shall not be allowed in any
residential uses within the City.
   B.   The materials used in a constructed fence are limited to materials made
of wood, metal, concrete, masonry, stone or vinyl. The materials used to
construct the fence shall be of dimensions and design commonly intended for
typical fence construction and shall not be materials or reused materials that
have been designed for another function and are now being used to create a
fence.
   C.   All fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair. Areas along
the wall or fence shall be maintained by the property owner. (Ord. 2017-09, 11-
21-2017)
10-10-7: NONCONFORMING RIGHTS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: It is the purpose of this section to provide for
the continual use of any fence which legally existed prior to the effective
date hereof. It is the intent of this chapter to regulate such uses in such a
manner to lead eventually to the elimination of nonconforming uses over time
and in no way perpetuate said uses beyond reasonable abandonment.
   B.   Preexisting, Nonconforming Fences:
      1.   Maintenance, Repairs And Restoration:
         a.   Fences may be maintained.
         b.   A fence which is damaged or partially destroyed by fire, flood,
wind, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God, or the public enemy, to the
extent of not more than one-half (1/2) times its assessed value at the time of
repair or replacement, may be restored. Vegetation which dies off shall not be
restored in violation of this chapter.
      2.   Additions And Enlargements: A fence or structure shall not be added
to or enlarged in any manner unless such fence or structure, including such
additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all the conditions of this
chapter.
      3.   Abandonment By Neglect: Fences, structures, or portions thereof
shall be deemed abandoned by neglect where not maintained during a continuous
period of six (6) months. Burden of proof that such nonconforming rights exist
shall rest with the owner of the property in question.
      4.   Determination Of Violation: The City Code enforcer may determine
that any fence or structure in violation of this chapter, with nonconforming
rights, is a hazard to public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 2017-09, 11-21-
2017)
10-10-8: PENALTY:
It is a Class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-09, 11-21-2017)
CHAPTER 11
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING
SECTION:
10-11-1: Purpose
10-11-2: Prohibited Water Practices
10-11-3: Applicability Of Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance
10-11-4: Landscape Standards
10-11-5: Irrigation Design Standards
10-11-6: Landscapes In New Single-Family Residential Developments
10-11-7: Prohibitions On Restrictive Covenants
10-11-8: Landscapes In Commercial, Industrial, And Institutional Developments
10-11-9: Documentation For Commercial, Industrial, And Institutional Projects
10-11-10: Plan Review, Construction Inspection, And Post-Construction
Monitoring For Commercial, Industrial, And Institutional Projects
10-11-11: Enforcement, Penalty For Violations
10-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to support the State of Utah, Weber Basin
Conservancy District, secondary water providers, and other water stakeholders
in the responsible use of water. The City Council has found that it is in the
public interest to conserve the public's water resources and to promote water
efficient landscaping. The purpose of this chapter is to protect and enhance
the community's environmental, economic, recreational, and aesthetic resources
by promoting efficient use of water in the community's landscapes, reduce water
waste and establish a structure for designing, installing and maintaining water
efficient landscapes throughout the City. Adoption of these standards will
provide residents with eligibility for reimbursement programs and incentives to
retrofit existing landscaping with water wise landscaping.
The City highly encourages all property owners to retrofit existing landscaping
to come into compliance with all standards in this chapter. (Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-
2024)
10-11-2: PROHIBITED WATERING PRACTICES:
Wasteful use of water is prohibited on all properties within the City as
regulated by
8-2-11 Water Use Regulations. (Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024)
10-11-3: APPLICABILITY OF WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to:
   A.   All new landscapes in all zones of the city associated with
construction of any new residential home, commercial or industrial structure,
public facility, or mixed use development.
   B.   Any existing residential, commercial, industrial, or mixed-use projects
where the owner or developer proposes to modify the landscaped area by more
than fifty percent (50%). (Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024)
10-11-4: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
   A.   Plant Selection.
      1.   Plants shall be well-suited to the microclimate and soil conditions
at the project site. Both native and locally-adapted plants are acceptable.
Plants with similar water needs shall be grouped together as much as possible.
      2.   Areas with slopes greater than twenty-five percent (25%) shall be
landscaped with deep-rooting, water-conserving plants for erosion control and
soil stabilization.
      3.   Park strips and other landscaped areas less than eight (8) feet wide
shall be landscaped with water-conserving plants. Turf is restricted in these
spaces for new development or any retrofit projects.
      Note: Please see Exhibit A for a list of recommended plants for various
landscape situations and conditions (not a comprehensive list).
   B.   Mulch. After completion of all planting, all irrigated non-turf areas
shall be covered with a minimum three (3) inch layer of mulch to retain water,
inhibit weed growth, and moderate soil temperature. Non-porous material shall
not be placed under the mulch.
   C.   Tree Selection. Tree species shall be selected based on growth
characteristics and site conditions, including available space, overhead
clearance, soil conditions, exposure, and desired color and appearance. Trees
shall be selected as follows:
      1.   Broad canopy trees shall be selected where shade or screening of
tall objects is desired;
      2.   Low-growing trees shall be selected for spaces under utility wires;
      3.   Select trees from which lower branches can be trimmed to maintain a
healthy growth habit where vision clearance and natural surveillance is a
concern;
      4.   Narrow or columnar trees shall be selected where awnings or other
building features limit growth, or where greater visibility is desired between
buildings and the street for natural surveillance;
      5.   Street trees shall be planted within existing and proposed park
strips, and in sidewalk tree wells on streets without park strips. Tree
placement shall provide canopy cover (shade) and avoid conflicts with existing
trees, retaining walls, utilities, lighting, and other obstacles; and
      6.   Trees less than a two-inch caliper shall be double-staked until the
trees mature to a two-inch caliper. (Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024)
10-11-5: IRRIGATION DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Smart Automatic Irrigation Controller. Landscaped areas shall be
provided with a WaterSense labeled smart irrigation controller which
automatically adjusts the frequency and/or duration of irrigation events in
response to changing weather conditions. All controllers shall be equipped with
automatic rain delay or rain shut-off capabilities and shall be set up to
operate in "smart" mode.
   B.   Each valve shall irrigate a landscape with similar site, slope and soil
conditions and plant materials with similar watering needs. Turf and non-turf
areas shall be irrigated on separate valves. Drip emitters and sprinklers shall
be placed on separate valves.
   C.   Drip emitters shall be provided for each tree.
   D.   Drip irrigation shall be used to irrigate plants in non-turf areas.
Pop-up spray heads shall be at a minimum of four inches (4") in height to avoid
blockage from lawn foliage.
   E.   Sprinklers shall have matched precipitation rates with each control
valve circuit.
   F.   Sprinkler heads shall be attached to rigid lateral lines with flexible
material (swing joints) to reduce potential for breakage.
   G.   Check valves shall be required where elevation differences cause low-
head drainage. Pressure compensating valves and sprinklers shall be required
where a significant variation in water pressure occurs within the irrigation
system due to elevation differences.
   H.   Filters shall be required on all secondary water service connections.
Filters shall have as a minimum a thirty (30) mesh screen and shall be cleaned
and maintained by the property owner on a regular basis.
   I.   Drip irrigation lines require additional filtration at or after the
zone valve at a minimum of two hundred (200) mesh and end flush valves are
required as necessary for drip irrigation lines.
   J.   Valves with spray or stream sprinklers shall be scheduled to operate in
accordance with local water supplier restrictions to reduce water loss from
wind, evaporation or other environmental conditions not suitable for
irrigation.
   K.   Program valves for multiple repeat cycles where necessary to reduce
runoff, particularly on slopes and soils with slow infiltration rates. (Ord.
2024-02, 5-7-2024)
10-11-6: LANDSCAPES IN NEW SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Homebuilders and/or developers subdividing lots and/or constructing new
single-family residential homes shall provide water-efficient landscaping to
prospective home buyers, such as the Localscapes design style when the
landscape is installed by the homebuilder/developer. The water-efficient
landscaping option shall meet the Landscape Design Standards and Irrigation
Design Standards of this chapter, and any central open shape area consisting of
plant material in mass requiring overhead spray irrigation shall not exceed
thirty-five percent (35%) of the total landscaped area.
   B.   Homebuilders and/or developers who construct model homes for a
designated subdivision shall install water-efficient landscaping, such as the
Localscapes design style. The water-efficient landscaping option shall meet the
Landscape Design Standards and Irrigation Design Standards of this chapter, and
any central open shape area consisting of plant material in mass requiring
overhead spray irrigation shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the
total landscaped area.
   C.   New Construction homes shall have landscaping and irrigation plans
approved by the City Planning Department prior to issuance of building permits,
for which no variance may be granted, and which meet the aforementioned
requirements.
   D.   When buyers or owners are installing their own landscaping on new home
construction, a time frame for landscaping to be completed shall be eighteen
(18) months from the time of occupancy to complete the front yard and no more
than three (3) years to complete the total landscape. (Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024)
10-11-7: PROHIBITION ON RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS:
Any Homeowners Association governing documents, such as bylaws, operating
rules, covenants, conditions, and restrictions that govern the operation of a
common interest development, are void and unenforceable if they conflict with
any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024)
10-11-8: LANDSCAPES IN COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS:
Commercial, industrial and institutional landscapes shall meet the Landscape
Design Standards and Irrigation Design Standards of this chapter, and the turf
area shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total landscaped area,
outside of active recreation areas. (Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024)
10-11-9: DOCUMENTATION FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL PROJECTS:
Landscape Plan Documentation Package. A copy of a Landscape Plan Documentation
Package shall be submitted to and approved by the City prior to the issue of
any permit. A copy of the approved Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall
be provided to the property owner or site manager and to the local retail water
purveyor. The Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall be prepared by a
registered landscape architect and shall consist of the following items:
   A.   Project Data Sheet. The Project Data Sheet shall contain the following:
      1.   Project name and address;
      2.   Applicant or applicant agent's name, address, phone number, and
email address;
      3.   Landscape architect's name, address, phone number, and email
address; and
      4.   Landscape contractor's name, address, phone number and email
address, if available at this time.
   B.   Planting Plan. A detailed planting plan shall be drawn at a scale that
clearly identifies the following:
      1.   Location of all plant materials, a legend with botanical and common
names, and size of plant materials;
      2.   Property lines and street names;
      3.   Existing and proposed buildings, walls, fences, utilities, paved
areas and other site improvements;
      4.   Existing trees and plant materials to be removed or retained;
      5.   Scale: graphic and written;
      6.   Date of Design;
      7.   Designation of a landscape zone, and
      8.    Details and specifications for tree staking, soil preparation, and
other planting work.
   C.   Irrigation Plan. A detailed irrigation plan shall be drawn at the same
scale as the planting plan and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Layout of the irrigation system and a legend summarizing the type
and size of all components of the system, including manufacturer name and model
numbers;
      2.   Static water pressure in pounds per square inch (psi) at the point
of connection to the public water supply;
      3.   Flow rate in gallons per minute and design operating pressure in psi
for each valve and precipitation rate in inches per hour for each valve with
sprinklers, and
      4.   Installation details for irrigation components.
   D.   Grading Plan. A Grading Plan shall be drawn at the same scale as the
Planting Plan and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Property lines and street names, existing and proposed buildings,
walls, fences, utilities, paved areas and other site improvements, and
      2.   Existing and finished contour lines and spot elevations as necessary
for the proposed site improvements. (Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024)
10-11-10: PLAN REVIEW, CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION, AND POST-CONSTRUCTION
MONITORING FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL PROJECTS:
   A.   As part of the Building Permit approval process, a copy of the
Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall be submitted to the City for review
and approval before construction begins.
   B.   All installers and designers shall meet state and local license,
insurance, and bonding requirements, and be able to show proof of such.
   C.   During construction, site inspection of the landscaping may be
performed by the City Building Inspection Department.
   D.   Following construction and prior to issuing the approval for occupancy,
an inspection shall be scheduled with the Building Inspection Department to
verify compliance with the approved landscape plans. The Certificate of
Substantial Completion shall be completed by the property owner, contractor or
landscape architect and submitted to the City.
   E.   The City reserves the right to perform site inspections at any time
before, during or after the irrigation system and landscape installation, and
to require corrective measures if requirements of this chapter are not
satisfied. (Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024)
10-11-11: ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
The Public Works Director, the Code Enforcement Officer, and other employees of
the Public Works Department and Police Department are authorized to enforce all
provisions of this chapter. Any consumer who violates any provisions of this
chapter shall be issued a written notice of violation. This notice shall be
affixed to the property where the violation occurred. The notice will describe
the violation and order that it be corrected, cured or abated immediately or
within times specified by the City. Failure to receive a notice shall not
invalidate further actions by the City. If the order is not complied with, the
City may terminate water service to the customer and/or issue a citation. (Ord.
2024-02, 5-7-2024)
CHAPTER 12
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Accessory Dwelling Units
10-12-1: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Purpose. Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) in single-family residential
zones are an important tool in the overall housing goals and needs of the City
and allow for alternative and flexible housing options in owner-occupied
single-family residences.
   B.   Accessory Dwelling Units Defined. An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is a
second dwelling unit in an owner-occupied single-family property that is
clearly incidental and accessory to the main dwelling on the property. ADUs are
categorized by being internal, detached or attached. References herein to an
"accessory dwelling unit" or "ADU" without designating either external or
internal is a reference to both internal and external accessory dwelling units.
      1.   Internal ADU. "Internal ADU" means an ADU located (a) within a
primary dwelling unit; (b) within the footprint of the primary dwelling unit at
the time the Internal ADU is created; and (c) for the purpose of offering a
long-term rental of 30 consecutive days or longer. Internal ADUs must meet the
standards in Utah Code 10-9a-530.
      2.   External ADU. "External ADU" means an ADU located in a structure
other than the primary dwelling unit. The following types are considered
external ADUs:
         a.   Detached ADU "Detached ADU" means an ADU located in an accessory
building on the property and not attached to or within the principal dwelling
unit. Detached ADUs are not permitted within any zone. No structure that is
detached from the primary dwelling unit may be used, constructed, or converted
for use as a Detached ADU. Attached ADU "Attached ADU" means a new ADU is
constructed as a physical expansion (i.e., addition) of the primary dwelling
and is attached to the single-family dwelling unit b one or more common walls.
   C.   Permitted and Conditional Uses. Accessory dwelling units shall be
permitted in the Residential R-1 Zone only and when as permitted herein. If the
ADU is not designated within a particular zone, then it is prohibited.
   D.   General Standards.
      1.   ADU permit application shall be required for all internal, and
external attached units. Only applications deemed complete by City Staff will
be processed. Complete applications include appropriate application forms
reflecting the standards of the City, plans, texts and signatures as required
on the form available at City Hall. A letter or email confirming the
completeness of the application may be requested by the applicant. All
applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as established from
time to time by resolution of the City Council.
      2.   Only one (1) ADU per property is permitted.
      3.   ADUs shall meet all building codes and obtain all required permits
prior to occupancy of the ADU.
      4.   The applicant shall have a fee simple title to the property.
      5.   The ADU shall have a separate entrance that is not visible from the
street and that does not disrupt the single-family appearance of the existing
structure.
      6.   The ADU shall have the same address number as the primary dwelling
unit, but refer to the ADU as "Unit B." Addresses must be located in a visible
location on the street frontage side of the home.
      7.   The ADU shall have a minimum of one (1) bedroom and a three-quarter
(3/4) bath.
      8.   The ADU shall have a kitchen.
      9.   Parking Requirements for ADUs:
         a.   A single-family dwelling with an ADU shall provide at least one
(1) additional off-street parking space for the ADU. In no case shall the
number of off-street parking spaces be less than the number of vehicles being
maintained on the premises This shall include covered parking, garages and
tandem parking in driveways. Tandem parking within a driveway is allowed to
meet the parking requirement. No parking spaces may be located with in the
front yard or side yard setbacks adjacent to a street, except for within an
approved driveway. At a minimum, all parking areas and driveways shall be paved
with concrete, asphalt, masonry, or concrete pavers. Permitted accessory
parking standards must meet minimum parking requirements. No ADU may be allowed
on any lot that cannot satisfy the parking requirements.
         b.   Any parking spaces contained within a garage or carport should be
replaced if an ADU is created within that space.
         c.   No vehicles shall be parked on the front lawn or other landscaped
areas except within an approved driveway.
      10.   The property shall be neatly maintained and shall meet all current
codes regarding property maintenance and public health standards.
      11.   The applicant has not been notified or fined by the City for any
code violations relating to this property or any other property within the
previous twelve (12) months.
      12.   Owner Occupancy. An application for an ADU shall only issue when an
owner occupant lives on the property within either the principal or accessory
dwelling unit. Owner occupancy shall be defined as follows:
         a.   OWNER-OCCUPANCY: Any one of the fol lowing individuals resides on
the subject property for the entire time during which an accessory dwelling
unit or principal dwelling is rented or otherwise occupied by:
            (1)   An individual who is listed on a recorded deed as an owner of
the property;
            (2)   Any person who is related by blood, marriage or adoption to
an individual who is listed on a recorded deed as an owner of the property; or
            (3)   An individual who is a trustor of a family trust who
possesses legal ownership of the property.
      13.   The occupants of an ADU shall be limited by one (1) of the
following family categories:
         a.   One (1) person living alone; or
         b.   Two (2) related or unrelated adults and their children.
         c.   Any of the above categories plus a temporary guest. A "temporary
guest" is defined as a person who stays with a family for a period of less than
ninety (90) days within any rolling one (1) year period and does not utilize
the dwelling as a legal address for any purpose.
      14.   The ADU must be rented for periods of thirty (30) consecutive days
or more.
      15.   All ADUs shall connect to the utility lines as follows:
         a.   Internal ADUs and External Attached ADUs may connect to the same
(water and sewer) utility lines as the primary dwelling unit.
   E.   Internal ADU Standards.
      1.   Purpose: Internal Accessory Dwelling Units (IADUs) in single-family
residential zones are an important tool in the overall housing goals and needs
of the City and allow for alternative and flexible housing options in owner-
occupied single-family residences. The purposes of the IADU standards of this
code are to:
         a.   Create new housing units while respecting the appearance,
neighborhood character, and scale of single-family residential development.
         b.   Provide more housing choices in residential zones.
         c.   Allow more efficient use of existing housing and large
underutilized yards.
         d.   Provide housing options for family caregivers, adult children
aging parents, and families seeking smaller households.
         e.   Offer a means for residents, particularly seniors, single
parents, and families with grown children, to remain in their homes and
neighborhoods, and obtain extra income, security. companionship, and services.
         f.   Broaden the range of affordable housing options throughout the
City.
      2.   Definitions:
         a.   OWNER-OCCUPANCY: Any one of the following individuals resides on
the subject property for the entire time during which an accessory dwelling
unit or principa l dwelling is rented or otherwise occupied by:
            (1)   An individual who is listed on a recorded deed as an owner of
the property;
            (2)   Any person who is related by blood , marriage or adoption to
an individual who is listed on a recorded deed as an owner of the property; or
            (3)   An individual who is a trustor of a family trust who
possesses legal ownership of the property.
      3.   The occupants of an IADU shall be limited by one (1) of the
following family categories:
         a.   One (1) person living alone; or
         b.   Two (2) related or unrelated adults and their children.
         c.   Any of the above categories plus a temporary guest. A "temporary
guest" is defined as a person who stays with a family for a period of less than
ninety (90) days within any rolling one (1) year period and does not utilize
the dwelling as a legal address for any purpose.
      4.   Local Requirements in accordance with Utah Code 10-9a-530-4, the
City:
         a.   Zones - Within the R-1, R-3 and RT zones only, IADUs are allowed
in single-family, not allowed in multi-family lots or lots that do not meet
requirements (parking, setbacks, etc.)
         b.   The entire structure must be in compliance with all applicable
codes, including building, health and fire codes. An initial building
inspection and fire inspection must be completed prior to approval of and/or
issuance of IADU permit.
         c.   IADUs may only be rented, not sold.
         d.   One (1) IADU maximum per lot.
         e.   Lot size must be greater than six thousand (6 ,000) square feet.
         f.   Separate accessible entrance or stairway that must be located on
the side or the back.
         g.   Same address number, but refer to the IADU as "Unit B." Addresses
must be located in a visible location on the street frontage side of the home.
         h.   An IADU must provide living areas for eating, sleeping and full
bathroom, including kitchen, bathroom sink, toilet, shower/bath, separate from
the principal dwelling unit.
         i.   The owner of the property shall occupy either the IADU or the
primary dwelling where the IADU is located as their place of primary residence.
         j.   Separate utility connections shall not be permitted for IADUs.
Owners of lots with an IADU shall be charged for two (2) city utility
connections, regardless of shared connection. The owner will be responsible for
the meter and payment.
         k.   IADUs may only be rented for long-term rentals of thirty (30)
consecutive days or longer. No rentals less than thirty (30) days will be
allowed.
         l.   No home occupation business shall be established within an IADU
without the express written permission of the property owner, and approval from
the City Business License Official.
         m.   For the Owner: Yearly rental license from the City will be
required for all IADUs. If the unit is being rented as a long-term rental, a
rental license from the City must be obtained by the owner prior to renting out
the unit.
      5.   Parking Requirements:
         a.   A single-family dwelling with an IADU shall provide at least one
(1) additional off-street parking space for the IADU. In no case shall the
number of off-street parking spaces be less than the number of vehicles being
maintained on the premises This shall include covered parking, garages and
tandem parking in driveways.
         Tandem-parking within a driveway is allowed to meet the parking
requirement. No parking spaces may be located within the front yard or side
yard setbacks adjacent to a street, except for within an approved driveway. At
a minimum, all parking areas and driveways shall be paved with concrete,
asphalt, masonry, or concrete pavers. Permitted accessory parking standards
must meet minimum parking requirements. No IADU may be allowed on any lot that
cannot satisfy the parking requirements.
         b.   Any parking spaces contained within a garage or carport should be
replaced if an IADU is created within that space.
      6.   IADU Permit Required: All lADUs must be fully permitted and licensed
before being occupied. Citations shall be issued after ninety (90) days if land
use has not been permitted.
         a.   Application must include detailed floor plans and payment of
initial permit fee.
         b.   Before a permit will be issued, evidence of payment of all other
required fees and certificates of inspections must be submitted. (Ord. 2024-05,
11-19-2024)
   F.   Attached ADU Standards.
      1.   Attached ADUs shall maintain the outward appearance of a single-
family residence, so that the appearance is not altered in a manner to appear
as a duplex with such features as two (2) front doors and two (2) garages or
carports facing the street.
      2.   The total area of an attached ADU shall not exceed fifty (50)
percent of the square footage of the habitable area of the building footprint
of the primary residence and in no case exceed eight-hundred (800( square feet.
      3.
 
                      External Attached ADU
Location              Attached to Primary Dwelling Unit
Minimum Lot Size      6,000 square feet
Size Limit, Habitable 50% up to 800 square feet
Maximum Height Limit  Same as Primary Dwelling Unit
Maximum Side Setback  Same as Primary Dwelling Unit
Maximum Rear Setback  Same as Primary Dwelling Unit
 
      4.   Fire Regulations.
         a.   External Attached ADUs will remain subject to the same fire
regulations as the primary dwelling.
(Ord. 2025-05, 11-18-2025)
CHAPTER 13
FORM BASED CODE
SECTION:
10-13-1: Form Based Code
10-13-1: FORM BASED CODE:
Sunset Town Center Form Based Code is available for view in PDF:
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1b7-tugwi-0c6HaMAkADcxTw4IAwUDDn-/view
(Ord. 2023-06, 12-19-2023)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purposes
11-1-2: Scope
11-1-3: Definitions
11-1-4: Enforcement And Permits
11-1-5: Penalty
11-1-1: PURPOSES:
   A.   Promote Health And Welfare: The underlying purpose and intent of this
Title is to promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the City in the matter of the subdivision of land and related
matters affected by such subdivision.
   B.   Best Interest Of Public Welfare: Any proposed subdivision and its
ultimate use shall be in the best interests of the public welfare and shall be
in harmony with good neighborhood development of the area concerned, and the
subdivider shall present evidence to this effect when requested to do so by the
Planning Commission. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-1-2: SCOPE:
   A.   Compliance: No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is
located wholly or in part in the City, except in compliance with this Title.
   B.   Pursuant To Provisions: No person shall sell or exchange or offer to
sell or exchange any parcel of land which is a part of a subdivision of a
larger tract of land, nor offer for recording in the office of the County
Recorder any deed conveying such a parcel of land, or any interest therein,
unless such subdivision has been created pursuant to and in accordance with the
provisions of this Title. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to the definitions set forth in Utah Code 10-9a-103, the following
definitions apply, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ADMINISTRATIVE  A.   The Planning Commission shall act as the approval authority for the Preliminary
LAND USE        Plat.
AUTHORITY:      B.   The Public Works Director or designee shall act as the approval authority for
                the Final Plat.
BLOCK:          The land surrounded by public streets and rights-of-way, or land which is designated
                as a block on any recorded subdivision plat.
CITY:           Sunset City, Utah.
COUNTY:         Davis County, Utah.
                The process by which the Public Works Director, acting as the administrative land
                use authority, receives comment and reviews documentation related to the
DEVELOPMENT     subdivision, and, once all requirements and standards are met, issues final plat
REVIEW:         approval. The Public Works Director receives comments from city and county officials
                who provide technical expertise, policy requirements, and application of appropriate
                standards regarding development applications under the applicable codes.
                That portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a person or
EASEMENT:       entity other than the legal owner or owners of said property or properties. An
                easement may be for use under, on, or above said lots or lots.
PLANNING        The Sunset City Planning Commission unless another planning commission is
COMMISSION:     specifically named.
PUBLIC WORKS    The Public Works Director of Sunset City, Utah, or a consulting engineering firm
DIRECTOR:       designated as the Public Works Director by the City Council.
                The process for review of a complete subdivision application. There may be multiple
                fifteen (15) business day reviews for the preliminary plat review cycle. There shall
                be no more than four (4) total review cycles of twenty (20) business days for a
                final plat.
                A.   A single review cycle shall be considered complete when:
                   1.   Complete Application is submitted to the Administrative Land Use Authority;
                   2.   The Administrative Land Use Authority: Review is complete;
                   3.   The Applicant Response to Review is complete; and
                   4.   The Administrative Land Use Authority provides a written statement to the
                Applicant stating completion of the review cycle and next required steps for
REVIEW CYCLE:   approval.
                B.   Review Cycle, exceptions as follows:
                   1.   Additional Review Cycle(s). May be required when a modification or
                correction is necessary to protect public health and safety or to enforce state or
                federal law when a change or correction is necessitated by the Applicant's
                adjustment to a plan set or an update to a phase plan that adjusts infrastructure
                needed for the specific development.
                   2.   Additional Time for Review. If the Applicant does not submit a revised plat
                within twenty (20) business days after the Administrative Land Use Authority
                requires a modification or correction, the Administrative Land Use Authority shall
                have an additional twenty (20) business days to respond.
                The cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit used by the applicant or developer
SECURITY:       to guarantee the proper installation of the total cost of public improvements
                determined by the Public Works Director, plus ten percent (10%) of the total cost as
                contingency, and naming the City as a party eligible to draw upon said security.
                Various types of transportation corridors defined as follows:
                A.   "Street" means a thoroughfare which has been dedicated or abandoned to the
STREETS:        public and accepted by proper public authority, or a thoroughfare with a solid
                asphalt or concrete surface not less than twenty-six feet (26') wide which has been
                made public by right of use, and which affords the principal access to the abutting
                property, excepted where limited.
   Collector A street, existing or proposed, of considerable continuity which is the main means
street:         of access to the major street system.
   Cul-de-sacA minor terminal street provided with an adequate turnaround.
                A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to serve as a major
   Major     trafficway, and is designated on the Major Streets Plan as a limited or controlled
Street:         access highway, major street, parkway or other equivalent term to identify those
                streets comprising the basic structure of the Major Streets Plan.
   Minor     A street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to a collector street and of
Street:         limited continuity, which serves or is intended to serve the local needs of a
                neighborhood.
                A thoroughfare within a development which has been reserved by dedication unto the
   Private   subdivider or lot owners to be used as a private access to serve the lots platted
Street:         within the subdivision and complying with the adopted street cross section standards
                of the City and maintained by the subdivider or other private entity.
                The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more parts for the
                purpose, whether immediate or future, of a sale of a building development; provided,
                that if any person within one calendar year divides any tract into three (3) or more
                parts, such land shall be deemed a subdivision within the meaning of this Title.
                Providing, however, that this definition of a subdivision shall not include a bona
SUBDIVISION:    fide division or partition of agricultural land in parcels of more than one acre for
                other than development purposes, nor shall it include the division of property in
                commercial or industrial districts for commercial or industrial developments where
                no new streets are required or are to be dedicated for public use; nor shall it
                include or apply to the allocation of land in the settlement of an estate, or a
                court decree for the distribution of property.
ZONING OR LAND  The zoning and land use regulations in the Sunset City Municipal Code. (Sub. Ord.;
USE:            amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
 
11-1-4: ENFORCEMENT AND PERMITS:
The Building Department shall not issue any permit unless the plans for the
proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use fully
conforms to all provisions of this Title. No City officer shall issue any
permit or license for the use of any building, structure or land when such land
is a part of a subdivision, as defined in Section
11-1-3 of this Chapter, until such subdivision has been approved and recorded
in the County Recorder's office and all other provisions of law have been
complied with. Any license or permit issued in conflict with this Title shall
be null and void. (Sub. Ord.; 1997 Code; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-1-5: PENALTY:
In accordance with Utah Code § 10-3-703, the City imposes the following
penalties for a violation of this Title:
   A.   Civil. In addition to other remedies as provided by law or equity, any
subdivider, subdivider's agent, employee, purchaser, or assign (in whole or
part) in violation of this Title is subject to a civil fine not to exceed seven
hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation, per day, that a violation
continues.
   B.   Criminal. Any subdivider, subdivider's agent or employee, purchaser, or
assign (in whole or part) who violates the provisions of this Title is guilty
of a Class C misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed seven hundred and fifty
dollars ($750.00) and/or a term of imprisonment up to ninety (90) days. Each
violation constitutes a separate offense. (Sub. Ord.; 1997 Code; amd. Ord.
2024-01, 4-16-2024)
 
CHAPTER 2
PLANNING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Commercial And Industrial Site Plan Approval Required
11-2-2: Penalty
11-2-1: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED:
In any commercial or industrial zone, the location of main and accessory
buildings on the site, the height and bulk of buildings, the provision of other
open space in the site, and the display of signs shall be in accordance with
the site plan or plans or subsequent amendment thereof, approved in any case by
the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a building permit. In approving
site plans, the Planning Commission may act on its own initiative in proposing
and approving a site plan, including any conditions or requirements; designated
or specified on or in connection therewith. A site plan may include
landscaping, fences and walls designed to further the purposes of the
regulations for commercial and industrial zones and such features shall be
provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and maintenance of
any use to which they are appurtenant. In considering any site plan hereunder,
the Planning Commission shall endeavor to assure safety and convenience of
traffic movement both within the area covered and in relation to access
streets, harmonious and beneficial relation among the buildings and uses in the
area covered, and satisfactory and harmonious relation between such areas and
contiguous land and buildings and adjacent neighborhoods. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord.
2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-2-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of these provisions shall be deemed guilty of a Class
C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Sub. Ord.; 1997 Code; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
CHAPTER 3
PLANS AND PLATS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Preliminary Plan
11-3-2: Final Plat
11-3-1: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
   A.   Information: Each person who proposes to subdivide land which is
located in whole or in part in the City shall confer with the Planning
Commission before preparing any plats, charts or plans in order to become
familiar with the City subdivision requirements and existing master plans for
the territory in which the proposed subdivision lies and to discuss the
proposed plan of development of the tract.
   B.   Complete Application: A complete application is required to be filed
with the City before the Review Cycle commences. The determination of whether
an application is complete is made by the Director of Community Development or
designee. An application shall not be considered complete, and the first review
cycle shall not begin unless and until the Applicant has submitted the
following items:
      1.   A completed application as provided by the City.
      2.   Additional studies and information as listed on the application form
and as necessary to show feasible compliance with applicable codes and
regulations.
      3.   A signed Owner-Agent Affidavit (if the Owner is being represented by
another party).
      4.   Current Davis County ownership plat depicting property proposed for
subdivision and all contiguous property around land proposed to be subdivided.
      5.   A recent Title Report covering the proposed subdivided property
identifying ownership, easements of record, liens or other encumbrances and
verifies payment of taxes and assessments.
      6.   Will serve letters from all affected entities.
      7.   A digital copy of the preliminary plat as outlined in the Public
Works Standards.
      8.   A digital copy of the preliminary improvement plans to include at a
minimum the following:
         a.   Grading and drainage plan.
         b.   Storm Drain calculations.
         c.   Low Impact Design (LID) analysis and Water Quality Report
         d.   Utility plan.
      9.   Payment of all applicable fees.
   C.   Investigation: The Planning Commission shall establish subdivision
procedures for the City which shall set forth in detail all steps necessary to
ensure that complete investigation of all proposed subdivisions are made prior
to final approval. This investigation may include obtaining information and
recommendations from the County Recorder, City Engineer, Fire Department,
County School Board and from companies providing utility services to the area.
   D.   Fee: At the time of filing the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall
deposit with the Planning Commission a non-refundable fee made payable to the
City. The City Council shall by resolution from time to time, prescribe the
amount of such fee, which shall be for the purpose of reimbursing the City for
the expenses incidental in connection with the checking and approving of such
subdivision plans. A similar fee shall be paid whenever a subdivider submits
any amended or revised plat.
   E.   Requirements: The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not
smaller than one hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1") and shall give the
following information:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
      2.   Sufficient information to locate accurately the property shown on
the plan.
      3.   The names and addresses of the subdivider, the engineer or surveyor
of the subdivision, and the owners of the land immediately adjoining the land
to be subdivided.
      4.   Contour map at vertical intervals of not more than five feet (5') as
determined by the Planning Commission.
      5.   The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided.
      6.   The location, widths and other dimensions of all existing or platted
streets and other important features such as railroad lines, watercourses,
exceptional topography and buildings within or immediately adjacent to the
tract to be subdivided.
      7.   Existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, water supply mains, water
wells and culverts within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto.
      8.   The locations, widths and other dimensions of proposed public
streets, private streets or private access rights of way, alleys, utility
easements, parks and other open spaces and lots, with proper labeling of spaces
to be dedicated to the public, or designated as private streets or private
access rights of way.
      9.   North point, scale and date.
      10.   Plans or written statements regarding the width and type of
proposed pavement, location, size and type of proposed sanitary sewers or other
sewage disposal facilities, proposed water mains and hydrants and other
proposed utilities, proposed storm water drainage facilities and other proposed
improvements, such as sidewalks, planting and parks, and any grading of
individual lots.
   F.   Approval, Disapproval: Following a review of the preliminary plan, the
Planning Commission shall act on the plan as submitted or modified. If
approved, the Planning Commission shall express its written approval with
whatever conditions are attached and by returning one approved copy of the
preliminary plan to the subdivider. If the preliminary plan is disapproved, the
Planning Commission shall indicate its disapproval in writing and reasons
therefor by similarly signed copies. Notification of approval of the
preliminary plan shall be authorization for the subdivider to proceed with the
preparation of the final plat and specifications for the minimum improvements
required in this Title.
   G.   Time Limitation: Approval of the preliminary plan by the Planning
Commission shall be valid for a maximum period of twelve (12) months after
approval unless, upon application of the subdivider, the Planning Commission
grants an extension. If the final plat has not been submitted within the twelve
(12) months or approved extended period, the preliminary plan must again be
submitted to the Planning Commission for reapproval; however, preliminary
approval of a large tract shall not be voided; provided, that the final plat of
the first section is submitted for final approval within the twelve (12) month
period.
   H.   Grading Limitation: No large scale excavation, grading or regrading as
determined by the Planning Commission shall take place on any land for which a
preliminary subdivision plan has been submitted until such plan has been given
preliminary approval by the Planning Commission. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01,
4-16-2024)
11-3-2: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Final Plat: After compliance with the governing code requirements, the
applicant or subdivider shall file a complete final plat application and pay
the associated fees. The final plat shall contain all the modifications made
during Development Review and the applicable review cycles.
      1.   The final plat, construction drawings, and accompanying
documentation shall be submitted for Development Review.
      2.   Development Review shall complete a review of the plat within twenty
(20) business days per review cycle after it is submitted for review.
Development Review shall review the final plat, construction drawings, and
other documentation to determine compliance with all applicable codes.
      3.   If Development Review determines that the final plat conforms to all
a pplicable codes, the Public Works Director may approve the final plat by
signing the same.
      4.   If Development Review determines that the final plat, construction
drawings, and other documentations do not conform with the applicable code
requirements, written comment shall be provided to the applicant to be
addressed in the subsequent review and submittal.
      5.   No final plat shall have any force or effect unless the same has
been approved by the Public Works Director.
   B.   Final Plat Requirements. The final plat shall consist of a sheet of
approved mylar or material of sufficient size, quality, and specifications of
the County. The plat shall be signed by all parties designated on the final
plat who are duly authorized and/or required to sign, and shall contain the
following information:
      1.   A subdivision name, approved by the County and the general location
of the subdivision, in bold letters at the top of the sheet.
      2.   A north point and scale of the drawing, and the date.
      3.   Accurately drawn boundaries, showing the proper bearings and
dimensions of all boundary lines of the subdivision, properly tied to public
survey monuments. These lines should be slightly heavier than street and lot
lines.
      4.   The names, widths, lengths, bearings and curve data on centerlines
of proposed streets and easements.
      5.   The boundaries, bearings, and dimensions of all portions within the
subdivision as intended to be dedicated to the use of the public; the lines,
dimensions, bearings and numbers of all lots, blocks and parts reserved for any
reason within the subdivision.
      6.   All lots are to be numbered and addressed consecutively under a
definite system approved during Development Review.
      7.   All proposed streets shall be numbered consecutively under a
definite system and conform to the Major Streets Plan and street numbering
system of the City.
      8.   Parcels of land to be dedicated as public property or permanently
reserved for common open space shall be labeled as such.
      9.   The final plat should contain the standard approval information and
certifications as follows:
         a.   Description of land to be included in the subdivision.
         b.   Registered land surveyor's certificate of survey.
         c.   Owner's dedication certificate.
         d.   Notary public acknowledgment.
         e.   City engineer's certificate of approval.
         f.   Other certificates of approval, as may be shown on the final
plat.
         g.   Space for County to record.
   C.   Construction Drawings and Supporting Documentation. The applicant or
subdivider shall furnish a complete set of reproducible construction drawings
of profiles, construction, and design data of all streets, existing and
proposed, and all utilities to be constructed within the subdivision to the
city engineer prior to the submission of the final plat. Supporting
documentation includes:
      1.   Traffic studies, geological studies, feasibility studies, other
studies of any kind related to development.
      2.   Covenants, conditions, and restrictions.
      3.   Any development agreement between the applicant and City.
      4.   Easement documents.
      5.   Other information and documentation relevant to the development.
   D.   Final Plat Approval.
      1.   The Public Works Director shall make final plat approval based upon
compliance with the applicable codes and standards.
      2.   During final plat approval, Public Works Director, shall provide a
cost estimate for improvements which amount shall be held by the City as
security for the proper development of the subdivision and its improvements in
accordance with the approval requirements and applicable codes and standards.
      3.   Applicant or subdivider shall reimburse the City for any expenses
the City or an affected entity incurred related to the review, approval, and
inspection of the subdivision improvements.
      4.   No street improvements or utilities shall be installed until after
approval of the final plat. No lots included in the final plat shall be
purchased, sold, exchanged, nor offered for sale or exchange and no
construction of buildings upon such lots shall begin until the final plat is
approved and recorded in the County.
   E.   Security. At the time the final plat is approved by the Public Works
Director, the applicant or subdivider shall deposit with the City the
applicable security and security contingency, which contingency shall represent
a minimum ten (10) percent of the total security. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-
01, 4-16-2024)
CHAPTER 4
SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Streets
11-4-2: Blocks
11-4-3: Lots
11-4-4: Public Use And Service Areas
11-4-5: Building Restrictions
11-4-6: Housing Developments
11-4-1: STREETS 1 :
   A.   Conformity To Major Street Plan: The subdivision of land shall conform
to the Major Street Plan, both as to general alignment and right-of-way widths.
   B.   Extension Of Existing Streets: The proposed street system shall extend
existing streets or their projections at the same or greater width (but in no
case less than the required minimum width). Half streets along the boundary of
land proposed for subdivision will not be permitted. Private streets shall not
be accepted in any subdivision, nor shall public improvements be approved for
any private street.
   C.   Street Widths: The minimum width of proposed streets, measured from lot
line to lot line, shall be as shown on the Major Street Plan, or if not shown
on such plan shall be:
      1.   Major streets, not less than fifty feet (50').
      2.   Collector streets, not less than fifty feet (50').
      3.   Local service streets or minor streets which cannot be extended in
the future, not less than fifty feet (50').
      4.   Alleys, not less than twenty feet (20').
   D.   Grades: Grades on major streets shall not exceed eight percent (8%).
Grades on other streets may be as much as fifteen percent (15%). Street grades
at the gutter shall not be less than one-half of one percent (0.5%).
   E.   Rounded Corners: Curb radii at street intersections shall not be less
than twenty feet (20') and where the angle of street intersection is less than
seventy-five degrees (75°), a greater curb radius may be required. Wherever
necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius
without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width,
the property line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back
sufficiently to permit such construction.
   F.   Intersection Angles: Where an acute angle of less than seventy five
degrees (75°) occurs between streets at their intersections, a grading plan
showing existing and proposed contours at one foot (1') intervals may be
required.
   G.   Curves: Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees (10°) in the
alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be
introduced. On major and secondary streets, the center line radius of curvature
shall not be less than three hundred feet (300'); on minor and local streets,
not less than one hundred feet (100').
   H.   Dead Ends: Streets designed to have one end permanently closed (cul-de-
sac) shall not be more than six hundred feet (600') long and shall be provided
at the closed end with a turnaround with a minimum radius of the outside curb
of at least forty feet (40'). In determining the length of a cul-de- sac, the
turnaround shall not be included.
   I.   Names: Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others
already existing and named, shall bear the names of the existing street. In no
case shall the name of proposed streets duplicate existing street names
irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, driveway,
place or court. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  11-5-5 of this Title.
11-4-2: BLOCKS:
Blocks shall be not more than one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') in length.
In blocks over eight hundred feet (800') in length, there may be required one
or more public crosswalks not less than fifteen feet (15') in width. (Sub.
Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-4-3: LOTS:
   A.   Arrangement: Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right
angles to straight street lines or radical to curved street lines. Each lot
shall front on a public street or road or highway system.
   B.   Minimum Size: The minimum width for a residence lot shall be sixty feet
(60') at the building line and no lot shall contain less than six thousand
(6,000) square feet. Corner lots shall have such extra width as will permit the
establishment of a building line at least thirty feet (30') on the front street
and twenty feet (20') on the side street. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-
2024)
11-4-4: PUBLIC USE AND SERVICE AREAS:
   A.   May Require Dedication: In any subdivision, the Planning Commission
and/or Public Works Director may require the dedication to the public of not
more than ten percent (10%) of the land for park or recreation purposes.
   B.   Easements For Utilities: Except where alleys are permitted for the
purpose, easements, not exceeding twenty feet (20') in width, for poles, wires,
conduits, storm and sewers, gas, water and heat mains or other utility lines,
along all rear lot lines and along side lot lines may be required if necessary
or advisable. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-4-5: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS:
No final plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning
ordinance will be approved unless it conforms with such ordinance. In general,
a building line at least thirty feet (30') from the street line will be
required on residential lot frontage, and in the case of corner lots, a
building line at least thirty feet (30') from the front street and twenty feet
(20') from the side street line, will be required. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-
01, 4-16-2024)
11-4-6: HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS:
A comprehensive group housing development, including the construction of two
(2) or more housing units, together with necessary drives and ways of access,
may be approved if departures from the foregoing regulations can be made
without destroying the intent of the regulations. Plans for all such
developments must be submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission and
City Council whether or not a plat is to be recorded and no building permits
shall be issued therefor until such approval has been given. (Sub. Ord.; amd.
Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
CHAPTER 5
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Scope
11-5-2: Water Supply
11-5-3: Sewage Disposal
11-5-4: Storm Water
11-5-5: Streets
11-5-6: Curbs And Gutters
11-5-7: Sidewalks
11-5-8: Monuments
11-5-9: Fire Hydrants
11-5-10: Fencing Of Canals
11-5-11: Survey Stakes
11-5-12: Guarantee Of Improvements
11-5-13: Inspection Of Improvements
11-5-1: SCOPE:
The owner of any land to be platted as a subdivision shall at his own expense
install the following improvements prior to recording the final plat or
guarantee the installation of such improvements provided in Section 11-5-12 of
this Chapter, according to the specifications and under the inspection of the
City Engineer, except for septic tanks which must be installed according to the
specifications of the State Board of Health. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-
16-2024)
11-5-2: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Installation Of Lines: Where an approved public water supply is
reasonably accessible or procurable, the subdivider shall install water lines,
or shall contract with the local water distributing agency to make the water
supply available to each lot within the subdivision, including laterals to the
property line of each lot. The subdivider shall furnish to the City Engineer
three (3) copies of plans showing the location and size of proposed water lines
and fire hydrants and also existing water lines to which a connection is to be
made. Information concerning the residual water pressure in the existing mains
at the approximate point of connection shall also be furnished.
   B.   Determination Of Adequacy: The City Engineer shall determine the
adequacy of the existing water system to provide culinary water and fire
protection to State Board of Health requirements to the lots in the
subdivision. (Sub. Ord.; 1997 Code; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-5-3: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
Where a public sanitary sewer is within two hundred feet (200') or is close
enough in the opinion of the City Engineer to require a connection, the
subdivider shall connect with such sanitary sewer and provide adequate lateral
lines to the property line of each lot. Such sewer connections and subdivision
sewer systems shall comply with the regulations of, and shall be approved by,
the City Engineer. (Sub. Ord.; 1997 Code; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-5-4: STORM WATER:
The City Engineer shall require the subdivider to dispose of storm water and
surface drainage if such provision is deemed necessary. If easements are
required across abutting property to permit drainage of the subdivision, it
shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to acquire such easements. (Sub.
Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-5-5: STREETS 1 :
   A.   Grading And Surfacing: All public and private streets shall be graded
and surfaced in accordance witnThe standards and rules and regulations.
   B.   Drainage: Street drainage and drainage structures may be required by
the City Engineer where necessary.
   C.   Trees: Street trees may be planted by the subdivider when so required
by the City.
   D.   Signs: Street signs shall be installed by the subdivider at all
locations as designated by the City Engineer. Such signs shall be of such a
type and of such material as shall be prescribed by the City Engineer. (Sub.
Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  11-4-1 of this Title.
11-5-6: CURBS AND GUTTERS:
Curbs and gutters shall be installed on existing and proposed streets by the
subdivider, where necessary to remove surface water, or for safety or other
reasons. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-5-7: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be required for reasons of safety or public welfare. (Sub.
Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-5-8: MONUMENTS:
Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established at such points as
are necessary to definitely establish all lines of the plat except those
outlining individual lots. Monuments shall be of a type approved by the City
Engineer. All subdivision plats shall be tied to a corner or monument of
record, or established land office survey corner. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-
01, 4-16-2024)
11-5-9: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants shall be installed. Such fire hydrants shall be of the type,
size, number and installed in such locations as determined by the City
Engineer. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-5-10: FENCING OF CANALS:
A solid board, chainlink or other non-climbable fence, not less than five feet
(5') in height, shall be installed on both sides of existing irrigation ditches
or canals which carry five feet (5') or more of water, or bordering open
reservoirs, railroad rights of way or non-access streets, and which are located
within or adjacent to the subdivision, except where the City Engineer
determines that park areas, including streams or bodies of water, shall remain
unfenced. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-5-11: SURVEY STAKES:
Survey stakes shall be permanently set at all lot corners so as to completely
identify the lot boundaries on the ground. (Sub. Ord.; amd. 1997 Code; Ord.
2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-5-12: GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Methods: In lieu of actual installation of the improvements required by
this Chapter, the subdivider may guarantee the installation thereof by one of
the methods specified as follows:
      1.   Bond: The subdivider may furnish and file with the City Recorder a
bond with corporate surety in an amount equal to the cost of the improvements
(plus ten percent (10%)) not previously installed as estimated by the City
Engineer to assure the installation of such improvements within a two (2) year
period immediately following the approval of the subdivision plat by the Public
Works Director, which bond shall be approved by the City Council and City
Attorney and shall be filed with the City Recorder.
      2.   Escrow: The subdivider may deposit in escrow with an escrow holder
approved by the City Council an amount of money equal to the cost of the
improvements not then installed as estimated by the City Engineer, as
aforesaid, under an escrow agreement to assure the installation of said
improvements within a one (1) year period from the approval of the subdivision
plat by the City Council as aforesaid. The escrow agreement aforesaid shall be
approved by the City Council and City Attorney and shall be filed with the City
Recorder.
      3.   Agreement: The subdivider may execute, acknowledge and cause to be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder, a written agreement with the
City, which shall specifically provide that it shall be deemed to be a covenant
running with the subdivided lands for the benefit of the City and shall
particularly and accurately describe such lands. By said agreement, the
subdivider shall further give and grant to the City a lien on said lands to
secure performance of the covenant and agreement herein before specified and to
secure the installation of all of the improvements required by this Chapter,
together with the payment of all costs, including a reasonable attorney fee,
which the City may incur in enforcing any of the terms and provisions of said
agreement. Said agreement shall further provide that he will not lease or
convey any of the subdivided property to anyone whomsoever unless he shall
first, as a condition precedent thereto, either:
         a.   Install and pay for all of the improvements aforesaid necessary
to the full, effective and practical use and enjoyment thereof by the lessee or
grantee of the lands so to be conveyed, including, but not limited to, all
street improvements in front of such property and thence along the dedicated
streets to a connection with existing improvements of the same kind or to the
boundary of the subdivision nearest said existing improvements whichever is
closer; or
         b.   File a bond as provided in subsection Al of this Section to
secure the installation and/or completion of all uncompleted improvements
herein specified, or
         c.   Deposit in escrow as provided in subsection A2 if this Section,
money to secure the installation and/or completion of all uncompleted
improvements herein specified.
   B.   Release Of Liens: The City Engineer is authorized and directed from
time to time, at the request of the subdivider or his successors in interest,
to release of record from the burden of the covenant and lien aforesaid lots
and parcels of land as to which the covenant and agreement has been fully
performed, either by installation of improvements, by the deposit of a bond or
the deposit of funds in escrow as aforesaid. The covenant and agreement
aforesaid shall be approved as to form by the City Council and by the City
Attorney. The City Council is authorized to prescribe by administrative rule or
regulation, forms and procedures to ensure the orderly, regular and efficient
processing of applications for the approval of a proposed subdivision and the
strict compliance with the requirements of this Title.
   C.   Continuous Improvements: Whenever the subdivider develops a subdivision
a portion at a time as contemplated by subsection A3 of this Section, such
development shall be in an orderly manner and in such a way that the required
improvements will be continuous and all of the said improvements will be made
available for the full, effective and practical use and enjoyment thereof by
the lessees or grantees of any of the lands subdivided within the time
hereinbefore specified. (Sub. Ord.; amd. Ord. 99-01, 1-19-1999; Ord. 2024-01,
4-16-2024)
11-5-13: INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Required: The City Engineer and Building Inspector shall inspect or
cause to be inspected all buildings, structures, streets, fire hydrants and
water supply and sewage disposal systems in the course of construction,
installation or repair, etc. Excavations for fire hydrants, water and sewer
mains and laterals shall not be covered over or backfilled until such
installation shall have been approved by the City Engineer. If any such
installation is covered before being inspected and approved, it shall be
uncovered after notice to uncover has been issued to the responsible person by
the City Engineer.
   B.   Payment Of Costs: The subdivider or contractor, upon submission of his
plans, shall deposit with the City a sum, in an amount estimated by the City
Engineer, to cover engineering and inspection of the above improvements. (Sub.
Ord.; Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
CHAPTER 6
CONDOMINIUM APPROVAL PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-6-1: Purpose And Intent
11-6-2: Definitions
11-6-3: Submission Of Application
11-6-4: Staff Review
11-6-5: Preliminary Approval By Planning Commission
11-6-6: Notice To Tenants In Conversion Projects
11-6-7: Tenant Protest Review
11-6-8: Final Approval By Planning Commission
11-6-9: Approval By City Council
11-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Applicability: The procedures and requirements of this chapter shall
apply to and govern the processing of condominium record of survey maps
pursuant to the requirements of the condominium ownership act of 1975, Utah
Code Annotated title 57, chapter 8. Said procedures and requirements shall
supplement zoning, site development, health, building and other ordinances
applicable to a particular condominium project, and shall apply to the approval
of such projects involving new construction as well as those involving the
conversion of existing structures. In addition, condominium projects which
contemplate dedication of real property or improvements for the use of the
public, or condominium projects in which units are not contained in existing or
proposed buildings shall also be considered subdivisions requiring compliance
with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Impact Assessment: It is the intent of this chapter to establish a
reasonable process whereby the city can assess the impact of mixing collective
and individual ownerships, as presented in a particular condominium project,
upon the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city. In the
case of commercial or residential conversions of existing buildings,
corrections of building code violations, the upgrading of vehicle parking
facilities and safety of common functional elements of the structure or
structures are of prime importance. It is also recognized that the conversion
of existing apartments or similar multi-family rental dwelling structures
presents the potential of relocation hardship to existing tenants, especially
senior citizens, and warrants that reasonable notice and disclosure
requirements be established by the city to minimize said hardships.
   C.   Impact Fees: The city could implement impact fees which would be set by
the City Council on the fee schedule. (Ord. 2009-07, 7-21-2009; amd. Ord. 2024-
01, 4-16-2024)
11-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
APARTMENT HOUSE:           A building designed to be occupied by more than four
                           (4) families.
                           A building or complex in which units of property,
                           such as apartments, are owned by individuals and
CONDOMINIUM:               common parts of the property, such as the grounds
                           and building structure, are owned jointly by the
                           unit owners.
                           A building designed and used for residential
DWELLING:                  purposes, including one-, two-, three- and four-
                           family dwelling units, but not including apartments,
                           boarding houses, hotels, lodging houses or motels.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: See definition of Apartment House.
                           One or more related or connected rooms occupied by
DWELLING UNIT:             or designed for residential purposes by one
                           household.
                           A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group
                           of three (3) or more attached units in which each
TOWNHOUSE:                 unit extends from foundation to roof and with open
                           space on at least two (2) sides. (Ord. 2009-07, 7-
                           21-2009; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
 
11-6-3: SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
The owner or developer of a proposed condominium project desiring approval
shall file an application with the Planning Commission staff of the city on a
form prescribed by the city, together with:
   A.   Map: Four (4) copies of the proposed map accurately drawn to scale as
required by Utah Code Annotated section 57-8-13, as amended, which shall be
made by a registered Utah land surveyor using a scale no smaller than one inch
to equal forty feet (1" = 40'). In addition, said map or an additional site
plan shall include diagrammatic floor plans identifying boundaries of the
project units, convertible and expandable areas or spaces and common areas.
Said map or plan should designate the intended use of common areas (e.g.,
storage, recreational, parking for guests as opposed to unit owners, open
space, etc.), and should indicate whether such common areas are to be open to
the public, assigned to specific units or semi-private and available only to
unit owners. Said map or site plan shall also identify and describe in detail
the location of existing or proposed driveways, pedestrianways, curb cuts,
walls, structures, fences, landscaping, utility easements, adjacent property
and sprinkling system.
   B.   Declarations; Bylaws: Two (2) copies, signed in the original, of the
proposed condominium declarations and bylaws, with a limit of two (2) years
minimum transferable.
   C.   Property Report: Where conversion of an existing building is proposed
as part of the condominium project, two (2) copies of the property report,
prepared by a licensed architect or engineer, including the following
information, shall be submitted as part of the application, together with the
plan for proposed improvements, renovations and repairs:
      1.   The age of the building or buildings.
      2.   The general condition, useful life and capacity of the building,
structural elements, including the roof, foundations, mechanical system,
electrical system, plumbing system, boiler and other structural elements.
      3.   All known conditions constituting deficiencies requiring repair to
meet existing NEC electrical and ICC codes.
      4.   All known conditions which may require repair or replacement within
the next succeeding five (5) year period.
      5.   The property report shall certify that the structure or structures
conform to the following minimum standards or the owner shall present plans to
bring the structure or structures into conformity with said standards prior to
issuance of certificates of occupancy:
         a.   Minimum Standards For Decent Sanitary And Safe Housing:
         (1)   The NEC electrical and ICC codes shall be met in all condominium
conversion projects.
         (2)   Commercial condominium spaces shall conform to the uniform code
for building conservation, as adopted by the city, with any amendments thereto,
for occupancy separation, construction type and allowable area, existing height
of building, etc.
         (3)   Each dwelling shall comply with separation of utilities,
soundproofing, fire ratings, fire sprinkler system and smoke detectors that are
capable of notifying adjacent units.
         b.   Minimum Electrical Service And Devices:
         (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be supplied with a minimum of a one
hundred (100) amp service with proper breakers and main disconnect located
within each unit. Each commercial space shall be wired in conduit and have a
properly sized service and disconnects.
         (2)   Each habitable room shall contain at least two (2) convenience
outlets and one wall switch controlled light. Hallways, bathrooms and kitchens
shall also have one wall switch controlled light.
         (3)   All new electrical wiring shall comply with the current NEC code
and be completed with proper permits and inspections.
         (4)   A smoke detector conforming to ICC standards 43-6 and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed in each dwelling unit as per the !RC code
sections R314 and R315.
         c.   Plumbing And Culinary Water Service:
         (1)   A Utah licensed engineer, plumbing contractor or a general
contractor shall determine the adequacy of the existing water service pressure
based on the fixture unit.
         (2)   Individual shutoff valves must be provided for each unit or each
plumbing fixture within the unit.
         (3)   All new installations must be completed with proper permits and
inspections in accordance with current IPC codes.
         d.   Heating And Mechanical Systems:
         (1)   Each dwelling or commercial space must be provided with its own
heating system, except when the building is provided with central water or
steam facilities.
         (2)   All mechanical installations and repairs must be completed with
proper permits and inspections and comply with current IMC codes.
         e.   Sanitary Sewer: Sanitary sewer main may be shared based upon a
written approved plan concerning maintenance and responsibility.
         f.   Landscaping: Property must be landscaped in a way that it is able
to retain water on own property and no trees or shrubs shall be placed in any
area that might obscure the adjoining properties' view.
   D.   Notice To Tenants: Proof of notice to tenants, as required by section
11-6-6 of this chapter, shall be required before final approval, but may be
submitted at they owner/developer's option, after preliminary approval is
obtained from the Planning Commission.
   E.   Incomplete Applications: Incomplete applications may be proffered and
reviewed for advisory comments by the planning or building services divisions,
but shall not be deemed accepted or received until complete, nor shall the
condominium project be scheduled for any hearings before the Planning
Commission until the application is complete, with only the exception of
subsection D of this section. (Ord. 2009-07, 7-21-2009; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-
16-2024)
11-6-4: STAFF REVIEW:
Upon receipt of a completed application for approval of a condominium project,
the city planning staff shall route copies of the application and development
plans in the same manner as a standard subdivision as outlined in this title.
Additional preliminary review by the planning staff, fire chief and the
building inspector shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Planning:
      1.   Letter Of Intent: A letter of intent shall be submitted indicating
proposed concept of project for staff review. The condominium declaration and
bylaws shall be reviewed as part of the final approval process and will include
provisions addressing and fixing responsibility for the maintenance, upkeep and
repair of common areas, including common walls, electrical, mechanical,
plumbing of utility systems, recreational areas, landscaping and parking areas.
The declarations shall also restrict the use of any individual residential
dwelling unit to single families as defined in this code. The staff shall also
review said declaration to require appropriate disclosure of any unusual
circumstances, variances or conditions placed upon the condominium project for
approval.
      2.   Plans And Related Documents: The staff shall review the plans and
related documents to determine whether the project conforms to applicable
requirements of the zoning title, the status or extent of nonconforming rights,
applicable conditions imposed upon the building or use by ordinance, appeal
authority variance, conditional use permit, and/or prior approval under a PRUD,
clustered or group dwelling plan. If the planning staff finds there are
violations of applicable zoning ordinances or requirements, the staff may
recommend denial of the condominium project until such violations have been
corrected or requirements completed or bonded for prior to final approval by
the Planning Commission.
   B.   Building Inspection:
      1.   Upon receipt of the application for approval of a condominium
project, the inspection department shall review the proposed building plans for
new construction, and/or in the case of a conversion project, the property
report and plan of improvement, renovation and repairs to determine conformance
with applicable building codes. In the case of a conversion, the department
shall require inspections of the property and may require supplementation,
revision and resubmission of the property report where necessary.
      2.   In the preliminary review report to the Planning Commission, the
building department shall note corrections, repairs and replacements which must
be made to bring the structures into code compliance; together with a list of
renovation improvements proposed by the owner/developer which are not required
by code. The chief building official shall also list any requirement of the
building code that needs appeal authority consideration due to unique
circumstances associated with the structure. The building official may then
recommend denial until such time as existing violations of the code are
corrected or may recommend preliminary approval of the project and building
report, subject to correction of the violations prior to final approval.
   C.   Fire Chief: The City Fire Chief shall inspect each structure proposed
for conversion and shall submit a report thereon to the planning staff,
outlining the conditions of the structures as they relate to fire safety. The
Fire Chief shall stipulate those conditions requiring improvement, prior to
occupancy, in the report. (Ord. 2009-07, 7-21-2009; amd. Ord. 2015-08, 11-4-
2015; Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-6-5: PRELIMINARY APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Consideration: Upon completion of the recommendations of the building
department, the planning staff, engineering staff and the fire chief, the
matter shall be set for consideration by the Planning Commission.
   B.   Compliance; Final Approval: If the Planning Commission finds that the
project is in full compliance with:
      1.   Applicable city ordinances;
      2.   The requirements of the Condominium Ownership Act of 1975;
      3.   That proper notice to tenants has been given; and
      4.   That in every way the project is ready for final approval, the
Planning Commission may grant final approval of the project, authorize the
signature of the chairman to be placed upon the necessary documents and forward
the project on to the City Council for consideration.
   C.   Changes; Modifications: If the Planning Commission finds that the
project substantially complies with the above mentioned criteria, but that
certain facets of the proposal require changes or modifications prior to final
approval, or that tenant notification has not been completed, the Planning
Commission may grant preliminary approval to the project with instruction as to
what criteria must be met prior to submission for final approval.
   D.   Disapproval: If the Planning Commission finds the project in conflict
with the ordinances of the city and/or the state and is not in the best
interests of the city as a whole and/or the specific neighborhood in which the
project is proposed to be located; or if it is not satisfied with the site
development plans of the project; the Planning Commission may disapprove the
project, specifying in detail the reasons for disapproval. (Ord. 2009-07, 7-21-
2009; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-6-6: NOTICE TO TENANTS IN CONVERSION PROJECTS:
   A.   Required: As part of the application for approval of a condominium
project, when said project involves the conversion of an existing structure
where the structure has been occupied by residential or commercial tenants
prior to application for conversion, the owner/developer shall provide notice
of intended conversion to said tenants by certified mail. This notice
requirement shall not apply to a structure that was vacant and remained so
during the year prior to filing of the developer's application for conversion;
nor shall it preclude the approval of a project to the expiration date where
every tenant has executed a waiver relinquishing his or her right of notice
under this provision.
   B.   Contents: Such notice shall include:
      1.   The proposal for the conversion of the building to a condominium
project;
      2.   The established dates of construction period and termination of
occupancy which shall not be less than sixty (60) days from the date notice is
served upon occupants or expiration of individual leases, whichever is longer;
      3.   The disclosure of the sales price for each unit shall be no greater
than the price initially advertised and offered to the general public at such
time as when the condominiums are offered for public sale;
      4.   Relocation information for the tenants, specifying available
alternative housing relocation resource agencies and organizations and a plan
of any services to be voluntarily provided by the owner/developer.
   C.   Dissemination: A copy of said notice, together with a list prepared by
the owner/developer identifying names, apartment or unit numbers, approximate
ages, rental rates and other known special handicaps or factors affecting
relocation needs of the tenants, shall be submitted to the city to advise the
city of the conversion and/or solicit city assistance with relocation services.
No final approval of such conversion project shall be granted by the Planning
Commission until the owner/developer has provided proof of notice by certified
mail or subsequent proof of actual delivery by method of services allowed under
Utah Code Annotated, 1953, section 78B-6-805, of such notices and relocation
information as required above, and any plans for relocation services to be
voluntarily provided by the owner/developer and the time designated therein (a
minimum of sixty (60) days) has expired. (Ord. 2009-07, 7-21-2009; amd. Ord.
2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-6-7: TENANT PROTEST REVIEW:
   A.   Procedure: When a tenant of a residential dwelling has received written
formal notice of eviction without cause and without at least sixty (60) days'
notice of conversion required above and has reason to believe that notice was
issued because of a proposed condominium project they may, within thirty (30)
days of the date of the notice of eviction, initiate an appeal regarding the
issue of proper notice to the City Council on a form provided in the city
office. The filing of such a protest shall stay the issuance of any approval or
issuance of any permits for the structure in question for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days and the matter shall be set for hearing before the City
Council. Subsequent appeals shall not act to further stay the issuance of
approval of the condominium project and no stay shall be granted if the
building official certifies to the City Council that a stay would, in their
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, approval
shall not be stayed other than by order issued by the district court upon
petition, notice and due cause being shown.
   B.   Agency Assistance: Upon filing, a copy of the appeal shall be forwarded
to the city for relocation advice and assistance.
   C.   Investigation: Upon filing a tenant appeal, the planning staff shall
institute an investigation to determine if the notice requirements set forth
above were satisfied. They shall then report their findings to the City Council
within ten (10) days of filing the appeal.
   D.   Hearing:
      1.   The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, give due notice to the appellant and to the owner/developer of the
condominium project and shall, at said hearing, review said appeal together
with agency and department reports, recommendations and related permit or
subdivision applications, and shall decide the same within thirty (30) days
from the date of filing the appeal.
      2.   The City Council, with regard to the hearing of said appeals, may:
         a.   Enforce the attendance of witnesses, the production of books and
papers and administer oaths;
         b.   Direct municipal resources, if necessary and appropriate for the
alleviation of relocation hardships;
         c.   Hear and decide allegations of error in any order requirement,
decision or determinations made by a municipal official in performance of his
duties as related above;
         d.   See that laws and ordinances are faithfully executed and direct
investigations accordingly;
         e.   Institute any appropriate actions or proceeding to prevent
persons from or punish persons for performing any act contrary to the building
and zoning titles of the city;
         f.   Impose reasonable conditions relating to the terms and conditions
upon which the project will be approved, which may include suspension of
approval pending preparation and implementation of a reasonable relocation plan
or services for tenants who have not been given proper notice, or denial of the
application, in which event the owner/developer may not reapply for twelve (12)
months from the date of denial. (Ord. 2009-07, 7-21-2009; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-
16-2024)
11-6-8: FINAL APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
If, upon submission of the building official and planning staff, engineering
staff and fire marshal, the Planning Commission finds that the project is in
compliance with applicable ordinances and the requirements of preliminary
approval, the Planning Commission may grant final approval. The Planning
Commission will review recommendations from the planning staff, engineering
staff, the Fire Chief and building official for work that is proposed for
subsequent completion, bonding or waiver and may otherwise impose appropriate
terms upon such bonding or conditions upon its approval. (Ord. 2009-07, 7-21-
2009; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 4-16-2024)
11-6-9: APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Upon final approval by the Planning Commission, the planning staff
shall ensure all conditions of approval have been completed, all final
documentation is signed and submitted, including any required bonds or
agreements required to be filed, and shall then submit the matter, together
with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, with the chair's signature
upon the map, before the City Council for final approval. If the City Council
shall determine said project is not in conformity with the requirements of the
ordinances of the city or if they reject any offers to dedication; or if not
satisfied with plans of a project which constitutes a subdivision, the City
Council may disapprove said map, specifying reasons for disapproval.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days after the City Council has disapproved any
project, the developer may file with the planning staff a map or documents
altered to meet the requirements of the City Council. Upon receipt of said map
or documents, the matter shall be referred back to the City Council by the
planning staff for reconsideration.
   C.   No final map shall have any force or effect until the same has been
approved by the city as reflected by the signature of the City Council and is
officially recorded with the city recorder within twelve (12) months from the
date of the City Council's approval. (Ord. 2009-07, 7-21-2009; amd. Ord. 2024-
01, 4-16-2024)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Statutory Authorization
12-1-2: Findings Of Fact
12-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
12-1-4: Definitions
12-1-5: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
12-1-6: General Provisions
12-1-7: Administration
12-1-8: Provisions For General Flood Hazard Reduction
12-1-9: Penalty
12-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of Utah has, in Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-
84, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations
designed to minimize flood losses, promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of Sunset City,
Utah, does adopt this chapter. (Ord. 2007-03, 6-19-2007)
12-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of Sunset City are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 2007-03, 6-19-2007)
12-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions to specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
   H.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 2007-03, 6-19-2007)
12-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application:
   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan
or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
   APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: a) built, in the case of a
building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of
the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and b) adequately anchored so
as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up
to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by
means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-30,
VE or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of section
60.3(e)(5) of the national flood insurance program regulations.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOODPRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls or structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
   LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvement to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATION VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonable use.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent
construction or structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of
construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
   VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the
NFIP regulations.)
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 2007-03, 6-19-2007)
12-1-5: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 2007-03, 6-19-2007)
12-1-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Sunset City.
   B.   Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in a
scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study For
Sunset City" dated June 18, 2007, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps
and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are
hereby adopted by reference and declared part of this chapter.
   C.   Establishment Of Development Permit: A development permit shall be
required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or
have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
   E.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   F.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the Sunset City council; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   G.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions
greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder. (Ord. 2007-03, 6-19-2007)
12-1-7: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of Floodplain Administrator: The building inspector is
hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national
flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities Of Floodplain Administrator: Duties of the
floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building
sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding;
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter;
      4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local government
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required;
      5.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is the department of public safety, emergency service
and homeland security, prior to any altercation or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management
agency;
      7.   Assure that flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained;
      8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with subsection
12-1-6B of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
this section;
      9.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or any other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30
and AE on the community FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community;
      10.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
developments in zones A1-30, AE and AH on the community's FIRM which increases
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'),
provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision
through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision).
   C.   Permit Procedures:
      1.   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
         a.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
         c.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection
12-1-8B2 of this chapter;
         d.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         e.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection B1 of this section.
      2.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         b.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         c.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         d.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         e.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         f.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges,
public utilities, and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
         g.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
         h.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location where
applicable;
         i.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
         j.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
for that area.
   D.   Variance Procedures:
      1.   The appeal board as established by the community shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
      2.   The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
      3.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
      4.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
      5.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      6.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvement to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection C2 of this
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-
half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
      7.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objective of this
chapter.
      8.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      9.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historical structure
and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
      10.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
         a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to avoid
relief.
         b.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            (1)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
            (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
            (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         c.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of the flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      11.   Variances may be issued for a community for new construction,
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
         a.   The criteria outlined in subsections D1 through D9 of this
section are met, and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 2007-03, 6-19-2007)
12-1-8: PROVISIONS FOR GENERAL FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
      1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
      7.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   B.   Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in this chapter, the
following provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A
registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of subsection
12-1-4C1a of this chapter is satisfied.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
      3.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect.
      4.   Manufactured Homes: Require that all manufactured homes to be placed
within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods
and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local requirements for resisting wind forces.
      5.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM either:
         a.   Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days;
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection
12-1-7C1 of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection B4 of this section. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions.
   C.   Standards For Subdivision Proposals:
      1.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections
12-1-1,
12-1-2, and
12-1-5 of this chapter.
      2.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of subsections
12-1-6C,
12-1-7C of this chapter; and the provisions of this section.
      3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than fifty (50) lots
or five (5) acres, whichever is less, if not otherwise provided pursuant to
subsection
12-1-6B or
12-1-7B8 of this chapter.
      4.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
      5.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
It is hereby found and declared by Sunset City that flooding has occurred in
the past within its jurisdiction and will certainly occur in the future; that
flooding is likely to result in infliction of serious personal injury or death,
and is likely to result in substantial injury or destruction of property within
its jurisdiction; in order to effectively comply with minimum standards for
coverage under the national flood insurance program; and in order to
effectively remedy the situation described herein, it is necessary that this
chapter become effective immediately.
Therefore, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this chapter, being
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health and
safety, shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval. (Ord. 2007-03, 6-19-2007)
12-1-9: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a jail sentence of not to exceed six (6)
months. (Ord. 2007-03, 6-19-2007)
 
