CITY CODE
OF
TOQUERVILLE CITY, UTAH
Code current through:
Ord. 2025.07, passed July 16, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of Toquerville City, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 2025.07, passed July 16, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
TOQUERVILLE CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Alterations
1-1-5: Statutes Or Codes Included And Excluded
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Toquerville City. This
code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the TOQUERVILLE CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (1977 Code § 1-001; amd. Ord.
2013.02, 5-9-2013; 2014 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2014 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2014 Code)
1-1-4: ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city recorder shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city
recorder. Any person having custody of a copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the city recorder. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and
shall be returned to the office of the city recorder when directed so to do by
order of the city council. (2014 Code)
1-1-5: STATUTES OR CODES INCLUDED AND EXCLUDED:
Any reference or citation to any statute shall not be interpreted or construed
to include, incorporate or make the citation or statute part of this code
unless the provisions of this code specifically include, incorporate, or make
the citation or statute part of this code by reference or incorporation, and
any such reference or citation not specifically included or incorporated may be
changed, amended or deleted without publication on an order of the governing
body. (1977 Code § 1-009)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the city passed prior
to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included
in this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal
(subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances. (1977 Code § 1-
002; amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided
in subsection A of this section shall not affect any debt or fee which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded. (1977 Code § 1-003; amd. 2014 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2014 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Scope Of Section: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2014 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1977 Code § 1-007; amd.
2014 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees: Whenever any officer or employee is referred by
title, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of
Toquerville City".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection", or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2014 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: Toquerville City, state of Utah.
CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL: The city council of Toquerville City, state of Utah.
CODE: The city code of Toquerville City.
COUNTY: The county of Washington, state of Utah.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation or other activity subject to city regulation,
authorization or limitation.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council of Toquerville City, state of Utah.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Southwest Utah public health department.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MUNICIPALITY: Toquerville City, state of Utah.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Shall mean or refer to any property or premises
containing a structure which is hooked to culinary water and power and intended
or used for human habitation, but excluding: a) property or premises containing
a structure hooked to power and water and used for human habitation on an
overnight or other temporary rental basis of less than thirty (30) consecutive
days; and b) property or premises containing a structure with more than eight
(8) dwelling units, which is hooked to power and water and used for human
habitation on a rental basis.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Utah.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1977 Code § 1-005; amd. 2014 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1977
Code § 1-006; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Sentencing
1-4-2: Offenses Designated; Classified
1-4-3: Utah Uniform Fine/Bail Schedule
1-4-1: SENTENCING:
   A.   Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance 1 :
      1.   Criminal: The city council may impose a minimum criminal penalty for
the violation of any municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum
class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a
term of imprisonment up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of
imprisonment.
      2.   Civil:
         a.   Except as provided in subsection A2b of this section, the city
council may prescribe a minimum civil penalty for the violation of any
municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor
fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301.
         b.   A municipality may not impose a civil penalty and adjudication
for the violation of a municipal moving traffic ordinance.
   B.   Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors 2 : A person who has been
convicted of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
      1.   In the case of a class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six
(6) months;
      2.   In the case of a class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days.
   C.   Infractions 3 :
      1.   A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be
subject to a fine, forfeiture and disqualification, or any combination.
      2.   Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is
specified, the person may be fined as for a class C misdemeanor.
   D.   Fines Of Persons 4 : A person convicted of an offense may be sentenced
to pay a fine, not exceeding:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the
conviction is of a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: Seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) when the conviction is of a class C misdemeanor conviction or
infraction conviction.
   E.   Fines Of Corporations 5 : The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon
a corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an
offense defined in this code, or the ordinances of the city, or for an offense
defined outside of this code over which this city has jurisdiction, for which
no special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by the
court, not exceeding:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the
conviction is for a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
when the conviction is for a class C misdemeanor conviction or for an
infraction conviction. (1977 Code §§ 1-320, 1-330; amd. 2014 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-3-703.
2 2. UCA § 76-3-204.
3 3. UCA § 76-3-205.
4 1. UCA § 76-3-301.
5 2. UCA § 76-3-302.
1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED:
   A.   Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter:
      1.   A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this code or the
ordinances of this city shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   Ordinances enacted after the effective date of this code which
involve an offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance
with this chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided. (1977 Code § 1-311)
   B.   Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or
infractions. (1977 Code § 1-312)
   C.   Misdemeanors Classified 1 :
      1.   Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
         a.   Class B misdemeanors;
         b.   Class C misdemeanors.
      2.   An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful in this code or any ordinance of this city when no
other specification as to punishment or category is made, is a class B
misdemeanor. (1977 Code § 1-313)
   D.   Infractions:
      1.   Infractions are not classified.
      2.   Any offense which is made an infraction in this code or other
ordinances of this city, or which is expressly designated an infraction and any
offense designated by this code or other ordinances of this city which is not
designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified is an
infraction. (1977 Code § 1-314)
   E.   Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this code
or any ordinance hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation
occurs or continues to occur. (1977 Code § 1-315)
 
Notes
1 3. UCA § 76-3-104.
1-4-3: UTAH UNIFORM FINE/BAIL SCHEDULE:
The Utah uniform fine/bail schedule, approved by the judicial council, shall be
applicable in providing assistance to the sentencing judge in determining the
appropriate fine or bail to be assessed in a particular case and to minimize
disparity of fines/bails imposed by different courts for similar offenses.
(2014 Code)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: City Seal
1-5-1: CITY SEAL:
The seal provided and used by and for the city, is described as follows:
Circular in form, one and three-fourths inches (13/4") in diameter, the outer
inscription of which reads "Toquerville City, Washington County, *Utah*", and
the inner inscription of which reads "Corporate Seal", is hereby declared to
have been, that it is now, and hereafter shall be, the corporate seal of
Toquerville City, Utah.
(1977 Code § 1-010)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Mayor And Mayor Pro Tempore
1-6-2: City Council
1-6-3: Meetings
1-6-4: Minutes Approval Procedure
1-6-5: Numbering Ordinances
1-6-1: MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEMPORE:
   A.   Powers And Duties Generally: The mayor:
      1.   Is, except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, a nonvoting
member of the council;
      2.   Votes as a voting member of the council:
         a.   On each matter for which there is a tie vote of the other council
members present at a council meeting; or
         b.   When the council is voting on:
            (1)   Whether to appoint or dismiss a municipal manager; or
            (2)   An ordinance that enlarges or restricts the mayor's powers,
duties or functions;
      3.   Is the chair of the council and presides at all council meetings;
      4.   Exercises ceremonial functions for the municipality;
      5.   May not veto an ordinance, tax levy or appropriation passed by the
council;
      6.   Except as modified by ordinance under subsection
1-6-2B of this chapter, has the powers and duties described in Utah Code
Annotated section 10-3b-104; and
      7.   May, within budget constraints, appoint one or more administrative
assistants to the mayor.
   B.   Mayor Pro Tempore:
      1.   If the mayor is absent or unable or refuses to act, the city council
may elect a member of the council as mayor pro tempore, to:
         a.   Preside at a council meeting; and
         b.   Perform, during the mayor's absence, disability or refusal to
act, the duties and functions of mayor.
      2.   The city recorder shall enter in the minutes of the city council
meeting the election of a council member as mayor pro tempore under subsection
B1 of this section. (2014 Code)
1-6-2: CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   The city council:
      1.   Exercises any executive or administrative power and performs or
supervises the performance of any executive or administrative duty or function
that:
         a.   Has not been given to the mayor under Utah Code Annotated section
10-3b-104; or
         b.   Has been given to the mayor under Utah Code Annotated section 10-
3b-104, but is removed from the mayor under subsection A2a(1) of this section;
      2.   May:
         a.   Subject to subsections A3 and B of this section, adopt an
ordinance:
            (1)   Removing from the mayor any power, duty or function of the
mayor under Utah Code Annotated section 10-3b-104; or
            (2)   Reinstating to the Mayor any power, duty or function
previously removed under subsection A2a(1) of this section;
         b.   Adopt an ordinance delegating to the Mayor any executive or
administrative power, duty or function that the City Council has under
subsection A1 of this section;
         c.   Subject to subsection
1-6-1A2b(1) of this chapter:
            (1)   Appoint, subject to subsections C and D of this section, a
Manager to perform executive and administrative duties or functions that the
City Council by ordinance delegates to the Manager, subject to subsection A3 of
this section; and
            (2)   Dismiss a Manager appointed under subsection A2c(1) of this
section; and
         d.   Assign any or all Council members, including the Mayor, to
supervise one or more administrative departments of the Municipality; and
      3.   May not remove from the Mayor or delegate to a Manager appointed by
the City Council:
         a.   Any of the Mayor's legislative or judicial powers or ceremonial
functions;
         b.   The Mayor's position as Chair of the City Council; or
         c.   Any ex officio position that the Mayor holds.
   B.   Adopting an ordinance under subsection A2a of this section removing
from or reinstating to the Mayor a power, duty or function provided for in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3b-104 requires the affirmative vote of:
      1.   The Mayor and a majority of all other Council members; or
      2.   All Council members except the Mayor.
   C.   1. As used in this subsection, "interim vacancy period" means the
period of time that:
         a.   Begins on the day on which a Municipal general election described
in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-201 is held to elect a Council member; and
         b.   Ends on the day on which the Council member elect begins the
Council member's term.
      2.   a. The City Council may not appoint a Manager during an interim
vacancy period.
         b.   Notwithstanding subsection C2a of this section:
            (1)   The Council may appoint an interim Manager during an interim
vacancy period; and
            (2)   The interim Manager's term shall expire once a new Manager is
appointed by the new administration after the interim vacancy period has ended.
      3.   Subsection C2 of this section does not apply if all the Council
members who held office on the day of the Municipal general election whose term
of office was vacant for the election are reelected to the Council for the
following term.
   D.   A Council that appoints a Manager in accordance with this section may
not, on or after May 10, 2011, enter into an employment contract that contains
an automatic renewal provision with the Manager. (2014 Code)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The City Council shall conduct at least one (1)
regular meeting per month, as provided in section 10-3-502(l)(b), Utah Code
Annotated. Meeting schedules set by resolution no less than once per year in
the City Council Chambers located at 212 N. Toquerville Blvd., Toquerville,
Utah, commencing promptly at a time set by resolution, provided that:
      1.   Such meeting may be canceled or rescheduled by the Mayor and/or City
Council if said meeting date is a legal holiday, or is immediately preceding or
following such; and
      2.   The Mayor may cancel any meeting so long as at least one (1) regular
meeting of the Council is scheduled and held during the calendar month in which
such meeting is canceled. Every meeting is open to the public, unless closed
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 52-4-204, 52-4-205, and 52-4-206.
   B.   Special Meetings: The Mayor or any two (2) members of the City Council
may order a special meeting of the City Council by delivering a written notice
of the special meeting signed by him or them to each member who did not join in
the order, leaving a copy of the notice at the member’s usual place of abode at
least three (3) hours prior to such meeting. The personal appearance by a
member of the City Council at any specially called meeting constitutes a waiver
of the notice required by this subsection. The written notice required in this
subsection shall state the time and place the special meeting is to be held and
the purpose for which the special meeting is being called, and shall comply
with all applicable provisions of the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act, Utah
Code Annotated section 52-4-101 et seq.
   C.   Record Of Proceedings. The City Recorder shall keep a record of the
proceedings of the meetings of the City Council, except that minutes of the
executive session shall not be available to the public until such time as the
City Council shall make them public or by an order of court.
   D.   Conduct Of Meetings And Order Of Business. All meetings will follow the
current policy and procedure practices adopted by resolution.
   E.   Electronic Meetings. The City Council may conduct electronic meetings
pursuant to the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-207, as such
may be amended from time to time. As required by Utah law, the following shall
apply to electronic meetings.
      1.   Definitions. For purposes of conducting electronic meetings, the
following are defined terms:
 
                    The physical location from which the electronic meeting
ANCHOR LOCATION:    originates and where interested persons and the public may
                    attend, monitor and participate in open portions of a City
                    Council meeting.
                    A public meeting of the City Council convened and conducted
                    by means of a telephonic, telecommunications or computer
ELECTRONIC MEETING: device or other electronic means, allowing each member of
                    the City Council to be in contact with the anchor location
                    and participate concurrently with all other members of the
                    City Council in the conduct of such meeting.
 
      2.   Anchor Location: The only anchor location for electronic meetings of
the City Council shall be the conference room in the city offices at 212 N.
Toquerville Boulevard, Toquerville, Utah. Other anchor locations for an
electronic meeting may be approved as required by circumstances. Public
participation in an electronic meeting is limited to an anchor location.
      3.   Facilities At Anchor Location: Space and facilities must be provided
at the anchor location so that all interested persons may attend and monitor
the open portions of the meeting. In addition, if comments from the public will
be accepted during the electronic meeting, space and facilities must be
provided at the anchor location so that interested persons and the public may
attend, monitor and participate in the open portions of the meeting.
      4.   Member Arrangements For Electronic Participation: A member of the
City Council must give the City Recorder notice of his or her intent to attend
a City Council meeting electronically at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to
the meeting to allow for arrangements to be made for the electronic meeting.
Such notice by the City Council member must include the electronic means the
City Council member intends to utilize to attend the meeting.
      5.   General Requirements: A quorum of the City Council need not be
present at the anchor location, so long as all other requirements of this Utah
Code Annotated section 52-4-207 for an electronic meeting is satisfied. No
meeting of the City Council may be held electronically unless at least one
member of the City Council is present at the anchor location, meeting shall be
conducted from the anchor location by the Mayor or the Mayor Pro Tempore. If
neither the Mayor nor Mayor Pro Tempore is present at the anchor location, the
City Council shall select from its membership present at the anchor location a
Mayor Pro Tempore for the sole purpose of conducting the electronic meeting.
      6.   Attendance And Participation: Any member of the City Council
participating in a meeting of the City Council by electronic means shall be
considered present at the meeting for all purposes, including counting toward a
quorum. A member of the City Council participating in a meeting via electronic
means shall be afforded every opportunity to participate in the discussion of
the items on the agenda and may make, second and vote on all motions.
      7.   Notice Of Electronic Meeting: Public notice of an electronic meeting
of the City Council shall be given not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior
to the meeting in compliance with Utah Code § 63G-30-102 by:
         a.   Posting written notice of the meeting at the anchor location,
         b.   Give public notice of the electronic meeting in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated Section 52-4-202 and
         c.   By posting the notice on the Utah Public Notice Website created
under Utah Code Annotated section 63F-1-701. In addition, the City Recorder
shall provide notice of the electronic meeting to members of the City Council
at least twenty-four (24) hours before the meeting so that they may participate
in and be counted as present for all purposes, including the determination that
a quorum is present. The notices of the electronic meeting shall describe how
the members of the City Council and public body will be connected to the
electronic meeting.
      8.   Communications During Electronic Meetings. For each electronic
meeting of the City Council, a speakerphone, or similar amplifying electronic
device with or without video capabilities will be connected in such a manner
that comments made by the members participating electronically will be
broadcast at the anchor location. Opportunities for each member present at that
anchor location and those participating electronically will be given to make
inquiries and participate in the discussion. Discussion of motions will take
place in accordance with the usual procedures of the City Council with the
exception that those present electronically must declare their intent verbally
with their accompanying name(s). Votes taken in electronic meetings shall be
roll call methods, with each member audibly verbalizing their vote. If a member
participating in a meeting electronically withdraws from the meeting, the rest
of the meeting may be completed provided there is a still a quorum present,
counting all members still participating in the meeting whether at the anchor
location or participating electronically.
      9.   Minutes of Electronic Meetings. Minutes of an electronic meeting
shall designate the name of each City Council member who participated
electronically, the nature of the electronic communication and the duration of
the member’s participation in the meeting. The roll call for members present
will be taken verbally and recorded, during the meeting.
      10.   Limitations on Electronic Meetings. Electronic meetings may be
prohibited or limited based on budget, public policy or logistical
circumstances.
   F.   Force Majeure Exception. In instances where conducting a regular
meeting, workshop or executive session is not practicable or reasonable due to
causes outside of the control of the City Council, including: acts of God,
civil commotion, war, terrorism, governmental regulations or control and health
pandemics the City Council may cancel the meeting, close the meeting, or
conduct it in an alternative location or choose to conduct the meeting,
workshop or executive session as an electronic meeting without the requisite
advanced notice due to the emergency or extraordinary circumstances pursuant to
Utah Code Annotated sections 54-2-20l(2)(b) and 54-2-202(5). (Ord. 2019.02, 4-
11-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-08, 6-11-2020; Ord. 2021.29, 12-15-2021; Ord. 2023.21,
8-16-2023)
1-6-4: MINUTES APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply so long as they are consistent with the definitions of the same
terms found in the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act, Utah Code Annotated
section 52-4-101 et seq. If a term is defined differently in the Utah Open and
Public Meetings Act, the definition found in that Act shall apply:
    CONVENING: The calling of a meeting of a public body by a person authorized
to do so for the express purpose of discussing or acting upon a subject over
which that public body has jurisdiction or advisory power.
   MEETING: 1. The convening of a public body, with a quorum present, including
a workshop of an executive session, whether the meeting is held in person or by
means of electronic communications, for the purpose of discussing, receiving
comments from the public about, or acting upon a matter over which the public
body has jurisdiction or advisory power.
      2.   "Meeting" does not mean:
         a.   A chance meeting;
         b.   A social meeting; or
         c.   The convening of a public body that has legislative and executive
responsibilities where no public funds are appropriated for expenditure during
the time the public body is convened; and
            (1)   The public body is convened solely for the discussion or
implementation of administrative or operational matters for which no formal
action by the public body is required; or
            (2)   The public body is convened solely for the discussion or
implementation of administrative or operational matters that would not come
before the public body for discussion or action.
   MEETING CLERK: The city recorder, or its acting deputy, for the city
council, or the person assigned by a public body, other than the city council,
to record and to take the written minutes of a meeting of a public body of
Toquerville City.
   MINUTES OF A MEETING: A written record of the meeting that shall include:
      1.   The date, time and place of the meeting;
      2.   The names of members present and absent (or excused);
      3.   The substance of all matters proposed, discussed or decided by the
public body, which may include a summary of comments made by members of the
public body;
      4.   A record by individual member (if poll is required) of each vote
taken by the public body;
      5.   The name of each person attending who:
         a.   Is not a member of the public body; and
         b.   After being recognized by the presiding member of the public
body, provided testimony or comments to the public body;
      6.   The substance in brief of the testimony or comments provided by the
public; and
      7.   Any other information that is a record of the proceedings of the
meeting that any council or board member requests be entered in the minutes or
recording.
   PROPOSED MINUTES: The written minutes prepared by the meeting clerk that
have been given to the members of a public body for their review and approval.
   PUBLIC BODY: Any administrative, advisory, executive or legislative body of
Toquerville City that:
      1.   Is created by the Utah constitution, statute, rule, ordinance or
resolution;
      2.   Consists of two (2) or more persons;
      3.   Expends, disburses or is supported in whole or in part by tax
revenue; and
      4.   Is vested with the authority to make decisions regarding the
public's business.
   B.   Policy For Approval Of Minutes: The following shall be the policy and
procedure for the approval of minutes for this municipality:
      1.   Written minutes shall be taken for all public meetings of any public
body of the city. The minutes of all public meetings of any public body of the
city shall be recorded, and taken down by the meeting clerk during the course
of any public meeting of the public body.
      2.   Within fifteen (15) working days from the end of the meeting, the
meeting clerk shall prepare proposed minutes for the meeting and give a copy of
the proposed minutes to each member of the public body for his or her review
and comments.
      3.   Once the proposed minutes have been given to the members of the
public body, the meeting clerk shall immediately make available to the public
the proposed written minutes, which shall be clearly identified as "draft", or
with some other appropriate notice that the proposed minutes are subject to
change until formally approved, and they shall become a public document
available to any member of the public who requests to read or copy the proposed
minutes.
      4.   The public body shall consider the proposed minutes for approval at
the first meeting of the public body that immediately follows the meeting clerk
giving the proposed minutes to the members of the public body. The members of
the public body shall either approve the proposed written minutes as presented
or vote to correct and amend the proposed written minutes and then approve the
corrected and amended written minutes at that meeting.
      5.   If the public body fails to consider the proposed minutes, or does
not take any action to approve the proposed minutes at the first public meeting
held by the public body immediately following the public body's receipt of the
proposed minutes from the meeting clerk, the proposed minutes shall be deemed
to have been approved by the public body and will stand as proposed.
      6.   Once the proposed minutes have either been approved by the public
body, or have been deemed to have been approved by the inaction of the public
body, they shall become the official record of the proceedings of the public
body and shall be signed by the meeting clerk and shall be retained in the
official records of the city and shall be a public document available for the
inspection and copying by members of the public as appropriate under state law.
(Ord. 2010.03, 4-8-2010)
1-6-5: NUMBERING ORDINANCES:
   A.   The city recorder shall, insofar as possible, assign all ordinances of
a general nature adopted after these revised ordinances a number, which shall
conform to the numbering system used in this code and shall indicate upon the
face of the ordinance the date adopted. (1977 Code § 1-008)
   B.   The city recorder shall keep all ordinances of a local, private or
temporary nature, including franchises, grants, dedications, bond issues and
tax levies in a separate book of "special ordinances" properly indexed and
organized according to date adopted. The first number of such an ordinance
shall be the year the ordinance is adopted, followed by a dash or period which
is followed by a number which shall be a sequential, ascending number
indicating the order in which such special ordinance was adopted during the
year. (1977 Code § 1-008; amd. 2014 Code)
   C.   Failure to comply with this section shall not affect or render invalid
any ordinance of the city. (1977 Code § 1-008)
CHAPTER 7
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 1
SECTION:
1-7-1: Creating Offices; Filling Vacancies
1-7-2: City Organizational Structure
1-7-3: Continuance In Office
1-7-4: Bond Requirements
1-7-5: Duties Generally
1-7-6: Compensation
1-7-7: Office Of The City Manager
 
Notes
1 1.    Chapter repealed and replaced by Ord. 2021.06, 4-21-2021
1-7-1: CREATING OFFICES; FILLING VACANCIES:
   A.   Offices Created by Council: The City Council may create any office
deemed necessary for the government of the City and provide for filling
vacancies in elective and appointive offices. Specifically, the City Council
shall appoint a City Manager to hold all powers and duties set forth in Section
1-7-6 below.
   B.   Mayor Appointments:
      1.   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall
appoint qualified individuals to serve as a “City Recorder” (also known herein
as the “City Clerk/Recorder”) and “City Treasurer.”
      2.   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may
appoint qualified individuals to serve as the “City Attorney,” the “City
Engineer,” the “Deputy Recorder,” and/or the “Deputy Treasurer.”
      3.   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may
appoint qualified individuals to serve in operations and public works. (Ord.
2021.06, 4-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022.10, 9-7-2022)
1-7-2: CITY ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE:
   A.   The “Officers” of the City shall include:
      1.   The six (6) member council, one of whom is the Mayor, with all the
powers, authority, duties, functions, and responsibilities provided for said
offices by the Utah constitution and Title 10 of the Utah Code Annotated
(including, but not limited to, sections 10-3b-101 et seq., and 10-3b-301 et
seq., Utah Code Annotated, except as otherwise provided herein.
      2.   The City Recorder (who shall answer to the Mayor and be a part of
the City's administrative services division).
      3.   The City Treasurer (who shall answer to the Mayor and be a part of
the City's administrative services division).
   B.   The Officers of the City may also include the following personnel:
      1.   Contract or exempt service personnel:
         a.   City Manager;
         b.   City Attorney; and
         c.   City Engineer.
      2.   Contract or nonexempt service personnel:
         a.   Deputy City Recorder; and
         b.   Deputy City Treasurer.
(Ord. 2021.06, 4-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022.10, 9-7-2022)
1-7-3: CONTINUANCE IN OFFICE:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, all appointed
Officers shall continue in office until their successors have been appointed
and taken their oath of office. (Ord. 2021.06, 4-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022.10, 9-
7-2022)
1-7-4: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   In accordance with Utah State Money Management Council Policy, every
Public Treasurer shall secure a fidelity bond or crime insurance in an amount
provided by the Money Management Council. Bonds or crime insurance must be
issued by a corporate surety licensed to do business in the State of Utah and
having a current A.M. Best rating of "A" or better. Crime insurance may be
issued by an inter-local agency operating as a Joint Self-Insurance Fund. Such
Joint Self-Insurance Fund providing crime coverage under this section must
maintain a restricted account in the State PTIF equal to fifty percent (50%) of
the per occurrence limit of coverage.
   B.   Bonds should be effective as of the date the Treasurer assumes the
duties of the office or is sworn in.
   C.   The basis for the amount of coverage required shall be the budgeted
gross revenue for the previous accounting year. Budgeted gross revenue includes
all funds collected or handled by the Public Treasurer, and shall be in the
amount as currently required by the Money Management Council.
   D.   The bond or insurance shall be superseded by any rules, regulation or
directive of the State Money Management Council when such would be binding on
this Municipality.
   E.   Any premium charged for bond or insurance required in this Chapter
shall be paid by the City. (Ord. 2021.06, 4-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022.10, 9-7-
2022)
1-7-5: DUTIES GENERALLY:
It shall be the duty of all Officers of the City to:
   A.   Deliver to their successor within one week after the change of office
all records, documents and property which belong to the City.
   B.   Deliver to the City Treasurer within one week after receipt of such
funds all funds of the City which the Officer receives.
   C.   Sign within a reasonable time all papers, documents and records
received by them which require his/her signature.
   D.   Perform all duties imposed on him/her by virtue of the Office held.
   E.   Give receipts on forms provided by the City Recorder for all sums of
money received, collected or paid them or their assistants. (Ord. 2021.06, 4-
21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022.10, 9-7-2022)
1-7-6: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Mayor And City Council. The monthly compensation for members of the
City Council and Mayor shall be set by resolution and reviewed no less than
once every three (3) years.
   B.   Payment of Mayor and City Council Compensation. The City Treasurer or
payroll clerk shall pay the Mayor and the City Council as noted on the most
current resolution on the fifth day of each month for work performed the
previous month. These payments will be made via direct deposit.
   C.   Appointed Officials and Employees. The monthly or twice monthly
compensation and listed range/rate for appointed officials or employees shall
be set by resolution and reviewed no less than once every (3) years.
   D.   Payment of Appointed Official and Employee Compensation. The City shall
issue payment to each employee or appointed Official according to the Policy
and Procedure Manual, as may be amended from time to time.
   E.   Per Diem. Each Elected and Appointed Official and employee of the City
shall receive mileage and per diem for all trips approved by the Mayor or City
Manager according to schedules adopted by the Utah Department of Finance.
   F.   Benefits. In addition to the salary paid the Officers and Employees of
the City, they shall receive those benefits as set fourth in the City’s
Policies and Procedures for Employees, as may be amended from time to time.
   G.   Compensation Limited for Multiple Positions. Whenever any person serves
in two (2) or more positions, either as Officers or employees of the City,
unless otherwise specifically provided in an employment agreement or by
ordinance, the person shall receive the salary or compensation of the Office or
employment paying the greater amount. (Ord. 2021.06, 4-21-2021; amd. Ord.
2022.10, 9-7-2022; Ord. 2023.19, 8-16-2023)
1-7-7: OFFICE OF THE CITY MANAGER:
   A.   Establishment. The office of City Manager is hereby established.
   B.   Appointment. The City Council, with input from the Mayor, shall hire
and appoint a City Manager, who shall qualify by taking, subscribing, and
filing the constitutional oath of office.
   C.   Classification. The City Manager position shall be classified as an
exempt position with at will status, pursuant to and in accordance with all
guidelines set forth in the Fair Labor Standards Act and other applicable laws
and regulations.
   D.   Supervision. The City Manager shall work under and be answerable to the
City Council and the Mayor.
   E.   ProTem And Vacancy in Office. The Assistant City Manager shall function
as, and have all of the duties, functions, responsibilities, and authority of
the City Manager:
      1.   Until one is initially hired and appointed;
      2.   At any time that there is a vacancy in the City Manager's office;
and
      3.   During the absence or disability of the City Manager.
   F.   Compensation. The City Manager shall receive compensation at the rate
and in a form to be determined by the City Council and established by
resolution and/or contract. Where a contract is used, the City Attorney shall
assist in drafting and approving a contract mutually agreed upon and properly
executed by the Mayor (with approval from the City Council) and the prospective
City Manager.
   G.   Powers, Duties, Functions, and Responsibilities. In addition to any
powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities set forth or referenced in
other provisions of this code, other ordinances and resolutions of the City
Council, and the City's Personnel Policies for the positions variously
described or entitled city administrator, city manager, manager, and full time
chief administrative officer, the City Manager shall have and exercise the
following powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities:
      1.   Discharge the duties of City Manager with fidelity;
      2.   Oversee and direct the operations, services, and activities of City
business;
      3.   Make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council on positions to
be filled, a description of the position, duties, and eligibility requirements,
and offers recommendations to the Mayor and City Council on the top candidates
to fill each position;
      4.   Represent and advocate for City staff (individually and
collectively);
      5.   Plan, organize, and direct the work of the City staff;
      6.   Ensure that public services of the City are delivered in an
efficient and effective manner;
      7.   Provide administrative support and serves as a resource to the Mayor
and City Council;
      8.   Respond to complaints or inquiries and explains regulations and
procedures to the public;
      9.   Assist City staff at the front desk as needed and is available for
"face to face" public comment;
      10.   Attend and participate in professional and governmental group
meetings;
      11.   Acts as the City's Planning and Zoning Administrator;
      12.   Oversee and supervise the maintenance of all City infrastructure;
      13.   Implement City goals, objectives and policies as directed by the
Mayor and City Council;
      14.   Coordinate the code enforcement program and efforts of the City;
      15.   Coordinate with the Mayor and City Treasurer on budget development
and issues;
      16.   Coordinate and supervise the dissemination of all public
information and social media relating to the City;
      17.   Act as the point of contact for all professional staff and services
rendered on behalf of the City;
      18.   Coordinates Capital Improvement Projects approved by the City
Council; and
      19.   Represents the City in discussions and negotiations with potential
and current developers.
   H.   Term. The term of the initial City Manager appointed on or after the
effective date hereof shall run until January 31 following the next municipal
general election of the City. Each succeeding appointment shall run for two (2)
years (until January 31 of each succeeding municipal general election of the
City) ("Appointment Term"). Unless a notice of non-renewal is provided by the
City Council or the City Manager at least thirty (30) days in advance of the
expiration of the current Appointment Term, said term shall automatically renew
for another two (2) years.
   I.   Removal, Termination And Resignation. The City Council, by majority
vote, may dismiss, remove, or otherwise terminate the services of the City
Manager at any time during an Appointment Term, subject to the provisions of
Subsection K, below. The City Manager may resign his or her position with the
City upon not less than thirty (30) days' written notice to the Mayor and City
Council. The City Manager and City may mutually agree, in writing, to terminate
the services of the City Manager.
   J.   Probation Period. The first six (6) months of the initial Appointment
Term shall be a probationary period for the City Manager. During said probation
the City Manager may be terminated with or without cause, in which case, he or
she shall not be entitled to any Severance Pay as set forth in Section K.2
below.
   K.   Severance Pay.
      1.   In the event that the services of the City Manager are terminated
for cause, including, but not limited to, malfeasance in office and/or the
commission of a crime of moral turpitude, the City shall have no obligation to
pay any severance pay to the City Manager. He/she shall only be entitled to
receive such earned pay and allowances as that of other employees of the City
who are ending their employment with the City, including, but not limited to,
any unpaid wages and accrued and unused vacation leave.
      2.   In the event that the services of the City Manager are otherwise
terminated by the City, the City shall pay to the City Manager a lump sum
payment equal to three (3) month's salary, plus one additional month's salary
for each full year of service as City Manager, up to a maximum sum total of six
(6) months' salary, plus accrued and unpaid pay and benefits ("Severance Pay").
(Ord. 2021.06, 4-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022.10, 9-7-2022)
CHAPTER 8
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Request For Hearing
1-8-2: Form Of Request
1-8-3: Procedure
1-8-4: Not Additional Remedy
1-8-1: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in any ordinance of the city or any code
adopted by reference, a hearing before the city council may be requested by any
person:
   A.   Who is denied or refused a permit or license by any officer, agent or
employee of this city.
   B.   Whose permit or license is revoked, restricted, qualified or limited
from that for which it was first issued. (1977 Code § 1-411)
1-8-2: FORM OF REQUEST:
The request for hearing must be made in writing to the mayor or city recorder
and made within thirty (30) days following the date notice denying, refusing,
revoking, qualifying or restricting the license or permit is mailed by the city
to the applicant or license holder at his address as it appears on the
application or license. (1977 Code § 1-412)
1-8-3: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Time And Place: Following receipt of a request for hearing, the city
council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and place the
hearing is to be held.
   B.   Witnesses; Evidence: At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have the
right to hear and examine any witnesses the city may produce to support its
decision and to present his own evidence in support of his contention.
   C.   Decision Of City Council: The city council shall, within ten (10) days
following the conclusion of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who
requested the hearing of the decision of the city council. (1977 Code § 1-413)
1-8-4: NOT ADDITIONAL REMEDY:
This chapter shall not be construed so as to afford any aggrieved party more
than one hearing before the city council, nor shall the hearing provided in
this section apply to any criminal complaint or proceeding. (1977 Code § 1-414)
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC RECORDS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Public Records
1-9-1: PUBLIC RECORDS:
   A.   Inspection: The records of the municipality shall be open to inspection
by the public during regular business hours, except as is herein provided.
   B.   Copies And Reproductions: Any public record of the municipality may be
copied or electronically reproduced for any member of the public on payment to
the city recorder of a sum in such amount as established by the city council.
   C.   Elected Officials: Any elected official of the municipality shall at
all times have the right to inspect the books, records and papers of the city.
   D.   Toquerville City will adhere to the Utah State General Records
Retention Schedule. It can be found on the Utah Division of Archives and
Records Services website. (1977 Code § 3-344; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2023.18, 8-
2-2023)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-10A-1: Short Title
1-10A-2: Declaration Of Purpose
1-10A-3: Scope
1-10A-4: Existing Law Continued
1-10A-5: Criminal Prosecution Right
1-10A-6: Effect Of Heading
1-10A-7: Validity Of Chapter And Severability
1-10A-8: No Mandatory Duty Or Civil Liability
1-10A-9: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-10A-10: Definitions
1-10A-11: Acts Include Causing, Aiding And Abetting
1-10A-12: Service Of Process
1-10A-13: Constructive Notice Of Recorded Documents
1-10A-14: General Enforcement Authority
1-10A-15: Adoption Of Policy And Procedures
1-10A-16: Authority To Inspect
1-10A-17: False Information Or Refusal Prohibited
1-10A-18: Failure To Obey Subpoena
1-10A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING
PROGRAM (ACE HEARING PROGRAM). (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-2: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that the enforcement of this code and applicable state
codes throughout the city is an important public service. Code enforcement is
vital to the protection of the public health, safety and quality of life. The
city council recognizes that enforcement starts with the drafting of precise
regulations that can be effectively applied in administrative code enforcement
hearings and judicial proceedings. The city council further finds that a
comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and
administrative remedies is critical to gain compliance with these regulations.
Failure to comply with an administrative code enforcement action may require
the city attorney to file a judicial action to gain compliance. (Ord. 2014.04,
9-11-2014)
1-10A-3: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter may be applied to all violations of this code.
It has been designed as an additional remedy for the city to use in achieving
compliance of its ordinances. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-4: EXISTING LAW CONTINUED:
The provisions of this chapter do not invalidate any other chapter or ordinance
of this code, but shall be read in conjunction with those chapters and
ordinances as an additional remedy available for enforcement of those
ordinances. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-5: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION RIGHT:
The city has sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil or criminal
case for the violation of any of its ordinances. The city may choose to file
both, or one or the other. The enactment of this administrative remedy shall in
no way interfere with the city's right to prosecute city ordinance violations
as criminal offenses. The city may use any of the remedies available under the
law in both civil and criminal prosecution. If the city chooses to file both
civil and criminal charges for the same day of violation, no civil penalties
may be assessed, but all other remedies are available. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-
2014)
1-10A-6: EFFECT OF HEADING:
Title, chapter, article, part and section headings contained in this chapter
shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the
scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article,
part, or section hereof. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-7: VALIDITY OF CHAPTER AND SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision of
this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby
declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision thereof, irrespective of the
fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases,
portions or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section
shall apply to all amendments heretofore or hereafter made to this chapter.
(Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-8: NO MANDATORY DUTY OR CIVIL LIABILITY:
It is the intent of the city council that in establishing performance standards
or establishing an obligation to act by a city officer or employee, these
standards shall not be construed as creating a mandatory duty for purposes of
tort liability if the officer or employee fails to perform his or her directed
duty or duties. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-9: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
For purposes of this chapter:
   A.   Any gender includes the other gender.
   B.   "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
   C.   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
   D.   Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense, and
vice versa.
   E.   Words and phrases used in this chapter and not specifically defined
shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language.
(Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-10: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section, unless a different meaning is
specifically stated to apply:
ABATEMENT: Any action the city may take on public or private property and any
adjacent property as may be necessary to remove or alleviate a violation,
including, but not limited to, demolition, removal, repair, boarding and
securing or replacement of property.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR OR ACE
ADMINISTRATOR: Any person authorized by the mayor and city council to
supervise, administer the administrative code enforcement hearing program, and
enforce violations of this code or applicable sections of the Utah code.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER: An order issued by an administrative law
judge. The order may include an order to abate the violation, pay civil
penalties and administrative costs, or take any other action as authorized or
required by this chapter, this code and applicable sections of the Utah code.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE (ALJ): The administrative law judge appointed by the
mayor and city council to preside over the administrative code enforcement
hearings established herein.
CITY: Toquerville City, a Utah municipal corporation, and the area within the
territorial city limits of the city, and such territory outside of the city
over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional
or incorporation provisions or any law.
CITY CODE: The Toquerville City code.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
CITY FEE SCHEDULE: The fee schedule adopted by the city council that sets forth
civil penalties, administrative fees, abatement costs and the applicable
interest rate for enforcement of this chapter. The city fee schedule is on file
in the office of the city recorder.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERFORMANCE BOND: A bond posted by a responsible person to
ensure compliance with this code, applicable sections of the Utah code, a
judicial action, or an administrative code enforcement order.
CODE ENFORCEMENT TAX LIEN: A lien recorded to collect outstanding civil
penalties, administrative fees and abatement costs.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: Any person authorized to enforce violations of this code,
this chapter or applicable sections of the Utah code.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person that holds a recorded mortgage or deed of
trust on a property.
GOOD CAUSE: Incapacitating illness; death; lack of proper notice;
unavailability due to unavoidable, unpreventable or extenuating emergency or
circumstance; if a required act causes an imminent and irreparable injury; and
acts of nature adverse to performing required acts.
IMMINENT LIFE SAFETY HAZARD: Any condition that creates a present, extreme, and
immediate danger to life, property, health or public safety.
LEGAL INTEREST: Any interest that is represented by a document, such as a deed
of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien,
mechanics' lien, or other similar instrument that is recorded in the official
records on file in the office of the recorder of Washington County, state of
Utah.
NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE: A document issued by the city, representing that a
property complies with the requirements outlined in the notice of violation.
NOTICE OF SATISFACTION: A document or form approved by the administrative law
judge or his or her designee, which indicates that all outstanding civil
penalties and costs have been either paid in full, or that the city has
negotiated an agreed amount, or that a subsequent administrative or judicial
decision has resolved the outstanding debt. In addition to the satisfaction of
the financial debt, the property must also be in compliance with the
requirements outlined in the notice of violation.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION: A written notice prepared by an enforcement official that
informs a responsible person of this code or Utah code violations and orders
the responsible person to take certain steps to correct the violations.
OATH: Includes affirmations and oaths.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, sergeant, officer, or employee of
any of them, or any other entity that is recognized by law as the subject of
rights or duties.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner of real property based on the official records
on file in the office of the assessor of Washington County, state of Utah.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist that
constitutes a threat to the public's health, safety and welfare, or that
significantly obstructs, injures or interferes with the reasonable or free use
of property in a neighborhood or community or by any considerable number of
persons. A public nuisance also has the same meaning as set forth in the Utah
code and this code.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who is responsible for causing or maintaining a
violation of this code or applicable sections of the Utah code. The property
owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in the real property, or person in
possession of the real property shall be liable for any violation maintained on
the property. In all cases, the property owner shall be considered a
responsible person.
WRITTEN: Includes handwritten, typewritten, photocopied, computer printed or
facsimile. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-11: ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING, AIDING AND ABETTING:
Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful in this chapter, it shall include
causing, permitting, aiding or abetting such act or omission. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-
11-2014)
1-10A-12: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
   A.   Methods: Whenever service is required to be given under this chapter
for enforcement purposes, the document shall be served by any of the following
methods, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically stated to
apply:
      1.   Regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the
owner or other responsible person;
      2.   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. If
not inhabited, the notice must also be mailed as in subsection A1 of this
section. The form of the posted notice shall be approved by the ACE
administrator or his or her designee;
      3.   Personal service pursuant to Utah rules of civil procedure, rule 4
(e)(1) or rule 4(e)(5); or
      4.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation where the identity
or whereabouts of the person to be served are unknown and cannot be ascertained
through reasonable diligence, where service is impracticable under the
circumstances, or where there exists good cause to believe that the person to
be served is avoiding service of process.
   B.   When Deemed Served: Service by regular mail in the manner described
above shall be deemed served on the fifth day after the date of mailing.
   C.   Deemed Valid Service: If service complies with the requirements of this
section, it shall be deemed a valid service even if a party claims not to have
received the service and it shall not affect the validity of any proceedings
taken under this chapter.
   D.   Validity Of Failure To Serve All Persons: The failure to serve all
responsible persons shall not affect the validity of any proceedings. (Ord.
2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-13: CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE OF RECORDED DOCUMENTS:
Whenever a document is recorded in the official records in file in the office
of the recorder of Washington County, state of Utah, as authorized or required
by this chapter or applicable sections of the Utah code, recordation shall
provide constructive notice of the information contained in the recorded
documents. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-14: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Whenever the ACE administrator or any enforcement official finds that a
violation of this code or applicable sections of the Utah code has occurred or
continues to exist, the appropriate administrative enforcement procedure may be
used as outlined in this chapter. The ACE administrator or enforcement official
has the authority and power necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of
this code and applicable state codes. These powers include the power to issue
notices of violation and administrative citations, inspect public and private
property, abate public and private property, and use whatever judicial and
administrative remedies are available under this code or applicable sections of
the Utah code. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-15: ADOPTION OF POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
The ALJ is authorized to develop policies and procedures relating to the
hearing procedures, scope of hearings, subpoena powers and other matters
relating to the administrative code enforcement hearings program. (Ord.
2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-16: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
The ACE administrator or any enforcement official is authorized to enter upon
any property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this code or
applicable sections of the Utah code are being obeyed and to make any
examinations and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of the
enforcement duties. This may include the taking of photographs, samples or
other physical evidence. All inspections, entries, examinations and surveys
shall be done in a reasonable manner based upon cause. If the responsible
person refuses to allow the ACE administrator or enforcement official to enter
the property, the ACE administrator or enforcement official shall obtain a
search warrant. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10A-17: FALSE INFORMATION OR REFUSAL PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make a false statement or
refuse to give his or her name or address with intent to deceive or interfere
with the ACE administrator or an enforcement official when in the performance
of his or her official duties under the provisions of this chapter. A violation
of this section is a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014; amd. 2014 Code)
1-10A-18: FAILURE TO OBEY SUBPOENA:
It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to obey a subpoena issued for
an administrative code enforcement hearing. Failure to obey a subpoena
constitutes contempt and may be prosecuted as a class B misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014; amd. 2014 Code)
ARTICLE B. ABATEMENT AND NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
1-10B-1: Authority
1-10B-2: Notice Of Violation
1-10B-3: Failure To Bring Property Into Compliance
1-10B-4: Inspections
1-10B-5: Emergency Abatement
1-10B-1: AUTHORITY:
Any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist in violation of any
provisions of this code or applicable state codes that constitutes a violation
may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article.
(Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10B-2: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   Information Included: Whenever the ACE administrator or any enforcement
official determines that a violation of this code or applicable section of the
Utah code has occurred or continues to exist, the ACE administrator or
enforcement official may choose to proceed under the ACE program. If this
procedure is used, a notice of violation shall be issued to a responsible
person. The notice of violation shall include the following information:
      1.   Name of property owner or responsible person;
      2.   Street address of violation;
      3.   Date violation observed;
      4.   All city code and applicable Utah code sections violated and
description of condition of the property that violates the applicable codes;
      5.   A statement explaining the type of remedial action required to
permanently correct outstanding violations, which may include corrections,
repairs, demolition, removal or other appropriate action;
      6.   Specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of the
violation, which date shall be at least the number of days set forth in the
city fee schedule from the date of service;
      7.   Explanation of the consequences should the responsible person fail
to comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice of
violation, which may include, but is not limited to, criminal prosecution;
civil penalties; revocation of permits; recordation of the notice of violation;
withholding of future municipal permits; abatement of the violation; costs of
abatement; lien on property; administrative fees; and any other legal remedies;
      8.   That civil penalties will begin to accrue immediately on expiration
of the date to correct violations;
      9.   The amount of the civil penalty on each violation and that the
penalty will accrue daily until the violation is brought into compliance;
      10.   That only one notice of violation is required for any twelve (12)
month period, and that civil penalties begin immediately upon any subsequent
violations of the notice. The responsible person may request a hearing on the
renewed violations by following the same procedure as provided for the original
notice;
      11.   Procedures to request a hearing as provided in section
1-10D-3 of this chapter, and consequences for failure to request one.
   B.   Service Of Notice: The notice of violation shall be served by one of
the methods of service listed in section
1-10A-12 of this chapter.
   C.   Multiple Notices: More than one notice of violation may be issued
against the same responsible person, if it encompasses different dates or
different violations. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10B-3: FAILURE TO BRING PROPERTY INTO COMPLIANCE:
If a responsible person fails to bring a violation into compliance within the
time set forth on the notice of violation after service of the notice of
violation, civil penalties shall be owed to the city for each and every
subsequent day of violation. Failure to comply with the notice of violation is
a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014; amd. 2014 Code)
1-10B-4: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the responsible person served with a notice of
violation to request an inspection when his or her property has been brought
into compliance. It is prima facie evidence that the violation remains on the
property if no inspection is requested. Civil penalties accumulate daily until
the property has been inspected and a notice of compliance is issued.
Reinspection fees shall be assessed pursuant to the "remedies" section of this
chapter, if more than one inspection is necessary. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10B-5: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:
   A.   Authorized: Whenever the ACE administrator determines that an imminent
life safety hazard exists that requires immediate correction or elimination,
the ACE administrator may take immediate action to abate the hazard.
   B.   Entrance Upon Property: The ACE administrator or authorized
representative has the authority, based on cause, to enter the property without
a search warrant or court order to abate the safety hazard.
   C.   Minimum Level Of Correction: The ACE administrator shall pursue only
the minimum level of correction or abatement as necessary to eliminate the
immediacy of the hazard.
   D.   Liability For Costs: The responsible person shall be liable for all
costs associated with the abatement of the imminent life safety hazard. Costs
incurred by the city during the emergency abatement process shall be assessed
and recovered against the responsible person through the procedures outlined in
the "remedies" section of this chapter.
   E.   Other Remedies: The ACE administrator may also pursue any other
administrative or judicial remedy to abate any remaining violations.
   F.   Notice Of Action Taken: After an emergency abatement, the city shall
notify the property owner or responsible person of the abatement action taken.
This notice shall be served within ten (10) days of completion of the
abatement. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
ARTICLE C. ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
SECTION:
1-10C-1: Declaration Of Purpose
1-10C-2: Authority
1-10C-3: Procedures
1-10C-4: Contents Of Administrative Citation
1-10C-5: Civil Penalties Assessed
1-10C-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of
enforcement for minor violations of this code and applicable sections of the
Utah code. The city council further finds that an appropriate method of
enforcement is an administrative citation program. The procedures established
in this article shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal
remedy established by law that may be pursued to address violations of this
code or applicable sections of the Utah code. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10C-2: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Minor Violations: Any person violating this code or applicable sections
of the Utah code, where said violation is deemed minor by the ACE
administrator, may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement
official or ACE administrator as provided in this article.
   B.   Civil Penalty: A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of an
administrative citation issued by the enforcement official, and shall be
payable directly to the city treasurer's office.
   C.   Collection: Penalties assessed by means of an administrative citation
shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in the
"remedies" section of this chapter. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10C-3: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Issuance Of Administrative Citation: Upon discovering any violation of
this code or applicable sections of the Utah code, an enforcement official or
ACE administrator may issue an administrative citation to a responsible person
in the manner prescribed in this article or as prescribed in section
1-10A-12 of this chapter. The administrative citation shall be issued on a form
approved by the ALJ.
   B.   Location Of Business Owner: If the responsible person is a business,
the enforcement official or ACE administrator shall attempt to locate the
business owner and issue an administrative citation to the business owner. If
the enforcement official or ACE administrator can only locate the manager of
the business, the administrative citation may be given to the manager of the
business. A copy of the administrative citation may also be mailed to the
business owner or any other responsible person in the manner prescribed in
section
1-10A-12 of this chapter.
   C.   Signature Of Responsible Person: Once the responsible person has been
located, the enforcement official or ACE administrator shall attempt to obtain
the signature of that person on the administrative citation. If the responsible
person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or
refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation and subsequent
proceedings.
   D.   Unable To Locate Responsible Person: If the enforcement official or ACE
administrator is unable to locate the responsible person for the violation,
then the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person in
the manner prescribed in section
1-10A-12 of this chapter.
   E.   Posting Of Administrative Citation: If no one can be located at the
property, then the administrative citation may be posted in a conspicuous place
on or near the property and a copy subsequently mailed to the responsible
person in the manner prescribed by section
1-10A-12 of this chapter.
   F.   Signature Of Enforcement Official: The enforcement official or ACE
administrator shall sign the administrative citation.
   G.   Failure To Receive Notice: The failure of any person with an interest
in the property to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any
proceedings taken under this article. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10C-4: CONTENTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
   A.   Violation Information: The administrative citation shall refer to the
date and location of the violations and the approximate time the violations
were observed.
   B.   Sections Violated: The administrative citation shall refer to this code
or Utah code sections violated and the titles of those sections.
   C.   Penalty Amount: The administrative citation shall state the amount of
penalty imposed for the violations.
   D.   Explanation Of Penalty: The administrative citation shall explain how
the penalty shall be paid, the time period by which the penalty shall be paid,
and the consequences of failure to pay the penalty.
   E.   Request For Hearing: The administrative citation shall identify the
right and the procedures to request a hearing.
   F.   Signatures: The administrative citation shall contain the signature of
the enforcement official or ACE administrator and the signature of the
responsible person, unless the responsible person refuses to sign it or
otherwise cannot be located. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10C-5: CIVIL PENALTIES ASSESSED:
   A.   The ALJ shall establish policies to assist in the assessment of civil
penalties or administrative citations.
   B.   Civil penalties shall be assessed immediately for each violation listed
on the administrative citation. The penalties shall be those established in the
city uniform fee schedule.
   C.   Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the
violations, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. (Ord.
2014.04, 9-11-2014)
ARTICLE D. HEARING PROCEDURES; POWERS OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE;
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT ORDERS; APPEALS
SECTION:
1-10D-1: Declaration Of Purpose
1-10D-2: Authority And Scope Of ACE Hearings
1-10D-3: Request For ACE Hearing
1-10D-4: Default Hearings And Orders
1-10D-5: Notification Of Hearings
1-10D-6: Disqualification Of Administrative Law Judge
1-10D-7: Powers Of Administrative Law Judge
1-10D-8: Procedures At Hearing
1-10D-9: Failure To Attend Hearing
1-10D-10: Administrative Code Enforcement Order
1-10D-11: Failure To Comply With Enforcement Order
1-10D-12: Appeal Of Administrative Code Enforcement Order
1-10D-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that there is a need to establish uniform procedures for
administrative code enforcement hearings (ACE hearings) conducted pursuant to
this chapter. It is the purpose and intent of the city council to afford due
process of law to any person who is directly affected by an administrative
action. Due process of law includes notice, an opportunity to participate in an
ACE hearing, and an explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative
action. These procedures are also intended to establish a forum to efficiently,
expeditiously and fairly resolve issues raised in any administrative code
enforcement action. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10D-2: AUTHORITY AND SCOPE OF ACE HEARINGS:
Enforcement of this code and applicable sections of the Utah code violations
may be conducted through the administrative code enforcement procedures
established by this chapter, presided over by the administrative law judge
(ALJ). The ALJ shall develop policies and procedures to regulate the hearing
process for any violation of this code and applicable sections of the Utah code
that are handled pursuant to the administrative abatement procedures, the
emergency abatement procedures, the demolition procedures or the administrative
citation procedures. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10D-3: REQUEST FOR ACE HEARING:
   A.   Right To Request: A person served with one of the following documents
or notices has the right to request an administrative code enforcement hearing,
if the request is filed within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service
of one of the following notices:
      1.   Notice of violation;
      2.   Notice of itemized statement of costs or fees;
      3.   Administrative citation; or
      4.   Notice of emergency abatement.
   B.   Filing Request: The request for hearing shall be made in writing and
filed with the ACE administrator. The request shall contain the case/citation
or notice number, the address of the violation, and the signature of the
responsible party (ACE hearing request). The ACE administrator shall forward
the ACE hearing request to the ALJ within five (5) business days.
   C.   Hearing Scheduled: As soon as practicable after receiving the ACE
hearing request, the ALJ shall schedule a date, time and place for the ACE
hearing.
   D.   Failure To Request: Failure to request a hearing as provided shall
constitute a waiver of the right to an ACE hearing and a waiver of the right to
challenge the action. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10D-4: DEFAULT HEARINGS AND ORDERS:
   A.   Default Hearing Set: If the responsible person fails to request an ACE
hearing before the expiration of the ten (10) day deadline, the case shall be
set for a default hearing. The ALJ and the ACE administrator shall schedule a
default hearing (default hearing). The responsible person shall be notified of
the date, time and place of the default hearing by one of the methods listed in
section
1-10A-12 of this chapter.
   B.   Scheduling: A default hearing shall be scheduled for all cases that
have outstanding or unpaid civil penalties, administrative fees and/or
abatement costs due to the city before collection, if a hearing on that case
has not already been held.
   C.   Evidence Presented: At the default hearing, the responsible person
shall have the opportunity to present evidence to show that "good cause"
exists, as defined in section
1-10A-10 of this chapter, to do one or more of the following:
      1.   Waive or reduce the fines which have accumulated;
      2.   Postpone an abatement action by the city; or
      3.   Excuse the responsible person's failure to request a hearing within
the ten (10) day period.
   D.   Order Of ALJ: If the responsible person fails to establish good cause
to take one or more of the actions set forth in the preceding subsection, the
ALJ shall review the notice of violation or administrative citation and any
other relevant information included in the case file. The ALJ shall not accept
any other evidence. If the evidence shows that the violations existed, the ALJ
shall enter an order requiring abatement of the violations, and the payment of
all penalties, fees and costs. Penalties shall run until the city issues a
notice of compliance stating when the violations were actually abated. (Ord.
2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10D-5: NOTIFICATION OF HEARINGS:
   A.   Written Notice: Written notice of the day, time and place of the ACE
hearing or default hearing shall be served to a responsible person as soon as
practicable prior to the date of the said hearing.
   B.   Format, Contents: The format and contents of the hearing notice shall
be in accordance with rules and policies promulgated by the administrative law
judge.
   C.   Service Of Notice: The notice of the ACE hearing or the default hearing
shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in section
1-10A-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10D-6: DISQUALIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
The administrative law judge is subject to disqualification for bias,
prejudice, interest or any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified
in a court of law. Rules and procedures for disqualification and replacement
shall be promulgated by the ALJ. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10D-7: POWERS OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
   A.   General Authority: The ALJ has the authority to hold hearings,
determine if violations of this code or applicable sections of the Utah code
exists, order compliance with this code or applicable sections of the Utah
code, and enforce compliance as provided in this chapter on any matter subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Continuance Of Hearing: The ALJ may continue a hearing (ACE hearing or
default hearing) based on good cause shown by one of the parties to the
hearing. The ALJ must enter on the record the good cause on which a continuance
is granted.
   C.   Issue Subpoenas: The ALJ, at the request of any party to a hearing, may
sign subpoenas for witnesses, documents and other evidence where the attendance
of the witness for the admission of evidence is deemed necessary to decide the
issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and
mileage fees, shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena. Said costs
may be recovered by the city from the responsible party where the ALJ finds
that a violation existed. The ALJ shall develop policies and procedures
relating to the issuance of subpoenas in ACE hearings, including the form of
the subpoena and related costs.
   D.   Jurisdiction: The ALJ has continuing jurisdiction over the subject
matter of an ACE hearing or default hearing for the purposes of granting a
continuance; ordering compliance by issuing an administrative code enforcement
order using any remedies available under the law; ensuring compliance of that
order, which includes the right to authorize the city to enter and abate a
violation; modifying an administrative code enforcement order; or, where
extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing.
   E.   Requirement To Post Bond: The ALJ has the authority to require a
responsible person to post a code enforcement performance bond to ensure
compliance with an administrative code enforcement order. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-
2014)
1-10D-8: PROCEDURES AT HEARING:
   A.   Informal: ACE hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal
rules of evidence and discovery do not apply; however, an informal exchange of
discovery may be required. The request must be in writing. Failure to request
discovery shall not be a basis for a continuance. Complainant information is
protected and shall not be released unless the complainant is a witness at the
hearing. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow
the procedures promulgated by the ALJ.
   B.   Burden Of Proof: The city bears the burden of proof at an ACE hearing
to establish the existence of a violation of this code or applicable sections
of the Utah code.
   C.   Standard Of Proof: The standard of proof to be used by the ALJ in
deciding the issues at an ACE hearing is whether the preponderance of the
evidence shows that the violation exists.
   D.   Testimony: Each party shall have the opportunity to cross examine
witnesses and present evidence in support of his or her case. A written
declaration signed under penalty of perjury may be accepted in lieu of a
personal appearance if the written declaration is provided to the opposing at
least seven (7) days before the hearing. Testimony may be given by telephone or
other electronic means.
   E.   Open Hearings: All ACE hearings and default hearings are open to the
public. They shall be recorded by audiotape. Hearings may be held at the
location of the violation.
   F.   Attorney Representation: The responsible person has a right to be
represented by an attorney. If an attorney will be representing the responsible
person at the hearing, notice of the attorney's name, address and telephone
number must be given to the city at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
If notice is not given, the hearing may be continued at the city's request, and
all costs of the continuance assessed to the responsible person.
   G.   New Hearing Requires Extraordinary Circumstances: No new hearing shall
be granted, unless the administrative law judge determines that extraordinary
circumstances exist which justify a new hearing. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10D-9: FAILURE TO ATTEND HEARING:
Any party whose property or actions are the subject of any ACE hearing or
default hearing and this chapter, and who fails to appear at the hearing is
deemed to waive the right to a hearing and will result in a default judgment
for the city; provided, that proper notice of the hearing has been provided.
(Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10D-10: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
   A.   Stipulated Agreement: The city and the responsible party may enter into
a stipulated agreement, which must be signed by both parties. This agreement
shall be entered as the administrative code enforcement order. Entry of this
agreement shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and the right to
appeal.
   B.   Administrative Order: Once all evidence and testimony are completed,
the ALJ judge shall issue an administrative code enforcement order that
affirms, modifies, or rejects the notice of violation or administrative
citation. The ALJ may increase or decrease the total amount of civil penalties
and costs that are due pursuant to the city fee schedule and the procedures in
this chapter.
   C.   Abatement By City: The ALJ may order the city to enter the property and
abate all violations, which may include removing animals kept in violation of
this code.
   D.   Kennels, Animal Licensing And Possession: The ALJ may revoke a kennel
permit, an animal license or the right to possess animals as provided in this
code.
   E.   Conditions: As part of the administrative code enforcement order, the
ALJ may condition the parties assessment of civil penalties on the responsible
person's ability to complete compliance by specified deadlines.
   F.   Subsequent Review Hearings: The ALJ may schedule subsequent review
hearings as may be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to
ensure compliance with the administrative code enforcement order.
   G.   Posting Of Bond: The ALJ may order the responsible person to post an
administrative code enforcement performance bond to ensure compliance with the
administrative code enforcement order.
   H.   Date Order Final: The administrative code enforcement order shall
become final on the date of the signing of the order.
   I.   Service Of Order: The administrative code enforcement order shall be
served on all parties by any one of the methods listed in section
1-10A-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10D-11: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
Upon the failure of the responsible person to comply with the terms and
deadlines set forth in the administrative code enforcement order, the city may
use all appropriate legal means to recover the civil penalties and
administrative costs to obtain compliance. After the ALJ issues an
administrative code enforcement order, the ACE administrator shall monitor the
violations and determine compliance. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10D-12: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
   A.   Petition For Judicial Review: Any person adversely affected by any
decision made in the exercise of the provisions of this chapter may file a
petition for review of the decision or order by the district court in and for
Washington County, state of Utah, within thirty (30) days after the decision is
rendered (petition for judicial review).
   B.   Administrative Remedies Exhausted: No person may challenge in district
court an ALJ's decision until that person has exhausted his or her
administrative remedies.
   C.   Request For Copy Of Records: Within one hundred twenty (120) days after
submitting a petition for judicial review, the party petitioning for appeal
shall request a copy of the record of the proceedings, including transcripts of
the ACE hearings and/or default hearings when necessary. The ALJ shall not
submit copies of files or transcripts to the reviewing court until the party
petitioning for appeal has paid all required costs. The petitioning party's
failure to properly arrange for copies of the record, or to pay the full costs
for the record, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the petition for
review was filed shall be grounds for dismissal of the petition for judicial
review.
   D.   Remand For Supplemental Procedures: If a transcript of a hearing cannot
be prepared because the tape recording is incomplete or unintelligible, the
district court may, in its discretion, remand the matter to the ALJ for a
supplemental proceeding to complete the record. The district court may limit
the scope of the supplemental proceeding to issues that, in the court's
opinion, need to be clarified.
   E.   Review Limited: The district court's review is limited to the record of
the administrative code enforcement order that is being appealed. The district
court shall not accept nor consider any evidence that is not part of the record
of the administrative code enforcement order.
   F.   Authority Of Court: The district court shall:
      1.   Presume that the ALJ's decision and orders are valid; and
      2.   Review the record to determine whether or not the decision was
arbitrary, capricious or illegal. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
ARTICLE E. REMEDIES
SECTION:
1-10E-1: Declaration Of Purpose
1-10E-2: Recordation Of Notice Of Violation; Notice Of Satisfaction
1-10E-3: Prohibition Against Issuance Of Municipal Permits
1-10E-4: Administrative Civil Penalties
1-10E-5: Abatement Of Violation
1-10E-6: Injunctions
1-10E-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of
enforcement for violations of this code and applicable sections of the Utah
code that are found to exist. The city council further finds that an
appropriate method of enforcement for these types of violations is the issuance
and recordation of notices of violation. The remedies established in this
article shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other remedy established
by law that may be pursued to address the violation of this code or applicable
state codes. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10E-2: RECORDATION OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION; NOTICE OF SATISFACTION:
Whenever the ACE administrator determines that a property or violation has not
been brought into compliance as required in this chapter, the ACE administrator
has the authority to record the notice of violation or administrative code
enforcement order with the Washington County recorder's office.
   A.   Procedure For Recordation: Recordation of a notice of violation shall
occur according to the following procedures:
      1.   Once the ACE administrator or any enforcement official has issued a
notice of violation to a responsible person, and the property remains in
violation after the deadline established in the notice of violation, and no
request for an ACE hearing has been filed, the ACE administrator shall record a
notice of violation in the official records on file in the office of the
recorder of Washington County, state of Utah.
      2.   If an ACE hearing is held, and an administrative code enforcement
order is issued in the city's favor, the ACE administrator shall record the
administrative code enforcement order in the official records on file in the
office of the recorder of Washington County, state of Utah.
      3.   The recordation shall include the name of the property owner, the
parcel number, the legal description of the parcel, and a copy of the notice of
violation or administrative code enforcement order.
      4.   The recordation does not encumber the property, but merely places
future interested parties on notice of any continuing violation found upon the
property.
   B.   Service Of Notice Of Recordation: A notice of the recordation shall be
served on the responsible person and the property owner pursuant to any of the
methods of service set forth in section
1-10A-12 of this chapter.
   C.   Waiver Of Hearing: The failure of any person to file a request for an
ACE hearing when served with a notice of violation shall constitute a waiver of
the right to an ACE hearing and shall not affect the validity of the recorded
notice of violation.
   D.   Inspection; Satisfaction: When the notice of violations and/or
administrative code enforcement orders have been corrected, the responsible
person or property owner may request an inspection of the property from the ACE
administrator and the issuance of a notice of compliance or notice of
satisfaction, as the case may be.
      1.   Upon receipt of a request for inspection, the ACE administrator or
an enforcement official shall reinspect the property as soon as practicable to
determine whether the violations listed in the notice of violation or the
administrative code enforcement order have been corrected, and whether all
necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed.
      2.   The ACE administrator shall serve a notice of satisfaction or notice
of compliance, as the case may be, to the responsible person or property owner
in the manner provided in section
1-10A-12 of this chapter, if the ACE administrator determines that:
         a.   All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation or
administrative code enforcement order have been corrected;
         b.   All necessary permits have been issued and finalized;
         c.   All civil penalties assessed against the property have been paid
or satisfied; and
         d.   The party requesting the notice of compliance or notice of
satisfaction, as the case may be, has paid all administrative fees and costs.
      3.   If the ACE administrator denies a request to issue a notice of
compliance or notice of satisfaction, upon request the ACE administrator shall
serve the responsible person with a written explanation setting forth the
reasons for the denial. The written explanation shall be served by any of the
methods of service listed in section
1-10A-12 of this chapter.
      4.   Recordation of the notice of compliance and notice of satisfaction
shall have the effect of canceling the recorded notice of violation or
administrative code enforcement order. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10E-3: PROHIBITION AGAINST ISSUANCE OF MUNICIPAL PERMITS:
The city may withhold business licenses; permits for kennels; or permits for
any alteration, repair, or construction pertaining to any existing or new
structures or signs on the property; or any permits pertaining to the use and
development of the real property or the structure when the ACE administrator or
any enforcement official has served a notice of violation upon the responsible
party. The city may withhold permits until a notice of compliance or a notice
of satisfaction has been issued by the ACE administrator. The city may not
withhold permits that are necessary to obtain a notice of satisfaction or that
are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations. (Ord. 2014.04,
9-11-2014)
1-10E-4: ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   Applicability: Any person violating any provision of this code or
applicable sections of the Utah code may be subject to the assessment of civil
penalties for each violation.
   B.   Civil Penalties: Each and every day a violation of any provision of
this code or applicable sections of the Utah code exists is a separate
violation subject to the assessment of civil penalties.
      1.   If a responsible person fails to bring a violation into compliance
within the number of days prescribed in the notice of violation after service
of the notice of violation, civil penalties shall be owed to the city for each
and every subsequent day of violation. Civil penalties are assessed and owing
immediately for any violation of this code or the applicable sections of the
Utah code for an administrative citation.
      2.   Civil penalties shall be assessed per violation per day pursuant to
the city uniform fee schedule for a notice of violation or administrative
citation.
      3.   Civil penalties shall continue to accrue until the violation(s) has/
have been brought into compliance with this code or applicable sections of the
Utah code and a notice of compliance or notice of satisfaction, as the case may
be, has been issued by the ACE administrator or enforcement official.
   C.   Civil, Criminal Penalties: Civil penalties cannot be assessed when a
criminal case has been filed for the same date and violation, because fines
will be assessed with the criminal case. However, all other civil and
administrative remedies are available.
   D.   Interest: Interest shall be assessed per the city uniform fee schedule
on all outstanding civil penalties, administrative fees, and/or abatement cost
balances until the case has been paid in full.
   E.   Fee Schedule: Civil penalties for violations of any provision of this
code or applicable sections of the Utah code shall be assessed pursuant to the
city uniform fee schedule.
   F.   Modification: Upon completion of the notice of violation or
administrative code enforcement order, the ALJ may modify the civil penalties
on a finding of good cause. Civil penalties may be waived or modified by the
administrative law judge if there is a finding of good cause based on the
responsible person's claim of legal nonconforming or conditional use, and
      1.   The city's verification of the claim; or
      2.   The responsible person's filing of an application for the
conditional use before expiration of the date to correct and said conditional
use is approved by the city.
   G.   Failure To Pay: The failure of any person to pay civil penalties
assessed within the specified time is a violation of this chapter and may
result in the city pursuing any legal remedy to collect the civil penalties as
provided in the law. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10E-5: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION:
The ACE administrator is authorized to enter upon any property or premises to
abate the violation of this code and applicable sections of the Utah code. The
ACE administrator is authorized to assess all costs for the abatement to the
responsible person and use any remedy available under the law to collect the
costs. If additional abatements are necessary within two (2) years, treble
costs may be assessed against the responsible person(s) for the actual
abatement.
   A.   Abatement By City: Once the procedures set forth in this chapter have
been completed, the violation may be abated by city personnel or by a private
contractor acting under the direction of the city.
   B.   Entrance On Private Property: An enforcement official, city personnel,
authorized representative (including a private contractor) may enter upon
private property in a reasonable manner to abate the ordinance violation as
specified in the notice of violation or administrative code enforcement order.
   C.   Abatement By Responsible Person; City Costs: If the responsible person
abates the violation before the city performs the actual abatement pursuant to
a notice of violation or administrative code enforcement order, the ACE
administrator may still assess all costs incurred by the city against the
responsible person.
   D.   Report: When the abatement is completed, a report describing the work
performed and an itemized account of the total abatement costs shall be
prepared by the ACE administrator. The report shall contain the names and
addresses of the responsible persons of each parcel and the tax parcel number.
   E.   Service On Responsible Person: The ACE administrator shall serve the
notice of costs and the itemized bill of costs by registered mail to the last
known address of the responsible person(s). The notice shall demand full
payment within twenty (20) days to the city treasurer.
   F.   Costs Hearing: The ACE administrator shall schedule an itemized bill
for costs hearing, if requested in writing by any or all responsible persons.
(Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10E-6: INJUNCTIONS:
In addition to any other remedy provided under this code or applicable sections
of the Utah code, including criminal prosecution or administrative remedies,
any provision of this chapter may be enforced by injunction issued in the
district court upon a suit brought by the city. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
ARTICLE F. COSTS AND FEES
SECTION:
1-10F-1: Declaration Of Purpose
1-10F-2: Costs
1-10F-3: Reinspection Fees
1-10F-4: Administrative Fees
1-10F-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
   A.   The city council finds that there is a need to recover costs incurred
by enforcement officials, the ACE administrator, the ALJ and other city
personnel who spend considerable time inspecting and reinspecting properties
throughout the city in an effort to ensure compliance with this code or
applicable sections of the Utah code.
   B.   The city council further finds that the assessment of costs is an
appropriate method to recover expenses incurred for actual costs of abating
violations, reinspection fees, filing fees, attorney fees, administrative law
judge fees, title search, and any additional actual costs incurred by the city
for each individual case. The assessment and collection of costs shall not
preclude the imposition of any administrative or judicial civil penalties or
fines for violations of this code or applicable sections of the Utah code.
(Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10F-2: COSTS:
Whenever actual costs are incurred by the city on a property to obtain
compliance with provisions of this code and applicable sections of the Utah
code, the ACE administrator may assess costs against the responsible person.
The ACE administrator shall serve the responsible party with a notice of
itemized statement of costs. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10F-3: REINSPECTION FEES:
   A.   Notification of reinspection fees shall be provided on the notice of
violation served to the responsible person(s).
   B.   Reinspection fees assessed or collected pursuant to this section shall
not be included in any other costs assessed.
   C.   The failure of any responsible person to receive a notice of the
reinspection fees shall not affect the validity of any other fees imposed under
this section. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10F-4: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES:
The ACE administrator or ALJ is authorized to assess administrative fees for
costs incurred in the administration of this program, such as investigation of
violations, preparation for hearings, hearings, and the collection process. The
fee assessed shall be the amount set in the city uniform fee schedule. The ACE
administrator shall serve the responsible party with a notice of itemized
statement of fees. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
ARTICLE G. COLLECTION OF PENALTIES, FINES, COSTS AND FEES
SECTION:
1-10G-1: Declaration Of Purpose
1-10G-2: Tax Liens Without Judgment
1-10G-3: Performance Bond
1-10G-4: Writ Of Execution
1-10G-5: Writ Of Garnishment
1-10G-6: Allocation Of Penalties, Fines, Costs And Fees
1-10G-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that recordation of code enforcement tax liens will
assist in the collection of civil penalties, abatement costs and administrative
fees assessed by the administrative code enforcement hearing program or
judicial orders. The city council further finds that collection of civil
penalties, costs and fees assessed for code enforcement violations is important
in deterring future violations and maintaining the integrity of the city's ACE
program. The procedures established in this article shall be used to complement
existing administrative or judicial remedies that may be pursued to address
violations of this code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10G-2: TAX LIENS WITHOUT JUDGMENT:
   A.   Itemized Statement: Once the city has abated a property of the
violation, the ACE administrator shall prepare three (3) copies of the itemized
statement of costs incurred in the removal and destruction of the violations
and deliver them to the city treasurer within ten (10) days after completion of
the work of removing the violations.
   B.   Notice To Property Owner: The ACE administrator shall send, by
registered mail to the property owner's last known address, a copy of the
itemized statement of costs informing him or her that a code enforcement tax
lien is being recorded for the amount of actual costs of abatement. Payment
shall be due within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of mailing.
   C.   Lien Recorded: Upon receipt of the itemized statement of costs, the
city treasurer shall record a code enforcement tax lien against the property in
the official records on file in the office of the recorder of Washington
County, state of Utah. The failure of any person with a financial interest in
the property to actually receive the notice of the lien shall not affect the
validity of the lien or any proceedings taken to collect the outstanding costs
of abatement.
   D.   Notice Of Satisfaction: Once payment in full is received for the
outstanding civil penalties and costs, or the amount is deemed satisfied
pursuant to a subsequent administrative order, the ACE administrator shall
either record a notice of satisfaction, or provide the property owner or
financial institution with the notice of satisfaction of judgment so that it
can record this notice in the official records on file in the office of the
recorder of Washington County, state of Utah. The notice of satisfaction shall
include the same information as provided for in the original code enforcement
tax lien. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the code enforcement tax
lien. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10G-3: PERFORMANCE BOND:
As part of any notice, order or action, the ALJ has the authority to require
responsible persons to post an administrative code enforcement performance bond
to ensure compliance with this chapter, this code, applicable sections of the
Utah code, administrative code enforcement order, or any judicial action. If
the responsible person fails to comply with the notice, order or action, the
bond will be forfeited to the city. The administrative code enforcement
performance bond will not be used to offset the other outstanding costs and
fees associated with the case. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10G-4: WRIT OF EXECUTION:
After obtaining a judgment, the ACE administrator may collect the obligation by
use of all appropriate legal means. This may include the execution on personal
property owned by the responsible person by filing a writ with the applicable
court. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10G-5: WRIT OF GARNISHMENT:
After obtaining a judgment, the ACE administrator may collect the obligation by
use of all appropriate legal means. This may include the garnishment of
paychecks, financial accounts and other income or financial assets by filing a
writ with the applicable court. (Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
1-10G-6: ALLOCATION OF PENALTIES, FINES, COSTS AND FEES:
Penalties, fines, costs and fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
deposited in the general fund of the city and appropriated and allocated in a
manner determined by the mayor and city council. The city auditor shall
establish accounting procedures to ensure proper account identification, credit
and collection.
(Ord. 2014.04, 9-11-2014)
CHAPTER 11
PROCUREMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-11-1: Contract Validity And Execution
1-11-2: Purchasing Administration
1-11-3: Standards For Purchasing
1-11-4: Bidding Procedures
1-11-5: Exceptions To Purchasing Policy
1-11-6: Lowest Responsible Bidder
1-11-7: Insurance And Bonds
1-11-8: Public Record
1-11-9: Prohibited Acts And Evasion Of Procurement Threshold
1-11-10: City Purchasing Cards
1-11-11: Penalty
1-11-1: CONTRACT VALIDITY AND EXECUTION:
   No liability against the city may be created and no expenditure of public
funds may be made, which is not for a public purpose. No contract may become
valid or is binding against the city until:
   A.   The contract has been reduced to writing;
   B.   The city has received notice from the City Treasurer that funds are
lawfully available within budgeted appropriations to fulfill the city's
financial obligations thereunder;
   C.   Where certifications of compliance with federal contract or grant
assurances are required, the documents are approved as to form by the city
attorney;
   D.   The contract has been administered by the city manager and fully
complies with the requirements of the city's purchasing requirements;
   E.   The contract has been reviewed and approved as to form by the city
attorney and executed by the mayor or, where authorized, by the city manager or
a department head; and
   F.   The signature of the mayor has been attested by the city recorder or,
if signed by the city manager or department head, the signature has been
countersigned by the city recorder.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-11-2: PURCHASING ADMINISTRATION:
   The city manager shall have responsibility for the purchasing activities of
the city and its various departments. The duties and powers regarding
purchasing shall include the following:
   A.   Establish and maintain purchasing policies and processes, including the
review and approval of purchase requisitions, review contracts for the
acquisition of supplies, services, and equipment and administer the purchasing
card program.
   B.   Ensure compliance with the bidding and purchase procedures, authorizing
a waiver of such procedures only where appropriate.
   C.   Provide for the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment
between departments wherever it can be done effectively.
   D.   Review and maintain records and forms related to all purchasing
activities.
   E.   Provide for the disposal by public auction of surplus or unused
supplies and equipment that cannot be utilized by the city, but which has
residual value, except where such property has either a fixed cost or a unique
value, in which case disposal may be by negotiated sale.
   F.   Revise requisitions or estimates of a department's requirements for
supplies and contractual services as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost,
whenever revision is approved by the city manager and department head and
determined to be in the best interest of the city.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-11-3: STANDARDS FOR PURCHASING:
   A.   Specified:
      1.   Tier 1 Threshold: Purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual
services of an estimated value of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
may be made in the open market without complying with bidding procedures and
without a written agreement except as provided in this section. Sufficient
effort should be made on all purchases, regardless of cost, to determine the
best value before any purchase is initiated. A written agreement is required
for contractual services or if the purchases require customization, have unique
design criteria, or special terms.
      2.   Tier 2 Threshold: Purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual
services of an estimated value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less require at least three (3) written price
quotes and shall be obtained prior to the purchasing of supplies, equipment or
contractual services. A record of all written quotes shall be attached to the
purchase requisition prior to submitting the requisition to the purchasing
division for review and approval. A written agreement is only required for
contractual services or if the purchases require customization, have unique
design criteria, or special terms.
      3.   Tier 3 Threshold: Purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual
services of an estimated value greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the formal
bidding procedures. A written agreement is only required for contractual
services or if the purchases require customization, have unique design
criteria, or special terms.
   B.   All written agreements shall be reviewed and approved by the legal
department in conjunction with the purchasing division prior to a purchase or a
project beginning.
   C.   Construction Projects: Except for maintenance and improvement projects
performed by city personnel, all construction projects estimated by the city
engineer, water and power engineer or other appropriate party to have a value
more than the Tier 3 threshold, or where required by state law, shall be
advertised for bid and awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to
the procedure hereinafter prescribed. All such contract awards shall be made by
written contract as provided in this section and shall comply with the
insurance and bonding provisions of this article.
   D.   Bids Not Required For Certain Work: It is the policy of the city to
reserve to itself all legal prerogatives to perform services and work with its
own personnel and equipment.
   E.   Professional Services: Contracts for professional services estimated to
be more than the Tier 2 threshold shall be awarded at the discretion of the
city council, including, but not limited to, auditing, banking, insurance,
legal, engineering and similar professional consultation. Professional services
contracts do not include construction projects as detailed in this section. The
purchasing thresholds in this chapter apply to professional services agreements
but shall follow the procurement process for requests for proposals and
requests for qualifications. Professional services are not subject to cost-only
pricing determinations but shall be based on qualifications and/or proposals.
   F.   Refusal To Receive Bids: The city may preclude contractors or suppliers
from submitting bids where said proposed bidder has not completely satisfied
prior notices to comply with construction documents, drawings and/or other
specifications, or has otherwise failed to perform any work for the city or the
state in a timely or satisfactory manner. The contractor or supplier may appeal
the city's decision to refuse bids from a specific contractor or supplier by
filing a written notice of appeal within five ( 5) days of mailing or service
of the notice of refusal. The appeal shall be filed with the city recorder. An
informal administrative hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days. The
hearing shall be conducted and decided by the city manager and two (2)
department heads. Their decision shall be final.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-11-4: BIDDING PROCEDURES:
   Where formal bidding is required, the lowest responsible bidder shall be
determined through use of the following procedures:
   A.   Invitation For Bids: Notice inviting bids shall include a general
description of the articles or services to be purchased, advise where bid forms
and specifications are available, and state the process for submitting a bid.
Notice for bids shall be posted in accordance with Utah State Code.
   B.   Bid Opening: Sealed bids shall be submitted as designated in the notice
with the statement "bid for (item)" on the envelope.
      1.   Bids shall be opened:
         a.   In public in the presence of a witness at the time and place
stated in the notice; or
         b.   In an electronic bid opening process where bidders may see the
opening of the bid. Bidders shall be notified of the time and process for
viewing the opening.
      2.   A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted on the city
website for public inspection for a period of not less than thirty (30) days
after the bid opening.
   C.   Rejection Of Bids: The city council shall have the authority to reject
all bids, parts of all bids or all bids for any one (1) or more supplies or
contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the low
responsible bid exceeds available funds as certified by the appropriate city
officer by more than five percent (5%), or when the public interest will be
served thereby, and when permitted by law. Where a bid exceeds available funds
and time or economic considerations preclude re-solicitation of work or
purchase of a reduced scope or quantity, the city manager may negotiate with
the lowest responsible bidder for an adjustment of the bid price, including
changes in the bid requirements, to bring the low bid within the amount of
available funds.
   D.   Tie Bids: If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total
amount or unit price, with quality and service being equivalent, and if the
public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city
council shall accept the lowest bid made after negotiation with the tie bidders
at or after the time of the bid opening.
   E.   Award Of Contracts: Tier 3 threshold contracts shall be awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder as provided in this article, subject to approval by
the City Council.
   F.   Change Orders: All change orders for Tier 3 contracts must be approved
by the City Council.
   G.   Local Vendor Preference:
      In awarding bids for public work or for the procurement of supplies or
services, preference shall be given to local vendors unless such preference is
prohibited by federal law or by the terms of a federal grant or loan, the
proceeds of which are used to fund the public work or procurement of supplies
and services.
      A "local vendor" is defined as a business having a commercial office,
store, distribution center or other place of business located within Washington
County, with an intent to remain on a permanent basis.
      If a low bid is submitted by a non-preferred bidder, the bid may be
awarded to a local vendor if the local vendor's bid is within five percent (5%)
of the low non-preferred bid, and if the local vendor agrees, in writing,
within seventy-two (72) hours after notification that it is the qualified
preferred bidder, to meet the low bid.
      Such notice shall contain the exact bid submitted by the non-preferred
bidder, and the city shall not enter into a contract until seventy-two (72)
hours have elapsed after notification to the local vendor. The principal place
of business of a local vendor may be elsewhere as long as a local branch
meeting the above criteria is present. The domicile of one (1) or more
partners, owners, associates, directors, employees or agents shall not qualify
for constituting a local vendor in the absence of an actual local business
outlet.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-11-5: EXCEPTIONS TO PURCHASING POLICY:
   A.   Uniqueness: Contracts which by their nature are not adapted to an award
by competitive bidding, such as contracts for items available from a single
source only, contracts for repair and maintenance of equipment already owned by
the city which may be most efficiently performed by the originator of the
equipment or its agent, contracts for the purchase of used equipment or items
that are unique as to quality, condition and price, or contracts for a
particular brand of equipment or product which is uniquely suited to the city's
needs by reason of training of its personnel or compatibility with existing
equipment, shall not be subject to the competitive bidding requirements of this
article.
   B.   Auctions, Closeouts, Bankruptcy Sales: If the city manager determines
that supplies, materials or equipment can be purchased at any public auction,
closeout sale, bankruptcy, foreclosure or other similar sale, and if the city
council makes a finding that such purchase can be made at a cost below the
market cost in the city, the purchase may be made without complying with the
competitive bidding requirements of this article if otherwise allowed by law.
   C.   Cooperative Agreements: Contracts available to municipalities that have
been previously solicited by the state and national cooperatives may be
utilized. All cooperative contracts are subject to approval by the city
manager.
   D.   Alternative Procurement Process. The City Council may authorize other
or alternative procurement procedures on a case-by-case basis upon a showing of
good cause.
   E.   Emergency: In case of an actual or apparent emergency which requires
immediate procurement of supplies or contractual services, the affected
department head may approve acquisition at the lowest attainable price without
further compliance with the procedures provided herein. In such an event,
however, a full report of the circumstances of the emergency purchase shall be
filed by the procuring department with the city manager. Upon the approval of
the city manager, the report will be filed and shall be open to public
inspection. An "emergency" is any fact, circumstance or situation which
threatens injury or damage as the result of any happening or circumstance which
would delay the work of the city in such manner as to vitally affect life,
health or convenience of the public. The city manager shall report the
emergency procurement exception to the City Council no later than thirty days
from the date of the procurement.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-11-6: LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER:
   A.   Considerations: In awarding the lowest responsible bidder, the city
shall consider, in addition to price:
      1.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the supplies or service required;
      2.   The quality of supplies offered;
      3.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the supplies
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
      4.   The sufficiency of the bidder's financial resources and the effect
thereof on his ability to perform the contract or provide the supplies or
services;
      5.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
      6.   The quality of the bidder's performance on previous orders or
contracts for the city or others;
      7.   Litigation by or against the bidder, either pending or threatened,
where claim is made that the bidder provided or furnished materially defective
workmanship or materials to the city, or failed to substantially comply with
bid specifications or contract terms and conditions;
      8.   Any previous or existing noncompliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances of the city relating directly or indirectly to the subject of the
contract;
      9.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service,
where such maintenance and service is essential;
      10.   Possession or ability to obtain all necessary city and state
licenses either at the time of bid or before doing business with the city, as
specified by the contracting agent; and
      11.   A statement by the bidder of all subcontractors he will use who may
do or supply ten percent (10%) or more of the total contract being awarded, or
a willingness to supply such a listing of subcontractors at the time of the bid
award.
   B.   Award To Other Than Lowest Bidder: When the award is not given to the
lowest bidder, a statement of the reasons therefore shall be presented by the
department head involved, sent to and approved by the city manager and city
attorney and filed along with any other papers related to the transaction.
Challenge To Action Of Purchasing: Where a bid is protested by someone having
standing to do so, or an irregularity is waived by the city manager, written
notice of such protest or waiver shall be given to each bidder immediately,
advising the right of any person adversely affected to file a protest with the
city recorder. Such a protest must be in writing, made within seventy-two (72)
hours after the bid tabulation or after receipt of the notice of protest or
waiver from the city manager. Failure to file shall constitute a waiver of
further challenge. Upon receipt of such challenge, the contract award process
must cease until a decision of the administrative law judge is made unless the
city manager sets forth in writing particular facts and circumstances which
require continuance of the contract award process without delay to avoid an
immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare. An administrative
review of the protest shall be held within fifteen (15) business days. The
review shall be conducted and decided by the administrative law judge. The
decision of the administrative law judge shall be final.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-11-7: INSURANCE AND BONDS:
   A.   General Requirements: When directed by the city council or city
manager, or when required by state statute or city ordinance, insurance
certificates and/or bonds, whether permit, bid, performance or materialmen's,
shall be provided by a party contracting the City in a form approved by the
city attorney. Such bonds or insurance shall:
      1.   Name the city as an additional insured;
      2.   Be cancellable; provided that no cancellation thereof may be made
without first giving the city at least ten (10) days' prior written notice; and
      3.   Be in sums listed in the city's purchasing policy that are
sufficient to adequately protect the city and its interests.
      All corporate guarantors or sureties shall be licensed to do business in
the state and shall be sound and reputable firms, as determined acceptable to
the city attorney.
   B.   Bid Security:
      1.   Bid security in an amount equal to at least five percent (5%) of the
amount of the bid shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for
construction contracts where the total value of the contract is more than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Bid security shall be a bond provided by a
surety company authorized to do business in this state, the equivalent in cash,
or any other form satisfactory to the city.
   C.   When a bidder fails to comply with the requirement for bid security set
forth in the invitation for bids, the bids shall be rejected unless it is
determined that the failure to comply with the security requirements is non-
substantial.
   D.   After the bids are opened, they shall be irrevocable for the period
specified in the invitation for bids, except as provided below. If a bidder is
permitted to withdraw a bid before the award, no action shall be taken against
the bidder or bid security.
   E.   If after being accepted the bid fails,the bid security bond shall be
forfeited unless there has been a mistake in the bid of such consequence as to
make it apparent that:
      1.   A meeting of the minds never occurred and that enforcement of the
contract would be unconscionable;
      2.   Where the mistake related to a material feature of the contract;
      3.   Where the mistake does not constitute culpable negligence or
violation of a positive legal duty;
      4.   Where the city has been placed in status quo so that it suffers no
serious prejudice; or
      5.   In such other circumstances as determined by the city council.
   F.   Performance Bonds:
      1.   The contractor on a project to construct public improvements shall
be required to post a performance bond and a labor and materialmen's bond;
provided, however, that if the estimated construction cost is under two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00), or if, in the opinion of the city council, the
cost of requiring the bond will exceed the risk or benefit to the city, the
city may waive the performance bond requirement, provided other arrangements
are made to assure that laborers and materialmen on the project will be paid in
full.
      2.   The city manager shall have the authority to require a performance
bond before a contract is entered into to purchase or acquire supplies or
services, in such amount as may be reasonably necessary to protect the best
interest of the city.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-11-8: PUBLIC RECORD:
   The statement of reasons for rejection of a low bid as provided in this
article, the reasons for an emergency purchase made pursuant to this article,
any waiver pursuant to this article, and any estimate of the cost of public
construction work made by the city engineer or water and power engineer
pursuant to this article, where the estimate exceeds the sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00), shall become a part of the official records of the city
and shall be made available to the public upon request.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-11-9: PROHIBITED ACTS AND EVASION OF PROCUREMENT THRESHOLD:
   City employees or officials shall not engage in any practice or actions
which have the purpose or effect of evading the procurement rules of this
chapter.
   A.   No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements
of this article.
   B.   Where professional services, design services, or construction services
are procured under Tier 1 and 2 purchasing authority, the cumulative amount of
repeat purchases (such as separate task orders) in any fiscal year shall not
exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for that provider.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any officer, agent or employee of the city, or
any outside party or entity dealing with or seeking to deal with the city to
engage in any of the following practices:
      1.   Collusion or other agreement among bidders or prospective bidders,
in restraint of freedom or competition, to fix or in any way rig prices or
bids. In addition, any bid tainted with such collusion shall be voidable at the
option of the city.
      2.   Disclosure in advance of the opening of bids of the amount or
content of one bid to another bidder or potential bidder. If such disclosure is
deemed sufficiently material by the city manager, it shall void the bidding
process and require a new advertisement or request for bids.
      3.   Purchase of supplies or equipment for the personal use of an
officer, agent or employee of the city in the name of the city, whether part of
a city purchase or contract or separate, and whether paid for with city funds
or personal funds of the purchaser. The sole exception shall be where the item
or items purchased are required parts of a worker's equipment or uniform and
necessary to the successful performance of his duties as a city officer or
employee, although personally owned by him.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-11-10: CITY PURCHASING CARDS:
   City employees and officials who have been issued a City purchasing card
should use these cards for City purchases. Cardholders are encouraged to seek
out cost-effective vendors, even if the City does not have an existing account
with them. The cardholder must determine whether using the purchasing card is
in the best interest of the City and will expedite the purchase process.
   A.   All purchases made with the City purchasing card require a receipt. The
receipt shall be turned in to the City Treasurer no later than the first
business day of the month for the preceding month.
   B.   The City Treasurer shall review all purchasing card statements.
   C.   Personal purchases of any type on a City-issued purchasing card are
strictly prohibited.
   D.   Each employee who has access to a City purchasing card shall sign a
purchasing card use agreement to be maintained on file by the City Treasurer.
   E.   Employees using purchasing cards shall comply with Title 1 Chapter 11
of this code in its entirety. Anyone found in violation of this section may be
subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination and may be
subject to prosecution under the law.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-11-11: PENALTY:
   The penalty for actions made unlawful by this article shall be a class B
misdemeanor or infraction, in the discretion of the charging city attorney,
unless those actions involve conduct which would be a felony under the laws of
the state, in which event the county or state may charge the offense.
Conviction of the offense, other than a felony offense, shall subject the
violator to penalty as provided in this title. Imposition of a criminal penalty
shall not affect the city's right to take administrative action regarding an
employee, impose sanctions against a contractor or purchaser such as a refusal
to deal with him further, or avail itself of any other right which it may have
by law or otherwise.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
CHAPTER 12
SURPLUS PROPERTY
SECTION:
1-12-1:    Declaration Of Surplus Real Property
1-12-2:    Procedures For Disposal Of Real Property
1-12-3:    Disposal Of Personal Property
1-12-4:    Public Hearing For Disposal Of Real Property
1-12-5:    City Agencies
1-12-1: DECLARATION OF SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   No City-owned real property may be disposed of unless and until it has
been declared to be a surplus by the City Council.
   B.   The City Council must first find that it is in the public interest that
the subject property may be disposed ofto declare any City property surplus.
   C.   In determining whether any property shall be deemed surplus, the City
Council shall take into consideration the following:
      1.   The City has, or anticipates that it will have, no practical,
economical, efficient, or appropriate use for the property currently or in the
reasonably foreseeable future.
      2.   The purpose served by the property or its use either no longer
exists or has significantly changed because of the needs and demands of the
City or as may be determined by a change of policy evidenced by an ordinance or
resolution by the City Council.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-12-2: PROCEDURES FOR DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Upon the declaration of any City-owned real property as surplus
property, the City Council may authorize the disposition of such surplus real
property, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Unless provided otherwise by this chapter, the disposition of surplus
real property may be by public sale, private sale, exchange, option to
purchase, lease, lease with an option to purchase, trade-in, public auction,
private auction, sale upon public advertisement by sealed bid, or by any other
lawful and reasonable means.
   C.   No disposition of surplus real property shall be made for less than a
fair market value and consideration unless the City Council determines that it
is in the best public interest that disposition of the surplus property be made
for less than fair market value. Consideration and fair market value may be in
forms other than cash payment and may include the exchange of property for
services, as may be reasonably determined by the City Council.
   D.   The city manager shall maintain records of the manner and date of the
disposal of all City surplus property as well as the amount and nature of
consideration received for such property.
   E.   No lease or lease with an option to purchase of surplus real property
shall be entered without the prior consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-12-3: DISPOSAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY:
   The city manager is authorized to dispose of City-owned personal property.
Toquerville City may, from time to time, have personal property that it wishes
to sell. Once the City identifies the personal property to be sold, it will
publish notice of the intended sale to the public through various means.
   The City will conduct the sale of personal property either via an auction or
sealed bid format. The publication will outline the bidding process.
   The city manager shall have discretion, subject to the best interests of the
City and its residents and in accordance with good property management
techniques, over the disposition and manner of disposition of surplus,
obsolete, or unusable personal property.
   No elected official, appointed official, or city employee will be eligible
to participate in the bidding process and be eligible to purchase City personal
property.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-12-4: PUBLIC HEARING FOR DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY:
   No significant parcel of real property may be disposed of or leased unless
and until a public hearing has been held by the City Council concerning
disposition of the property. Such public hearing shall be held in the manner as
required by state law, Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-2(4), as amended. For
purposes of this section, "significant" shall be defined as any parcel of real
property having a market value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
1-12-5: CITY AGENCIES:
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all bodies which are within
the jurisdiction or under the authority of the City and which own real or
personal property in the name of the City.
(Ord. 2025.03, 5-7-2025)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Reserved
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: License Officer; Powers And Duties
3-1-4: License Required; Exemptions
3-1-5: Application For License; Renewal
3-1-6: License Application Or Application For License Fee
3-1-7: License Term And Payment Dates
3-1-8: Business License Certificates
3-1-9: Transfer Of License Prohibited
3-1-10: Branch Establishments
3-1-11: Reciprocal Recognition; Delivery Of Goods
3-1-12: Revocation Or Denial Of License
3-1-13: Violations Criminal; Civil Penalties
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
This title, adopted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated Title 10, Chapters 1 and 8,
as amended, is enacted for the following purposes: a) to license, regulate and
control businesses within the corporate limits of the City; and b) to assist in
the maintenance of a current index of all businesses within the corporate
limits of the City. (Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-2020)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used throughout this title, the following terms or phrases shall have the
following meanings:
                                 Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations,
                                 professions, enterprises, establishments and
                                 all other kinds of activities and matters,
                                 whether full time or part time, together with
BUSINESS:                        all devices, machines, vehicles and
                                 appurtenances related thereto, any of which
                                 are conducted for gain or economic profit or
                                 benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any
                                 premises within the City.
                                 Either the Toquerville City Clerk (or Deputy
                                 Clerk) or the Toquerville City Recorder (or
CITY CLERK:                      Deputy Recorders) or a combination of both if
                                 the statutory positions are held by the same
                                 person.
                                 A permit, based upon compliance with certain
                                 conditions, issued by the City Council for the
                                 use of property adjudged to be in harmony with
                                 the intent and purpose of a specified zone but
                                 not included in the list of permitted uses for
                                 the zone in which the property is located. A
                                 conditional use permit must be obtained prior
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:          to the issuance of a Business License for any
                                 business making use of property which is not
                                 included in the list of permitted uses within
                                 a specified zone. However, a conditional use
                                 permit shall not be required for the issuance
                                 of a Business License for any business making
                                 use of property which is included in the list
                                 of permitted uses within a specified zone.
                                 Each separate establishment or place of
                                 operation, whether or not operating under the
                                 same name, within the City, including a home
EACH SEPARATE PLACE OF BUSINESS: or other place of lodging if the same is held
                                 out by advertisements, listings or otherwise
                                 as the establishment or place of operation of
                                 a person engaging in business.
                                 Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of
                                 tangible personal property at retail or
                                 wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or
                                 property, the storage of vehicles, equipment,
                                 inventory or supplies, the rendering of
                                 administrative services of business including
                                 billing, collection and customer support and
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS:            the rendering of personal services for others
                                 for a consideration by persons engaged in any
                                 vocation, occupation, profession, trade or
                                 other calling; provided, however, that the
                                 rendering of personal services by an employee
                                 to his employer under any contract of personal
                                 employment, express or implied, shall not
                                 constitute "engaging in business", as herein
                                 defined.
                                 The certificate or document issued by the City
                                 and signed by the License Officer evidencing
LICENSE or BUSINESS LICENSE:     permission or authority from the City to the
                                 holder named therein to carry on a particular
                                 business or occupation at a particular
                                 location.
LICENSEE:                        The recipient of a License.
                                 Either the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, or
                                 the City Recorder or a combination if the
LICENSE OFFICER:                 statutory positions are held by the same
                                 person, including all Deputy Clerks and/or
                                 Deputy Recorder.
                                 A business, no part of the income of which is
NONPROFIT ENTERPRISE:            distributable to its owners, members or
                                 operators, unless such owner or operator shall
                                 be a religious or eleemosynary institution.
                                 Each separate location maintained or operated
PLACE OF BUSINESS:               by the Licensee within the City from which
                                 business activity is conducted or transacted.
                                 Toquerville City, a Utah municipal corporation
                                 with its fixed geographical boundaries located
CITY:                            in Washington County, State of Utah. (Ord.
                                 2020.14, 7-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2021.03, 2-17-
                                 2021; Ord. 2202-01, 1-19-2022)
 
3-1-3: LICENSE OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City Clerk is hereby designated and appointed as ex officio City License
Officer and shall issue licenses in the name of the City to all persons
qualified under the provisions of this Title and shall remit to the Treasurer’s
Office all license fees collected hereunder. In addition to all other powers
granted hereunder, the License Officer or designees shall have the following
powers:
   A.   Adopt Forms: Authority to adopt all forms necessary or desirable to
facilitate orderly and systematic issuance of all Business Licenses and ensure
the preservation of business records.
   B.   Investigation of Applicants: Authority to authorize investigation of
any applicant or Licensee, either at the time of issuance of a license, or at
any reasonable time thereafter, in order to determine the eligibility of such
applicant or Licensee for the issuance or renewal of a Business License. The
License Officer may engage the help and services of appropriate law enforcement
and public safety agencies, public utility providers or other City departments
for purposes of conducting such investigations.
   C.   Inspection of Premises and Records: Inspect proposed or existing places
of business to ensure compliance with building, safety and health codes and
inspect books and records of any applicant for the administration and
enforcement of this Title; provided, however, that any such inspection of
premises or business records shall be at reasonable times and upon prior notice
to the applicant or Licensee.
   D.   Determination of Standing of Applicant Or Licensee: Make a
determination whether the applicant or Licensee is in violation of any
provision of any ordinance of the City, or indebted or obligated in any manner
to the City or any department thereof, or in violation of any City land use
regulation (Toquerville City Code Title 10 - Toquerville Land Management Code)
by reason of the condition of the business premises or the use to be made
thereof.
   E.   Require Necessary Affidavits: When considered necessary in the
discretion of the License Officer, require affidavits regarding the prior
history of the applicant, indicating whether such person has had prior business
experience, has had a prior business license revoked or suspended, or any other
information with respect to the applicant’s prior experience or personal
integrity, including a record of prior convictions or arrests of the applicant
or Licensee.
   F.   Issuance of Notice of Acceptance or Rejection: Notify any applicant or
Licensee of the acceptance or rejection of the application for a Business
License or the renewal of a Business License, and, in the event of rejection,
said notice shall state in writing the reasons for such rejection. The License
Officer shall also have authority to notify the Licensee of any facts
constituting a violation of any ordinance of the City.
   G.   Enforcement: Be responsible for coordinating the enforcement of all
provisions of this Title, and shall cause to be filed complaints against all
persons or entities violating any of the provisions of this Title. (Ord.
2020.14, 7-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2022-01, 1-19-2022)
3-1-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, either directly or
indirectly, to engage in Business within the corporate limits of the City
without having first obtained a Business License, whether such License shall be
a new license or a renewal license, and without having first paid the
applicable license fee in accordance with all provisions of this Title.
   B.   Any person or entity engaging in bona fide agricultural activities and
selling the produce thereof shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a
Business License. (Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-2020)
3-1-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; RENEWAL:
   A.   Information Required: It shall be the responsibility of any person or
entity engaging in Business within the City to voluntarily apply for an initial
Business License. The application shall be submitted to the License Officer on
a form provided by the City which shall contain the following information:
business name, general description of business to be engaged in, mailing
address, phone number, date of birth, social security number, all names of
individuals involved in the ownership of the Business and such other
information as the License Officer shall deem reasonable and necessary.
   B.   Application Voided: A Business License application that has not had all
required items submitted and approved and the license issued within six (6)
months of application date shall be considered void and a new application and
fee will be required.
   C.   Renewal: Any person or entity holding an active Business License,
except where otherwise specified in this Title, shall be granted the
opportunity to obtain a renewal license. The License Officer shall issue
notices of renewal to eligible businesses forty five (45) days before the
expiration date on such form as the licensing officer may direct. Any Licensee
wishing to obtain a renewal license shall verify the accuracy of the
information regarding the business as requested on the renewal form and shall
attest to the accuracy of said information by affixing his/her signature to the
form. The signed renewal form shall be returned with the appropriate license
renewal fee to the License Officer. Any Licensee no longer engaging in business
within the City limits and therefore not wishing to obtain a renewal license
shall indicate such intentions on the renewal form, attesting with his/her
signature, and return such form to the License Officer. (Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-
2020; Ord. 2024.09, 6-20-2024)
3-1-6: LICENSE APPLICATION OR APPLICATION FOR LICENSE FEE:
   A.   Fee Imposed: There is hereby imposed and levied an application fee for
a license on the Business, location, trade, calling or profession for every
person engaged in a Business within the City, which shall be established by
resolution, and which may be changed from time to time and listed in the City’s
uniform fee schedule. Except for bona fide charitable organizations holding a
valid Section 501(c)(3) designation from the Internal Revenue Service, every
person or entity engaged in business in the City shall be required to pay a
business license application or renewal fee on an annual basis. The business
license application fees required by this Title must be paid in addition to any
other fees imposed on a particular business or type of business by any other
City ordinance.
   B.   Inspections Required: Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section,
if, due to the nature or location of the Business, state or local law or
regulation require that fire and safety inspections be conducted of the
premises by representatives of the local fire authority, to wit: the Hurricane
Valley Fire District or the Utah State Fire Marshall, prior to allowing the
person’s business to be conducted thereon, then the person shall be assessed
and shall pay to the City, in advance, an inspection fee, as established by
those public safety agencies, to cover the costs of said inspection(s).
   C.   Rebate of Fee: No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof
shall be made by reason of the nonuse of a Business License, denial of an
application or by reason of a change of location or type. (Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-
2020; Ord. 2024.09, 6-20-2024)
3-1-7: LICENSE TERM AND PAYMENT DATES:
   A.   Initial Applications and Renewal Applications: A Business License shall
commence January 1 of each year and shall expire on December 31 of each year
regardless of when they are submitted.
   B.   Inspections Made: Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of
this Section, no license shall be granted and validly in force until any and
all required inspections have been made, all City administrative approvals have
been given, and all licensing and delinquency related fees (including any such
unpaid fees from prior years) are paid by the applicant.
   C.   Payment Date On Renewal Licenses: Except as provided in Subsection D,
of this Section, annual business licensing fees shall be due and payable on or
before December 31 of the year immediately prior to year for which the Business
License is applicable and in force; and shall become delinquent if not paid, in
full, prior to March 1 of the year in which the Business License is applicable
and in force.
   D.   Payment Date On Initial Licenses: Payment for initial Business Licenses
are due and payable at the time of application therefor; and no license shall
be issued until such payment is made. There is no grace period for the payment
of such fees wherein business may lawfully be transacted.
   E.   Delinquency Fees, Civil Penalty And Collection Costs:
      1.   Delinquency Related Fees: Delinquency related fees shall mean and
include any fees and costs provided for in this Section 7.
      2.   Late Fees: Any license not renewed and paid for (in full) prior to
December 31, shall incur a late fee, which shall be established by resolution
and which may be changed from time to time and set forth in the City’s uniform
fee schedule. No license may be issued until all Delinquency Related Fees are
paid in full.
   F.   Enforcement: The failure to pay fees by March 1, shall result in a
prior license being non-renewable. If the applicant wishes to continue engaging
in business, the applicant will need to re-apply for a new business license and
the following shall be performed before an applicant may lawfully transact
business within the City again:
      1.   Applicant must submit to the City a new business license application
and any necessary documents as may be required by the City License Officer
pursuant to Section
3-1-5 , above.
      2.   Applicant must pay the license fee prescribed by Section
3-1-6  above, as well as any Delinquency Related Fees, including Late Fees and
licensing fees due during any lapse in licensure while the applicant continued
to Engage in Business.
      3.   Applicant must subject itself any the proposed Place of Business to
be inspected for compliance with all building, safety and health codes adopted
by the City pursuant to Section
3-1-3 (C) above.
      4.   Applicant must repay the City all enforcement costs incurred by the
City or otherwise attributable to the applicant’s prior delinquency and/or
illegal conduct, including all costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by
the City. (Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2021.05, 4-21-2021; Ord. 2023.24,
11-15-2023)
3-1-8: BUSINESS LICENSE CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Content: All Business License Certificates shall be signed by the
License Officer and shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name of the person to whom such Business License has been
issued.
      2.   The amount paid.
      3.   The type of Business.
      4.   The date of expiration.
      5.   The place where such Business, calling, trade or profession is to be
conducted.
   B.   Display: Every Business License certificate issued under this Title
shall be posted by the Licensee in a conspicuous place upon the wall of the
building, room or office of the Place of Business so that the same may be
easily seen. When the Business License certificate has expired, it shall be
removed by the Licensee from such place in which it has been posted, and no
certificate of license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to
remain posted upon the wall or any part of any room within the Place of
Business. If the Licensee’s Place of Business is such that a Business License
certificate cannot be displayed due to the transient or mobile nature of the
Business, then the Licensee shall carry the license on his person, ready to be
shown upon request by an authorized officer during all such time or times while
the Licensee is engaged in or pursuing the Business for which a License is
granted. (Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-2020)
3-1-9: TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No Business License granted or issued under this Title shall be assigned or
transferred to any other person or entity. It shall not be deemed to authorize
any person or entity other than the person or entity named therein to do
Business or to authorize any other business, calling, trade or profession than
is named therein. No Business License issued pursuant to this Title may be
transferred to any location not named therein without the Licensee first having
applied for a change in business location on such form as directed by the
License Officer. A new application fee shall be required to process the
application. If the address change occurs at time of renewal, only the regular
renewal fee shall be assessed. Upon approval of a business location change, the
License Officer will issue a new Business License certificate showing the
approved location and shall thereby nullify the previously issued License.
(Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-2020)
3-1-10: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
A separate License must be obtained for each separate Place of Business in the
City and each Business License shall authorize the Licensee to engage only in
the Business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in
the Business License certificate; provided, that warehouses and distributing
places used in connection with or incident to a Business licensed under this
Title shall not be deemed to be separate Places of Business or branch
establishments. (Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-2020)
3-1-11: RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION; DELIVERY OF GOODS:
   A.   No Business License shall be required for operation of any vehicle or
equipment in the City when:
      1.   Such vehicle is merely passing through the City.
      2.   Such vehicle is used exclusively in intercity or interstate
commerce.
   B.   No Business License shall be required by this Title of any person whose
only business activity in the City is the mere delivery in the City of property
sold by him/her/it at a regular Place of Business maintained outside the City
where:
      1.   Such person's Business is at the time of such delivery licensed by
the Utah municipality or county in which such Place of Business is situated;
and
      2.   The authority licensing such Business grants to licensees of the
City making deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges, upon
substantially the same terms, as are granted by this Section; and
      3.   Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it
was manufactured, produced, processed or stored are located within the City or
are subject to inspection by authority of the City for compliance with health
or sanitary standards prescribed by the City.
   C.   The License Officer shall, at the request of any person, certify a copy
of this Section to any municipality or county of the state to which a copy has
not previously been certified. (Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2021.03, 2-
17-2021)
3-1-12: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Conditions: Any Business License issued pursuant to the provisions of
this Title or of any other ordinance of the City may be revoked and any
application denied by the City because of:
      1.   The failure of the Licensee or applicant to comply with the
conditions and requirements of this Title or any other ordinance of the City.
      2.   Unlawful activities conducted or permitted on the premises where the
Business is conducted.
      3.   Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the
application for the license.
      4.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
      5.   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
   B.   Notice To Licensee: Prior to the revocation of a Business license,
denial of a new application, or denial of an application to renew a Business
License, the Licensee or applicant shall be given written notice which shall
state in substance that the City Council intends to consider revocation of the
Business License, deny the new application, or deny the application to renew,
together with the reason or reasons therefor, at a regular or special meeting
of the City Council, and that the Licensee or applicant has a right to appear,
to be represented by counsel, to hear the evidence against him, to cross
examine witnesses and to present evidence as to why the license should not be
revoked or the renewal application denied. The regular or special meeting of
the City Council shall be at least ten (10) days and not more than thirty (30)
days from the date such notice is sent. This Subsection shall not apply to
applications for licenses for Businesses which have not previously been
licensed by the City, and such applicants need only be informed that their
application has been denied and the reason(s) therefore. (Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-
2020)
3-1-13: VIOLATIONS CRIMINAL; CIVIL PENALTIES:
Any person failing or refusing to comply with any requirements of this Title,
or violating any of the provisions of this Title, or knowingly misrepresenting
to the License Officer or authorized agent any material fact in procuring any
Business License or renewal thereof, or who fails or refuses to comply with or
violates any of the conditions or restrictions of any Business License issued
hereunder, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor for each day such violation
shall continue and shall also be subject to all civil penalty provisions
provided in the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 2020.14, 7-16-2020)
CHAPTER 2
TAXES
ARTICLE A. SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Title
3-2A-2: Purpose
3-2A-3: Tax Imposed; Compliance With Statute; Exclusions
3-2A-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE OF TOQUERVILLE
CITY. (2014 Code)
3-2A-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   The 48th session of the Utah legislature has authorized the counties
and municipalities of the state to enact sales and use tax ordinances imposing
a one percent (1%) tax.
   B.   It is the purpose of this chapter to conform the sales and use tax of
the city to the requirements of the sales and use tax act, Utah Code Annotated
title 59, chapter 12, as currently amended. (2014 Code)
3-2A-3: TAX IMPOSED; COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTE; EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   Sales Tax: From and after the effective date hereof, there is levied
and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible
personal property, services and meals made within the city at the rate of one
percent (1%).
   B.   Excise Tax: An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or
other consumption in this city of tangible personal property from any retailer
on or after the operative date hereof at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
sales price of the property.
   C.   Determine Place Of Business: For the purpose of this chapter, all
retail sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at the place of
business delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of state destination
or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. In the
event a retailer has no permanent place of business, the place or places at
which the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under the rules
and regulations prescribed by and adopted by the state tax commission. Public
utilities, as defined by Utah Code Annotated title 54, shall not be obligated
to determine the place or places within any county or municipality where public
utilities services are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax revenue
arising from such service allocable to the city shall be determined by the
state tax commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   D.   Statute Adopted: Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of the sales and use tax act, all of
the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as amended and in
force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales
taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set
forth herein.
   E.   Substitution Of Terms In Statute: Wherever, and to the extent that in
Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, the state of Utah is named or
referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted
therefor. Nothing in subsection D of this section shall be deemed to require
substitution of the name of the city for the word "state" when that word is
used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or of the constitution
of the state, nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the
state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action
to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or
against the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of the chapter.
   F.   Additional License Not Required: If an annual license has been issued
to retailer under Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106, an additional license
shall not be required by reason of this chapter.
   G.   Exclusions: There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or
charged by which the tax is measured:
      1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer;
      2.   The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use tax
has become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality and
any county in the state, under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by that
county or municipality in accordance with the sales and use tax act. (2014
Code)
ARTICLE B. TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Definitions
3-2B-2: Tax Imposed
3-2B-3: Computation Of Gross Receipts; Exclusions
3-2B-4: Collection And Remittance Procedures
3-2B-5: Use Of Revenues
3-2B-6: Contract With State
3-2B-7: Tax Rate Changes
3-2B-8: Penalty
3-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
All definitions found in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-102, the sales and
use tax act, are hereby adopted and incorporated into this article by
reference. (Ord. 2007-03, 3-8-2007; amd. 2014 Code)
3-2B-2: TAX IMPOSED:
There is levied upon the business of every person, company, corporation or
other like and similar persons, groups or organizations, doing business in the
city as motor courts, motels, hotels, inns, campgrounds, RV parks, or like and
similar public accommodations, an annual license tax equal to one percent (1%)
of the gross revenue derived from the rent for each and every occupancy of a
suite, room or rooms, space or spaces, for a period of less than thirty (30)
consecutive days ("transient room tax"). The above tax shall apply to any
person, company, corporation or other like and similar persons, groups or
organizations doing business in an area annexed into the city municipal
boundaries after the enactment of this article. (Ord. 2007-03, 3-8-2007; amd.
2014 Code)
3-2B-3: COMPUTATION OF GROSS RECEIPTS; EXCLUSIONS:
For purposes of this article, gross receipts shall be computed upon the base
room or space rental rate assessed to the actual occupants. There shall be
excluded from the gross revenue, by which this tax is measured:
   A.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state or by any other
governmental agency upon a retailer or consumer;
   B.   The amount of any transient room tax or resort communities tax levied
under the authority of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, parts 3 and 4,
as amended, or its successor;
   C.   Receipts from the sale or service charge for any food, beverage or room
service charges in conjunction with the occupancy of the suite, room or rooms,
not included in the base room or space rental rate; and
   D.   Charges made for supplying telephone service, gas or electrical energy
service, not included in the base room or space rental rate. (Ord. 2007-03, 3-
8-2007)
3-2B-4: COLLECTION AND REMITTANCE PROCEDURES:
In collecting the transient room tax, the city will administer, collect and
enforce said tax in compliance with parts 1 and 2 of the Utah sales and use tax
act 1  ("tax act") and with the general taxation policies adopted by the state
tax commission. Commencing upon the effective date hereof, the transient room
tax imposed by this article shall be due and payable to the city treasurer
quarterly on or before the last day of the month next succeeding each calendar
quarterly period. Every person or business taxed hereunder shall, on or before
the last day of the month next succeeding each calendar quarterly period, file
with the city treasurer a report of its gross revenue for the preceding
quarterly period. The report shall be accompanied by a remittance of the amount
of tax due for the period covered by the report. (Ord. 2007-03, 3-8-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 59-12-101 et seq.
3-2B-5: USE OF REVENUES:
The transient room tax imposed by this article shall be used by the city for
promotion of the city and its recreational, tourist and cultural facilities,
activities and events. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the revenue
generated from the levy of the transient room tax may also be used for any
general fund purpose as deemed acceptable by the city council pursuant to Utah
Code Annotated section 59-12-352. (Ord. 2007-03, 3-8-2007)
3-2B-6: CONTRACT WITH STATE:
The city shall contract with the state tax commission or other agencies to
perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this
article, including the assessment and collection of said tax. (Ord. 2007-03, 3-
8-2007; amd. 2014 Code)
3-2B-7: TAX RATE CHANGES:
In the event the city desires to enlarge, repeal or modify the transient room
tax authorized pursuant to this article, the city may do so only after giving
notice of said change to the state tax commission and shall become effective
upon the first allowable date prescribed in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-
355. (Ord. 2007-03, 3-8-2007)
3-2B-8: PENALTY:
In addition to all remedies for noncompliance afforded to the city pursuant to
the tax act, a party's failure to timely remit to the city treasurer any
transient room tax owed under this article or to properly disclose the amount
of tax due, or any other violation of this article, shall be a class B
misdemeanor for each offense, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2007-03, 3-8-2007; amd. 2014 Code)
ARTICLE C. MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-2C-1: Intent
3-2C-2: Definitions
3-2C-3: Tax Imposed
3-2C-4: Exemptions From Tax
3-2C-5: Contract With State Tax Commission
3-2C-6: No Effect Upon Existing Franchises; Credit For Franchise Fees
3-2C-7: State Statutes Incorporated
3-2C-8: Additional License Or Reporting Not Required
3-2C-9: Effective Date Of Levy
3-2C-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city to adopt the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to, and in conformance with, Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-301 et
seq., the municipal energy sales and use tax act. (Ord. 2009.04, 6-18-2009)
3-2C-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to
the city municipal energy sales and use tax.
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   A fee:
      1.   Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
      2.   That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
   B.   1.   A fee similar to subsection A1 of this definition; or
      2.   Any combination of subsections A1 and A2 of this definition.
DELIVERED VALUE:
   A.   The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or use
in the city and includes:
      1.   The value of the energy itself; and
      2.   Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, services
charges or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable
form to each class of customer in the city.
   B.   Delivered value does not include the amount of a tax paid under:
      1.   Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1 or part 2; or
      2.   Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 1, part 3.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons
supplying a de minimis amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded
by rule promulgated by the state tax commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract or agreement
granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX:
   A.   A franchise tax;
   B.   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
   C.   Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this state,
any county, city, municipality, district or other local governmental entity of
the state, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
   A.   Installment and credit sales;
   B.   Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
   C.   Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable
energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable
if an outright sale were made.
STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this city for any
purpose, except sale in the regular course of business.
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity.
USE:
   A.   The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the
ownership or the leasing of taxable energy.
   B.   Does not include the sale, display, demonstration or trial of the
taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale. (Ord.
2009.04, 6-18-2009)
3-2C-3: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this article, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within the city equaling six percent
(6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax
shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax.
   A.   Calculation: The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the
taxable energy to the consumer.
   B.   Additional Tax: The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on
taxable energy imposed by the city or state as authorized by Utah Code
Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 2, the local sales and use tax act. (Ord.
2009.04, 6-18-2009)
3-2C-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax, except
as expressly provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305; notwithstanding
an exemption granted under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1,
tax collection. (Ord. 2009.04, 6-18-2009; amd. 2014 Code)
3-2C-5: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
   A.   Required; Authority Of Mayor: On or before the effective date hereof,
the city shall contract with the state tax commission to perform all functions
incident to the administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and
use tax, in accordance with this article. This contract may be a supplement to
any existing contract with the commission to administer and collect the local
sales and use tax. The mayor, with the approval of the city council and the
city attorney, is hereby authorized to enter supplementary agreements with the
state tax commission that may be necessary to the continued administration and
operation of the municipal energy sales and use tax enacted by this article.
   B.   Monthly Payments By Supplier; Conditions: An energy supplier shall pay
the municipal energy sales and use tax revenues collected from consumers
directly to the city monthly, if:
      1.   The city is the energy supplier; or
      2.   a. The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and
use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more; and
         b.   The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use
tax.
   C.   Deduction Of Franchise Fees: An energy supplier paying the municipal
energy sales and use tax directly to the city may deduct any contractual
franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and
remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-307(4). (Ord. 2009.04, 6-18-2009)
3-2C-6: NO EFFECT UPON EXISTING FRANCHISES; CREDIT FOR FRANCHISE FEES:
   A.   No Alteration: This article shall not alter any existing franchise
agreements between the city and energy suppliers.
   B.   Credit Against Tax Due: There is a credit against the tax due from any
consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
      1.   The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the city
pursuant to previous franchise agreements;
      2.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy
supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
      3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 2009.04, 6-18-
2009)
3-2C-7: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED:
   A.   Specified; Exemptions: Except as herein provided, and except insofar as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 10,
chapter 1, part 3, municipal energy sales and use tax act, as well as this
article, all of the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12,
part 1, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date hereof,
insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, and excepting for the amount of
the sales and use taxes levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of
this article as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2009.04, 6-18-2009; amd. 2014
Code)
   B.   Substitution Of Terms: Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code
Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, the state is named or
referred to as the "taxing agency", the name of the city shall be substituted,
insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Utah Code
Annotated title 10, chapter 1, part 3, as amended. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city for the word
"state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax
commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the city be
substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of such a
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
article.
   C.   Amendments: Any amendments made to Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, as amended, which would be applicable to the city for the
purposes of carrying out this article are hereby incorporated herein by
reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a
Utah statute. (Ord. 2009.04, 6-18-2009)
3-2C-8: ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING NOT REQUIRED:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use
tax levied by this article is required, provided the energy supplier collecting
the tax has a license issued under Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106. (Ord.
2009.04, 6-18-2009)
3-2C-9: EFFECTIVE DATE OF LEVY:
This article is effective June 18, 2009. The municipal energy sales and use tax
shall be levied beginning one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., October
1, 2009. (Ord. 2009.04, 6-18-2009)
ARTICLE D. TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX
SECTION:
3-2D-1: Definitions
3-2D-2: Levy Of Tax
3-2D-3: Tax Rate
3-2D-4: Rate Limitation And Exemption
3-2D-5: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3-2D-6: Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of Tax
3-2D-7: Interlocal Agreement For Collection
3-2D-8: Taxes Erroneously Recovered From Customers
3-2D-9: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
3-2D-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
COMMISSION: The Utah state tax commission.
CUSTOMER:
   A.   Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, "customer" means the
person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to
pay for telecommunications service received under the contract.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "customer" means:
      1.   The person who is obligated under a contract with a
telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received
under the contract; or
      2.   If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this
definition, the end user of telecommunications service.
   C.   "Customer" does not include a reseller:
      1.   Of telecommunications service; or
      2.   For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an
agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
END USER:
   A.   The person who uses a telecommunications service.
   B.   For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is
not an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the
telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the
telecommunications service.
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY: Those gross receipts from a
transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the
municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code Annotated
title 59, chapter 12 ("sales and use tax act"), and determined in accordance
with Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-215, as amended.
GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered,
except for amounts collected or paid as:
   A.   A tax, fee or charge:
      1.   Imposed by a governmental entity;
      2.   Separately identified as a tax, fee or charge in the transaction
with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
      3.   Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
   B.   Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a
customer under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12 ("sales and use tax
act"); or
   C.   Interest, a fee or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications
provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when
payment is due.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: As defined in the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
MUNICIPALITY: Toquerville City.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: A. For telecommunications service other than mobile
telecommunications service, means the street address representative of where
the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which
shall be:
      1.   The residential street address of the customer; or
      2.   The primary business street address of the customer; or
   B.   For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, "service
address" means:
   A.   If the location described in this section is known, the location of the
telecommunications equipment:
      1.   To which the call is charged; and
      2.   From which the call originates or terminates;
   B.   If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not
known but the location described in this section is known, the location of the
origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first
identified by:
      1.   The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
      2.   If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications
provider from its service provider; or
   C.   If the locations described in subsection A or B of this definition are
not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this
definition, "telecommunications provider" means a person that:
      1.   Owns, controls, operates or manages a telecommunications service; or
      2.   Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition
for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications
service.
   B.   A person described in subsection A of this definition is a
telecommunications provider whether or not the public service commission of
Utah regulates:
      1.   That person; or
      2.   The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls,
operates or manages.
   C.   "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined
in Utah Code Annotated section 54-8b-2, as amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: A. Telecommunications service, as defined in Utah
Code Annotated section 59-12-102, as amended, other than mobile
telecommunications service, that originates and terminates within the
boundaries of the state of Utah; and
   B.   Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code Annotated
section 59-12-102, as amended:
      1.   That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state;
and
      2.   Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC section 116 et seq.; or
   C.   An ancillary service as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-
102, as amended. (Ord. 2009.05, 6-18-2009)
3-2D-2: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to the city (otherwise
known as the gross receipts attributed to the municipality). (Ord. 2009.05, 6-
18-2009)
3-2D-3: TAX RATE:
   A.   The rate of the tax levy shall be three and one-half percent (3.5%) of
the telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service
that are attributed to the municipality, subject to the provisions of
subsection B of this section.
   B.   If the location of a transaction for telecommunications service is
determined to be a municipality other than the city, then the rate imposed on
the gross receipts for telecommunications services shall be the lower of: 1)
the rate imposed by the taxing jurisdiction in which the transaction is
located; or 2) the rate for the nonmobile telecommunication services shall be
the rate imposed by the municipality in which the customer's service address is
located; or 3) for mobile telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the
municipality of the customer's primary place of use. (Ord. 2009.05, 6-18-2009)
3-2D-4: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION:
The rate of this levy shall not exceed three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunication service
attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority
vote of the voters in the city that vote in:
   A.   A municipal general election;
   B.   A regular general election; or
   C.   A local special election. (Ord. 2009.05, 6-18-2009)
3-2D-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of October 1, 2009, or the first
day of any calendar quarter after a ninety (90) day period beginning on the
date the commission received or receives notice pursuant to Utah Code Annotated
section 10-1-403, as amended, of the enactment of this article. (Ord. 2009.05,
6-18-2009)
3-2D-6: CHANGES IN RATE OR REPEAL OF TAX:
Any changes to the tax rate or a repeal of the tax levied under this article
are subject to the requirement of Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-403. If the
tax rate is changed or the tax repealed, then the appropriate notice shall be
given as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-403. (Ord. 2009.05, 6-18-
2009)
3-2D-7: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION:
On or before the effective date hereof, the city shall enter into a uniform
interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah Code Annotated
section 10-1-405, as amended, for the collection, enforcement and
administration of this municipal telecommunications license tax. (Ord. 2009.05,
6-18-2009)
3-2D-8: TAXES ERRONEOUSLY RECOVERED FROM CUSTOMERS:
Pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-408, a customer
may not bring a cause of action against a telecommunications provider on the
basis that the telecommunications provider erroneously recovered from the
customer the municipal telecommunications license tax, except as provided in
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-408. (Ord. 2009.05, 6-18-2009)
3-2D-9: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
   A.   Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality for the purpose
of taxation of telecommunication services under authority of Utah Code
Annotated section 10-1-203 or Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 26, local
taxation of utilities limitation, is hereby repealed.
   B.   Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal
ordinance or fee which provides that the city may recover from a
telecommunications provider, the management costs of the city caused by the
activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights of way of the
municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code Annotated
section 72-7-102, as amended, and is not related to the municipality's loss of
use of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications
provider in a right of way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result
of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way.
   C.   Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to repeal or limit the
city right to charge fees or taxes on persons not subject to the municipal
telecommunications license tax under this article who locate telecommunications
facilities, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 72-7-108, as amended,
within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 2009.05, 6-18-2009)
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Types Of Retail Licenses
3-3-3: License Required
3-3-4: Application For License
3-3-5: Fee For License
3-3-6: Qualifications Of Licensee
3-3-7: Referral To Planning And Zoning Director
3-3-8: Bond Required
3-3-9: Health Department Permit
3-3-10: Transferability
3-3-11: Renewal Of License
3-3-12: Purchase Of Beer For Resale
3-3-13: Operational Restrictions
3-3-14: Sunday Sales Prohibited
3-3-15: Inspections Authorized
3-3-16: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in
the Utah alcoholic beverage control act, Utah Code Annotated title 32B, as
amended, unless a different meaning is clearly evident. (2014 Code)
3-3-2: TYPES OF RETAIL LICENSES:
   A.   Specified: Retail licenses issued hereunder shall be of the following
kinds and shall carry the following privileges and be known as:
      1.   Class A (consumption off premises beer license); and
      2.   Class B (consumption on premises beer license).
   B.   Class A: A class A license (consumption off premises beer license)
shall entitle the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises in the
original containers for consumption off the licensed premises in accordance
with the state alcoholic beverage control act and the ordinances of the city.
   C.   Class B: A class B license (consumption on premises beer license) shall
entitle the licensee to sell beer in the original containers or on draft on the
licensed premises for consumption on the licensed premises; or sell beer on the
licensed premises in sealed containers for consumption off premises in
accordance with the Utah alcoholic beverage control act. Total sales from beer
are not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the business's gross sales. (2014
Code)
3-3-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required; Penalty: It is a class B misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to engage in the business of selling beer at
retail, in bottles, cans or draft, without first having procured a license
therefor from the governing body and paid the license fee required by this
chapter.
   B.   Sales After Revocation Prohibited: It is a class B misdemeanor, subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to sell beer after the revocation of the
license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   Separate License; Transferability; Compliance: A separate license shall
be required for each place of sale and the license shall at all times be
conspicuously displayed in the place to which it shall refer or for which it
shall be issued. All licensees shall comply with the Utah alcoholic beverage
control act and the regulations of the Utah alcoholic beverage control
commission. (2014 Code)
3-3-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Requirements: All applications for licenses authorized by this chapter
shall be verified and shall be filed with the city recorder. The application
must state the applicant's name in full and that he understands and has read
and complied with the requirements and possesses the qualifications specified
in the Utah alcoholic beverage control act and this chapter. If the applicant
is a copartnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if a limited
liability company, the names and addresses of all members and managers; and if
a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and directors, must be
stated.
   B.   Subscribed By Applicant: The application must be subscribed by the
applicant who shall state under oath that the facts therein contained are true.
(2014 Code)
3-3-5: FEE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Specified: In addition to any other business license fee which any
person or place of business may be required to pay, there is imposed on the
business location of every person engaged in the sale or dispensing of beer a
license fee as established by the city council.
   B.   Fee To Accompany Application: Applications provided for in this chapter
shall be accompanied by the fee provided in this chapter. The fee shall be
returned to the applicant if the application is denied. (2014 Code)
3-3-6: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
No license shall be granted to any retailer to sell beer within the city unless
he shall be of good moral character, over the age of twenty one (21) years, and
a citizen of the United States, or to anyone who has been convicted of a felony
or of any violation of any law of the state or provision of the ordinances of
the city relating to intoxicating liquors, or of keeping a gambling or
disorderly house, or who has pleaded guilty to or has forfeited his bail on a
charge of having committed a felony or of having violated any such law or
ordinance, or to any partnership, any member of which lacks any of the
qualifications herein set forth in this chapter, or to any corporation, of
which any stockholder, holding at least twenty percent (20%) of the total
issued and outstanding stock of the applicant corporation, director or officer
lacks any such qualifications. (2014 Code)
3-3-7: REFERRAL TO PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR:
All applications filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be referred to the planning and zoning director for inspection and report. The
planning and zoning director shall, when possible within ten (10) days after
receiving such application, make report to the governing body of the general
reputation and character of the persons who habitually frequent such place; the
nature and kind of business conducted at such place by the applicant or by any
other person or by the applicant at any other place; whether the place is or
has been conducted in a lawful, quiet and orderly manner; the nature and kind
of entertainment, if any, at such place; whether gambling is or has been
permitted on the premises or by the applicant at any other place; and the
proximity of such premises to any school or church. The planning and zoning
director shall also add to such report his recommendation as to whether or not
the application should be granted. (2014 Code)
3-3-8: BOND REQUIRED:
No license required by this chapter shall be granted by the governing body
until the applicant shall have filed with the city recorder a bond in the sum
of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) payable to the city. (2014 Code)
3-3-9: HEALTH DEPARTMENT PERMIT:
No license under this chapter shall be issued until the applicant therefor
shall have first procured from the health department a permit which shall show
that the premises to be licensed is in a sanitary condition and that the
equipment used in the storage, distribution or sale of beer complies with all
the health regulations of the city and the state. (2014 Code)
3-3-10: TRANSFERABILITY:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable, and if
revoked by the governing body, the fee paid by the licensee to the city for the
license shall be forfeited to the city. (2014 Code)
3-3-11: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Time For Renewal: All applications for renewal licenses filed by the
holders of existing licenses shall be filed with the city recorder at least
thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the then issued license. Any
person who fails to file such application within the time limit shall close his
licensed premises on the expiration date of the then issued license and shall
keep the premises closed for any and all business for the sale of beer until
the date his new license is issued by the governing body.
   B.   Revocation For Nonuse: If the holder of an existing beer license has
not used the beer license (by the selling of beer) for a period of six (6)
months or more, during any one calendar year, the beer license will
automatically be revoked. (2014 Code)
3-3-12: PURCHASE OF BEER FOR RESALE:
It is a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any licensee to purchase or acquire, or to have or
possess for the purpose of sale or distribution, any beer, except that which he
shall have lawfully purchased from a brewer or wholesaler licensed under the
provisions of the Utah alcoholic beverage control act. (2014 Code)
3-3-13: OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell beer at any public dance, fair or
celebration, or to any person intoxicated, or under the influence of any
intoxicating beverage. It is unlawful for any person to sell beer in any dance
hall or theater.
   B.   No license shall be granted to sell beer in any dance hall, theater, or
within six hundred (600) yards of any church or within six hundred (600) yards
of any school.
   C.   It is unlawful to sell beer to any person under the age of twenty one
(21), or to permit the drinking of liquor on such premises.
   D.   Licensed premises shall be kept brightly illuminated at all times while
they are occupied or open for business, and no booth or kind of stall shall be
maintained unless all tables, chairs and occupants are kept open to full view
from the main floor and the entrance of such licensed premises. It is unlawful
to advertise the sale of beer except under such regulations as are made by the
state alcoholic beverage control commission; provided, that a simple
designation of the fact that beer is sold under city license may be placed in
or upon the window or front of the licensed premises.
   E.   It is unlawful for any person to sell beer except in the manner for
which he has been so licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (2014
Code)
3-3-14: SUNDAY SALES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person having a license for the sale of beer to sell,
barter, distribute, give away, exchange, dispense or serve beer on the first
day of the week commonly known as Sunday. (2014 Code)
3-3-15: INSPECTIONS AUTHORIZED:
   A.   All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by any officer,
agent or peace officer of the city, or the alcoholic beverage control
commission, or the health department, and every licensee shall, at the request
of the health department, furnish to it samples of beer which he shall have for
sale.
   B.   Any license granted pursuant to this chapter may be revoked on a
finding by the governing body that the licensee has had ten (10) days' or more
notice from the health department that the licensee is violating one or more
health ordinances, rules or regulations of the city or of the state division of
health and has failed to comply with such health ordinances, rules or
regulations.
   C.   The governing body may direct the law enforcement officers to close
down any business licensed under this chapter where the health department has
determined that continued operation of the business presents an imminent danger
to the health of the community or persons who may eat or drink at the business.
(2014 Code)
3-3-16: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority: The governing body may, after a hearing, revoke or suspend
any beer license on a finding by it that the licensee or his officers, agents
or employees have violated any provision of this chapter or any ordinance of
the city, whether now or hereafter enacted, which in any way relates to the
operation of the business or the safety of the public.
   B.   Hearing: A hearing may be requested by any person:
      1.   Who is denied or refused a beer license by any officer, agent or
employee of the city;
      2.   Whose beer license is revoked, restricted, qualified or limited from
that for which it was first issued.
   C.   Request For Hearing: The request for hearing must be made in writing to
the mayor or city recorder and made within thirty (30) days following the date
the notice denying, refusing, revoking, qualifying or restricting the beer
license is mailed by the city to the applicant or license holder at his address
as it appears on the application or license.
   D.   Notice Of Hearing: Following receipt of a request for hearing, the
governing body shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and
place the hearing is to be held. At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have
the right to hear and examine any witnesses the city may produce to support its
decision and to present his own evidence in support of his contention. The
governing body shall, within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the
hearing, in writing, inform the person who requested the hearing of the
decision of the city council.
   E.   Limitation: This section shall not be construed so as to afford any
aggrieved party more than one hearing before the city council, nor shall the
hearing provided in this section apply to any criminal complaint or proceeding.
(2014 Code)
CHAPTER 4
COMMERCIAL CHEMICAL APPLICATORS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Issuance Or Renewal Of License
3-4-3: Chemical Vehicle Requirements
3-4-4: Repair And Maintenance Of Equipment
3-4-5: Testing And Inspections
3-4-6: Records Maintained
3-4-7: Violations
3-4-8: Suspension Of License
3-4-9: Restitution
3-4-10: Penalty
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water in a potable water
distribution system as a result of cross connection.
BACKFLOW ADMINISTRATOR: A certified level 1 backflow administrator employed or
approved by the city or the Washington County water conservancy district.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE OR ASSEMBLY: A device, assembly or means designed to
prevent backflow, which complies with the specifications of section 608 of the
international plumbing code.
CHEMICAL: Any solid, gas, liquid or other substance of whatever nature which is
possible to introduce into the public drinking water system, other than the
intended potable water, including, but not limited to, nonpotable water,
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, soaps, detergents and other similar
substances.
CHEMICAL EQUIPMENT: Any equipment, device or other contraption of whatever
nature which is used or designed for the handling, storage, transportation or
application of chemicals, including, but not limited to, herbicide, pesticide,
fertilizer, mobile wash and other similar equipment.
CHEMICAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle of whatever nature used or designed for the
handling, storage, transportation or application of chemicals, including, but
not limited to, herbicide, pesticide, fertilizer, mobile wash and other similar
vehicles.
CITY WATER SYSTEM: Each and every component of the city municipal water supply
and delivery system, including, for purposes of this chapter, those portions of
the Washington County water conservancy district system within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection between a potable water
system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce
into the public drinking water system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or
substance, other than the intended potable water. (Ord. 2012.02, 3-8-2012; amd.
2014 Code)
3-4-2: ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
The issuance or renewal of a business license for any business employing
chemical equipment or vehicles subject to the provisions of this chapter may be
conditioned upon compliance with this chapter, and any failure to comply with
this chapter shall be grounds for suspension of a business license issued to
any such business. At the time of issuance or renewal of a business license,
the owner of any such vehicle or equipment shall provide to the business
licensing department the current authorization issued by the backflow
administrator. (Ord. 2012.02, 3-8-2012)
3-4-3: CHEMICAL VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Vehicle Requires Backflow Device: Every chemical vehicle to which water
is or potentially may be added from the city and/or the Washington County water
conservancy district system shall be equipped with a permanently affixed and
operational air gap backflow device, and all water added to such vehicles shall
pass through a backflow device.
   B.   Equipment Requires Backflow Device: No person shall add water to any
chemical equipment via a hose, pump or other equipment unless such hose, pump
or other equipment is fitted with an effective and approved permanently affixed
backflow prevention device or assembly to prevent backflow of chemicals or
liquids into the city water system, streams, lakes, other sources of water or
other areas. (Ord. 2012.02, 3-8-2012)
3-4-4: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
The maintenance, including necessary repairs, of all backflow prevention
devices or assemblies and cross connection control devices required by this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner of the vehicle and/or
equipment where an assembly or device is installed, and failure to adequately
maintain any required device or assembly shall be a violation hereof. (Ord.
2012.02, 3-8-2012)
3-4-5: TESTING AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Access Required: All equipment and vehicles on which a backflow
prevention device or assembly is required shall be open for inspection at all
reasonable times by authorized representatives of the water service department
in order to determine whether cross connections or sanitary hazards, including
violations of this chapter, exist. In order to make such determinations, the
inspection shall include access to any vehicle and equipment where cross
connections might exist. The owner and any occupant shall be responsible to
provide access for inspection purposes.
   B.   Annual Testing And Inspection Of Chemical Vehicles: Each owner of
chemical equipment or vehicles on which a backflow prevention device or
assembly is required under this chapter, shall have certified inspections made
of each backflow device before it is put into service and at least once a year
thereafter at the owner's expense by a backflow administrator. Where the city
deems the hazard to be great, the city may require such inspections and tests
at a more frequent interval as prescribed by the city. All such tests shall be
made according to the applicable standards set forth by the state and the
international plumbing code. The backflow administrator shall issue and place
the approved sticker onto the vehicle and/or chemical equipment in a visible
location. The city may require proof of compliance with this subsection at any
time, which shall be fulfilled by presenting the vehicle and/or chemical
equipment with the sticker issued and placed by the backflow administrator. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner of any such vehicle or equipment to
arrange for the inspections required by this subsection. (Ord. 2012.02, 3-8-
2012)
3-4-6: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
The water department shall keep records of cross connection hazards and the
condition of backflow prevention devices or assemblies, including those records
required by state and federal agencies. (Ord. 2012.02, 3-8-2012)
3-4-7: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Specified: A violation of this chapter exists if:
      1.   Failure To Install: A backflow prevention assembly and/or device
required by this chapter for control of cross connections is not installed or
maintained, as required in this chapter.
      2.   Removal Or Bypass Of Assembly And/Or Device: It is found that a
backflow prevention assembly and/or device is removed or bypassed.
      3.   Unprotected Cross Connection: An unprotected cross connection exists
on the vehicle and/or equipment.
      4.   Failure To Inspect: The periodic system inspection required herein
has not been conducted.
      5.   False Report Or False Information: A false report or false
information is provided to the city by or on behalf of the owner or consumer,
with regard to the cross connection or backflow prevention assembly and/or
device.
      6.   Failure To Obtain Sticker: The current sticker is not on the vehicle
and/or chemical equipment in a visible location.
   B.   Notice Of Violation: The city shall provide written notification of any
violation of this chapter to the owner of the vehicle or equipment on which the
violation exists and the consumer, if different, shall demand that the
corrective action be taken within twenty four (24) hours of the delivery of
such notification. The city, at the request of the owner or consumer, may
authorize an extension of time for the completion or any modification of the
required corrective action upon good cause shown. (Ord. 2012.02, 3-8-2012)
3-4-8: SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority Of City: If the owner or consumer fails to take the required
corrective action within twenty four (24) hours of the delivery of a notice of
violation of this chapter, the city, in its own discretion, may suspend any
business license issued to the owner and/or consumer.
   B.   Reinstatement Of Business License: No business license suspended under
this section may be reinstated until all outstanding fines and fees are paid,
and all violations or defects are corrected and the city has inspected and
approved the corrections. (Ord. 2012.02, 3-8-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
3-4-9: RESTITUTION:
If contamination of the city water system occurs by means of a violation of
this chapter, the owner of the property or equipment in violation and/or the
party responsible for such contamination, must bear the cost of cleanup of the
city water system. (Ord. 2012.02, 3-8-2012)
3-4-10: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered to be a
separate offense. (Ord. 2012.02, 3-8-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 5
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: License Required; Exceptions
3-5-3: Application For Special Event License; Fee
3-5-4: Deposit And Insurance
3-5-5: Notice To Officials
3-5-6: Standards For Issuance
3-5-7: Notice Of Rejection
3-5-8: Modified Special Event License
3-5-9: Contents Of Special Event License
3-5-10: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
3-5-11: Appeal Procedure
3-5-12: Revocation Of License
3-5-13: Penalty
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
                         Any event, gathering, march, parade, ceremony, show,
                         exhibition, pageant, race, festival, circus, carnival,
                         outdoor dance, community fair, concert, or activity of
SPECIAL EVENT:           any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any
                         street, park, parking lot, or any other place in the
                         city where more than fifty (50) persons are expected
                         to be involved and/or the event is likely to increase
                         the need for City personnel.
                         The individual, business entity, or organization who
SPECIAL EVENT ORGANIZER: is in charge of planning, organizing and directing the
                         Special Event. (Ord. 2021.01, 1-20-2021)
 
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any Special
Event, unless a Special Event License shall have been obtained from the City
Clerk. This Chapter shall not apply to the following or any other event
exempted by the City Council at a regular meeting of the City Council at which
a quorum is present:
   A.   A funeral procession;
   B.   Students going to and from school classes. Also school-sponsored
activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and
supervision of the proper school authorities;
   C.   A governmental agency event related to the agency acting within the
scope of its functions such as informational meetings, public meetings, and
open houses;
   D.   City-sponsored celebrations or Fourth of July celebrations;
   E.   Church-sponsored activities if held on church-owned property;
   F.   Family reunions or other private events at a city park (provided they
do not require additional city personnel); and
   G.   Pioneer Day celebrations. (Ord. 2021.01, 1-20-2021)
3-5-3: APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE; FEE:
   A.   Filing Period: An application for a Special Event License shall be
filed with the City Clerk not less than thirty (30) days nor more than one
hundred twenty (120) days prior to the date on which it is proposed to conduct
the Special Event.
   B.   Information Required: The application for the Special Event License
shall be made upon a form provided by the City Clerk and shall include at a
minimum the following information:
      1.   The name, mailing address and telephone number of the person or
organization seeking to organize and conduct the Special Event;
      2.   If the Special Event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of
or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads
of such organization;
      3.   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the
Special Event Chairperson or Director and who will be responsible for its
conduct;
      4.   The date(s) when the Special Event is to be conducted;
      5.   The hours the Special Event will start and terminate;
      6.   The location of the Special Event and a notarized statement of
ownership or authorization from the owner of the property on which the Special
Event is proposed to be located. If the Special Event is located on City-owned
property no notarized statement shall be required;
      7.   If the Special Event is a race or parade:
         a.   The route to be traveled, including the starting point and the
termination point; and if the route includes any state routes requiring the
applicant to obtain a UDOT parade permit in addition to the City's Special
Event License;
         b.   The approximate number and type of entries expected to
participate in the Special Event;
         c.   The interval of space to be maintained between units of a parade;
         d.   A statement as to whether the Special Event will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of any street proposed to be traversed; and
         e.   The location by street or any other location of any assembly
areas for such Special Event;
      8.   If the Special Event is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or
for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the Special Event
License shall file with the City Clerk a communication in writing from the
beneficiary, authorizing the applicant to apply for the Special Event License
on his/her/its behalf;
      9.   The person signing the Special Event License shall be responsible
for reading and knowing the contents of, and agreeing to follow the
requirements of this Chapter and any applicable provisions of the Toquerville
Code, the Utah Code and the Utah State Tax Code; and shall provide evidence of
compliance with Utah State Tax Commission sales tax collection requirements to
include providing the City with the Special Event tax number issued for the
event;
      10.   Special Events that include food items will provide a list of
exhibitors or vendors along with evidence of compliance with State and County
laws and ordinances regulated by the Washington County Health Department and
International Fire Code;
      11.   A plan addressing the following:
         a.   Access: Specific areas shall be designated for ingress and egress
of emergency vehicles, including appropriate barriers to regulate vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
         b.   Control Plan: A plan establishing adequate provisions for traffic
control, crowd control, patron control, and enforcement of city ordinances,
state and federal laws and any other applicable regulations, including, but not
limited to, traffic, fire, health, security, and Americans with Disabilities
Act regulations.
         c.   Emergency Services: First aid supplies and equipment, and
emergency medical services shall be made available to meet public health and
safety concerns or legal requirements.
         d.   Parking: Temporary off-street parking shall be provided at the
rate of one vehicle for every four (4) persons reasonably expected to attend
the Special Event use unless exempted by the City's Zoning Administrator. Such
parking need not be hard surfaced but dust control will be required. If parking
spaces are not marked, parking personnel shall be present to ensure orderly and
safe ingress and egress from the parking area.
         e.   Sanitation Facilities: Adequate sanitation facilities shall be
provided based on the duration of the Special Event and on the number of
persons reasonably expected to participate.
         f.   Security: A plan shall be approved establishing the number and
type of law enforcement and security personnel that will be present at the
Special Event to monitor and facilitate the use and provide spectator or
participant control and direction. Security personnel must be licensed or
certified. Proof must be provided.
         g.   Existing Zoning: A designation of existing zoning of the site and
contiguous properties.
         h.   Description Of Other Uses: Written description of other uses and/
or structures on the property and on contiguous properties.
         i.   Site Plan: Site plan, drawn to scale, showing proposed locations
and uses of all temporary structures.
   C.   Late Applications: The City Clerk, where good cause is shown therefor,
shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed
less than thirty (30) days before the date such Special Event is proposed to be
conducted. A late fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be imposed for a late
application.
   D.   License Fee: There shall be paid at the time of filing the application
for a Special Event License a fee in the amount designated by the City Council
from time to time and set forth in the City's Uniform Fee Schedule. (Ord.
2021.01, 1-20-2021)
3-5-4: DEPOSIT AND INSURANCE:
   A.   If it is reasonably expected that the Special Event will result in the
necessity of street cleaning, has the potential for unusual noise, or other
disruption of commercial activity in the City, or will otherwise pose a hazard
to public health and safety of the City, the City may require the applicant to
post a deposit (as determined by the City Clerk) to assure compliance with the
standards and conditions required in the Special Event License.
   B.   All applicants may be required, if deemed necessary, for public health
and safety to provide the City with a valid certificate of liability insurance
written through carriers acceptable to the City and Utah Local Governments
Trust. Said liability insurance shall:
      1.   Provide bodily injury and property damage liability protection in
the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence or such
additional amount as may be determined from time to time by City.
      2.   The applicant must be specified as the insured. The certificate
shall name Toquerville City, its officers and agents, as an "additional
insured" and must specify that the applicant's insurance shall be primary to
any insurance carried by the City.
      3.   A certificate of insurance shall be properly executed with the
original signature of the authorizing insurance agent. A copy of the insurance
certificate is required prior to the Special Event License being issued and
shall not be canceled prior to giving the City at least ten (10) days' written
notice of such cancellation.
      4.   If alcohol is to be consumed, liquor liability coverage is also
required. Special Events open to the general public or private events that
charge for alcohol served must adhere to Utah State Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control ("DABC") and provide a copy of the single event permit issued
by DABC prior to the Special Event.
   C.   In every case the Special Event location shall be restored to its
condition prior to the event. This is to include, but not be limited to,
cleaning of streets, sidewalks and gutters, repair damaged streets, sidewalks,
utilities, street signs, etc. If the City is required to correct problems or
clean up after a Special Event, the responsible party will be billed for the
cost of correction and/or cleanup if the Deposit made per subsection A of this
section is not sufficient to cover the cost of correction and/or cleanup. If no
correction and/or cleanup is required, the deposit made per subsection A of
this section will be refunded within thirty (30) days after the Special Event.
(Ord. 2021.01, 1-20-2021)
3-5-5: NOTICE TO OFFICIALS:
Immediately upon receipt of a completed Special Event License application, the
City Clerk shall send a copy hereof to the following requesting their feedback
and input on the application:
   A.   Washington County Sheriff's Department (or applicable law enforcement
authority);
   B.   Toquerville City Manager (if applicable) or Mayor;
   C.   Hurricane Valley Fire District (or applicable fire protection
authority);
   D.   Toquerville City Public Works Director; and
   E.   Toquerville City Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 2021.01, 1-20-2021)
3-5-6: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
The City Clerk shall issue a Special Event License as provided for hereunder
when, from consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:
   A.   Conducting the proposed Special Event will not substantially interrupt
the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   B.   Conducting the proposed Special Event will not require the diversion of
so great a number of law enforcement or city personnel to properly police the
event as to prevent normal police protection and provision of City services to
the residents of City;
   C.   Conducting the proposed Special Event will not require the diversion of
so great a number of emergency response service personnel from the Hurricane
Valley Fire District so as to prevent normal emergency response service to
other portions of the City;
   D.   The concentration of persons, animals and/or vehicles at any assembly
points of the proposed Special Event will not unduly interfere with proper fire
and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such
event areas;
   E.   Conducting the proposed Special Event is not reasonably likely to cause
injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a
disturbance;
   F.   The proposed Special Event is scheduled in such a manner as to not
conflict with other events or things which may require law enforcement, fire,
ambulance, or other personnel at the same time as the event;
   G.   The proposed Special Event is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or commercial activity;
   H.   If the sole purpose of the Special Event is to advertise any product,
goods or commercial activity or for private profit, the person or party
responsible will be required to pay for all costs and/or services. (Ord.
2021.01, 1-20-2021)
3-5-7: NOTICE OF REJECTION:
The City Clerk shall act upon the application for a Special Event License
within ten (10) business days after the filing thereof. If the City Clerk
disapproves the application, notice shall be mailed to the applicant within ten
(10) business days after the date upon which the application was filed, stating
the reasons for denial of the application. (Ord. 2021.01, 1-20-2021)
3-5-8: MODIFIED SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE:
The City Clerk, in denying an application for a Special Event License, shall be
empowered to authorize to issue a modified Special Event License allowing the
applicant to conduct the Special Event on a date, at a time, at a location or
over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring
to accept the modified Special Event License shall, within ten (10) business
days after notice of the action of the City Clerk, file a written notice of
acceptance with the City Clerk. A modified Special Event License shall conform
to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a normal Special Event
License issued under this Chapter. (Ord. 2021.01, 1-20-2021)
3-5-9: CONTENTS OF SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE:
   A.   Each Special Event License shall state the following information:
      1.   Special Event sponsor and applicant;
      2.   Special Event date or dates and times of operation;
      3.   Special Event location;
      4.   The number and location of any City personnel required and the rate
of pay applicable;
      5.   The portions of any street to be traversed that may be occupied by
the Special Event;
      6.   The list of any other tax, Utah Department of Transportation
("UDOT"), or other permits required in addition to the City issued Special
Event License to be provided to the City prior to the Special Event; and
      7.   Such other information and conditions as the City Clerk shall find
necessary and desirable for the enforcement of this Chapter and the Toquerville
Code;
   B.   A completed application must be approved and Special Event License
issued at least thirty (30) days prior to the Special Event. (Ord. 2021.01, 1-
20-2021)
3-5-10: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Duties Of Event Organizer: The Special Event Organizer shall ensure
compliance with all Special Event License directions and conditions and with
all applicable laws and ordinances.
   B.   Public Conduct During Special Event:
      1.   Interference: No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede
or interfere with any event or event assembly, or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a Special Event.
      2.   Driving Through Events: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles or persons comprising an event when such vehicles or persons are
in motion and are conspicuously designated as an event, unless specifically
directed to do so by a law enforcement officer.
      3.   Parking On Parade Or Race Route: The City Zoning Administrator and
law enforcement officials shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary,
to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a public street or part
thereof constituting a part of the route of a Special Event. The City or
Special Event Organizer may post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof.
However, no person shall be liable for parking on the street that is not posted
in a manner provided herein, or who is not otherwise advised not to park
thereon by a law enforcement officer or City personnel working the Special
Event. (Ord. 2021.01, 1-20-2021)
3-5-11: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a Special
Event License to the City Council. The appeal shall be submitted within ten
(10) days after notice of denial. The City Council shall act upon the appeal
within ten (10) days after its receipt. (Ord. 2021.01, 1-20-2021)
3-5-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Clerk shall have the authority to revoke a Special Event license
issued hereunder upon failure of the applicant or participants in the Special
Event to meet the standards and conditions provided herein and on the Special
Event License. (Ord. 2021.01, 1-20-2021)
3-5-13: PENALTY:
Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be a class B
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of the Toquerville Code, or such lesser offense as the City Attorney in
his/her discretion shall choose. (Ord. 2021.01, 1-20-2021)
CHAPTER 6
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Title And Purpose
3-6-2: Applicability
3-6-3: Definitions
3-6-4: Licenses Required
3-6-5: Application For License
3-6-6: Fees
3-6-7: Approval Process
3-6-8: Conditions Required Prior To Issuance Of License
3-6-9: Renewal Of License
3-6-10: Revocation Or Denial Of License
3-6-11: Appeal
3-6-12: Enforcement
3-6-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the TOQUERVILLE HOME OCCUPATION
ORDINANCE. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to allow persons, in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter to utilize a portion of their
residential premises as a place of business. Such business shall only be
operated by residents in the home and shall not be of such nature or scope that
the operation of the business disrupts neighbors or detracts, changes or
modifies the character of the neighborhood in which it is located. (Ord.
2023.05, 5-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023.15, 6-21-2023)
3-6-2: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all home occupations within the
following zoning areas inside the City:
   A.   Single-Family Residential (R-1-12, R-1-15 and R-1-20);
   B.   Multiple Use District (MU-20);
   C.   Agricultural District (A);
   D.   Multiple-Family District (RM-1 and RM-2). (Ord. 2023.05, 5-17-2023;
amd. Ord. 2023.15, 6-21-2023)
3-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
All other definitions set forth in this title not specifically modified by this
section are incorporated herein by this reference. The following words and
phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
 
                         The conducting of any business, transaction or
                         activity for which consideration of any nature is
                         received -within any permitted zoning district. Garage
HOME OCCUPATION:         or yard type sales do not constitute a home occupation
                         provided they are held no more than four (4) times per
                         calendar year and last no more than three (3)
                         consecutive days on each occasion.
                         The license issued by the Toquerville City Development
HOME OCCUPATION LICENSE: staff for the purpose of granting permission to
                         conduct a home occupation.
                         The use of a portion of the residential premises for
IN HOME OFFICE:          office use only, including, but not limited to, record
                         storage, filing, invoicing, accounting, billing, order
                         taking, making appointments and telephone contacts.
                         The building or structure on the residential premises
                         that is the home or dwelling unit that has been
RESIDENCE:               designed for use as the living and sleeping place for
                         its occupants, as distinguished from a detached garage
                         or other accessory building.
                         The parcel of land and structures on it that is
                         located in the areas of the City -which are, or may
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES:    be, zoned to permit home occupations. Residential
                         premises does not include parcels of land located in
                         any Commercial Zoning District. (Ord. 2023.05, 5-17-
                         2023; amd. Ord. 2023.15, 6-21-2023)
 
3-6-4: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   Home Occupation License: To assure compliance -with the provisions of
this title and to better protect the character of affected neighborhoods in the
City, a home occupation license must be approved by City Development staff
before a structure on the residential premises may be used for a home
occupation.
   B.   Business License: In addition to obtaining a home occupation permit,
any person wishing to conduct a home occupation upon residential premises must
also obtain and maintain a valid business license from the City, provided
however that the City shall not charge any license fee for the business
license.
   C.   State Sales Tax License: If required by the State, a State Sales Tax
license shall be issued to the home occupation, with the City listed as a
business location. (Ord. 2023.05, 5-17-2023)
3-6-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for a home occupation permit license shall contain the
following:
   A.   The name, contact information, and home address of the person applying
for the permit;
   B.   The registered name of the business, if applicable;
   C.   The Federal tax identification (EIN) number of the business entity, if
applicable;
   D.   A brief description of the type of business/home occupation to be
engaged in;
   E.   A State tax identification number, if applicable;
   F.   A licensure number issued by the State Department of Professional and
Occupational Licensing, if applicable;
   G.   Proof that the home occupation is State licensed or exempt, if
applicable;
   H.   A diagram or floor plan of the residence and/or ancillary structure
(drawn to rough scale) showing the location and size of the area of the
residence/structure being proposed to be used for a home occupation;
   I.   Signature of the applicant (or applicant’s authorized agent)
acknowledging under penalty of law that the information provided by the
applicant (or applicant’s authorized agent) is true. (Ord. 2023.05, 5-17-2023;
amd. Ord. 2023.15, 6-21-2023)
3-6-6: FEES:
The City shall not impose any license fee in connection with the operation ofa
home occupation. However, the City shall charge a one-time application fee as
shown on its fee schedule to cover the costs to process and review the
application for a home occupation. In addition, any fees incurred by the City
for professional services associated with the review of a home occupation
application, including fees for the City Planner and the City Engineer, shall
also be assessed to the applicant and paid in full as a prerequisite to the
issuance of any home occupation permit. (Ord. 2023.05, 5-17-2023)
3-6-7: APPROVAL PROCESS:
The City Development staff, upon application and review may issue a home
occupation license, which shall state the home occupation allowed, the
conditions attached thereto, if any, and any time limitations imposed thereon.
The home occupation license shall not be issued unless the City Development
staff is satisfied that the applicant has or will meet all of the conditions
set forth in section
10-23-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2023.05, 5-17-2023)
3-6-8: CONDITIONS REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The following conditions shall be met or agreed to be adhered to prior to the
issuance of a home occupation license:
   A.   The home occupation shall not alter the residential character of the
residential premises by reason of activity, color, design, materials, storage,
construction, lighting, sounds, noises, vibrations, dust, odors, noxious fumes,
etc., nor shall it unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of an individual
and/or the residential neighborhood, nor interfere with area radio or
television reception.
   B.   No persons other than residents of the residential premises shall be
employed in the home occupation. No independent contractors shall come upon the
residential premises to conduct the work of the home occupation.
   C.   Outside storage of equipment and/or materials associated with the home
occupation business shall not be permitted.
   D.   Only two (2) vehicles may be used in association with the home
occupation and they shall be capable of being parked in the garage (or
regularly parked areas normally used by the resident). The vehicles used for
the home occupation shall be limited to a maximum gross vehicle weight rating
of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or six (6) tons.
   E.   The number of square feet used for conducting the home occupation,
whether in the residence or other permitted structure, shall not exceed twenty
five percent (25%) of the total area of the residence, plus attached garage,
not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet.
   F.   The home occupation may be conducted in a garage or other structures on
the premises, subject to the following:
      1.   The garage may not be altered in any way that prevents the parking
of vehicles within.
      2.   Sufficient off-street parking must be available for the vehicles
displaced by using the garage to conduct the home occupation.
   G.   No business signs are to be displayed on the residential premises in
connection with the home occupation.
   H.   The home occupation shall not create noise in excess of that which is
customary to the immediate neighborhood.
   I.   The home occupation shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic
in excess of that customarily associated with the zoning in which the use is
located.
   J.   The proposed home occupation will not place the residence or permitted
structure out of conformity with any applicable Fire, Building, Plumbing,
Electrical and Health Codes, as well as with any Federal and State regulations
and other ordinances of the City. The residential premises shall be subject to
inspection by the City for compliance purposes.
   K.   The Proposed home occupation will not cause a demand for Municipal or
utility services, or community facilities, in excess of those usually and
customarily provided for similar residential premises in the affected zoning
area.
   L.   Promotional meetings for the purpose of selling merchandise, taking
orders or training shall not be held more than once in any calendar month.
   M.   No sales of goods or materials requiring regular or frequent delivery
to a customer by a semi-tractor/trailer truck are permitted.
   N.   No hours of operation between ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock
(6:00) A.M. are permitted.
   O.   No storage, usage or disposal of hazardous or flammable materials.
   P.   All trash or refuse created by the home occupation is to be disposed of
regularly and the storage of all trash/refuse will be kept in appropriate
containers out of the sight of the public from in the front of the residence.
   Q.   The applicant shall maintain a valid business license issued by the
City, or in the case of satellite operation, in the City where the main center
of operations for the home occupation is located.
   R.   The City Development staff may condition the approval of any home
occupation permit license with conditions reasonably calculated to mitigate or
maintain any of the above-mentioned conditions. (Ord. 2023.05, 5-17-2023; amd.
Ord. 2023.15, 6-21-2023)
3-6-9: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
All home occupation licenses shall be valid for a period of one year or until
the January 1 following issuance of the license. All licenses will
automatically renew unless there have been reported violations, or detrimental
characteristics, which may, in the opinion of the City Development staff,
require revocation or nonrenewal of the home occupation license. (Ord. 2023.05,
5-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023.15, 6-21-2023)
3-6-10: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Any home occupation permit license issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter may be revoked and any application denied by City Development
staff because of:
      1.   The failure of the applicant to comply with the conditions and
requirements of this chapter or any ordinance of the City.
      2.   Unlawful activities conducted on the residential premises where the
home occupation is conducted.
      3.   The home occupation permit license was obtained by fraud or deceit.
      4.   The home occupation has been abandoned for a period of one hundred
twenty (120) days or longer.
      5.   If at any time the home occupation exceeds the required conditions
of the original license, the City may revoke the license.
   B.   The City shall notify the applicant of the denial or revocation of the
home occupation permit license and the reason for such denial or revocation.
(Ord. 2023.05, 5-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023.15, 6-21-2023)
3-6-11: APPEAL:
A home occupation permit license denial, revocation or nonrenewal may be
appealed to the City Council by filing written notice of appeal with the City
Recorder within ten (10) days of an applicant’s receipt of the written notice
of denial, revocation or nonrenewal. The City Council shall hear the appeal
within sixty (60) days of the notice of appeal being filed. (Ord. 2023.05, 5-
17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023.15, 6-21-2023)
3-6-12: ENFORCEMENT:
Any person conducting a home occupation without a valid home occupation permit
license shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of chapter 5
of this title. In addition to the criminal sanctions set forth in chapter 5 of
this title, the City, at its discretion, may institute actions and proceedings,
whether legal or equitable, to enjoin, restrain or abate any violations of this
chapter. (Ord. 2023.05, 5-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023.15, 6-21-2023)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Nuisance Defined
4-1-2: Enumeration Of Nuisances
4-1-3: Maintenance Of Nuisance Prohibited
4-1-4: Enforcement
4-1-5: Abatement Procedures
4-1-6: Penalty
4-1-1: NUISANCE DEFINED:
   A.   A nuisance is an offense against the order and economy of the city and
consists in unlawfully doing an act or failing to perform an act, which:
      1.   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety
of three (3) or more persons; or
      2.   Offends public decency; or
      3.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for
passage any stream, public street, park, square or highway; or
      4.   In any way renders three (3) or more persons insecure in life or the
use of property.
   B.   An act which affects three (3) or more persons in any of the ways
specified in this section is still a nuisance regardless of the extent of
annoyance or whether damage inflicted on individuals is unequal.
   C.   If any condition designated herein as an offense against the order and
economy of the city is determined by a building official of the city or fire
official to constitute a fire or hazard, or is determined by a law enforcement
official to constitute a safety hazard, or by a health department official to
be a health hazard, or is determined by a city ordinance official or code
enforcer of unlawful nuisance ordination violations, there shall be a rebuttal
presumption that such act or omission is within the designations of subsection
A of this section.
   D.   Habitual Nuisance. Any premises or property located within the city
that generates repeated responses from public safety officials because of
nuisance related activities, including calls for drug or party houses, any
premises or property that generates three (3) or more calls for nuisance
related activities within an eighteen (18) month time period shall be deemed a
“habitual nuisance.” Any premises or property that generates two (2) or more
calls for nuisance related activities within an eighteen (18) month time period
to abate any drug or party conditions as set forth in this chapter shall be
deemed a “habitual nuisance.” (Ord. 03-09-06, 3-9-2006; amd. 2014 Code; Ord.
2022.08, 8-3-2022)
4-1-2: ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES:
   A.   Dead Animals: The failure by an owner to bury or otherwise dispose of a
deceased animal within two (2) days of its death shall constitute a nuisance
within the meaning of this Chapter.
   B.   Refuse In Public Streets: The act of intentionally or carelessly
throwing, casting, putting into, dropping or leaving in any street, gutter,
sidewalk or public place any stones, gravel, sand, dirt, debris, garbage,
leaves, lawn or tree clippings, paper material, handbills, ashes, rubbish of
any kind, or any other item, material or substance which: i) interferes with
the free and unobstructed use and movement of either traffic or water on a
public street or right of way, in the opinion of a law enforcement official or
city enforcement officer, or ii) shall constitute a fire hazard in the opinion
of a fire official shall constitute a nuisance within the meaning of this
Chapter.
   C.   Offensive Condition Or Refuse On Private Property: The keeping of
uncovered, stored openly or uncontained on or about any lot or parcel of
property, whether vacant or occupied, any garbage, refuse, junk, business
related equipment, materials, supplies and merchandise, effluvia, kitchen
waste, trash, inoperable motor vehicles, broken machinery, rank and noxious
weeds, or other unsightly or deleterious objects or conditions that are
offensive to the order and economy of the City shall constitute a nuisance
within the meaning of this Chapter.
   D.   Slaughterhouses: The allowance of a place where swine, cattle, sheep or
other animals are slaughtered, to remain unclean to the unnecessary annoyance
of the citizens of the City, or in any state or condition detrimental to the
public health, the same shall constitute a nuisance within the meaning of this
Chapter.
   E.   Water Pollution: The pollution of the waters of this City, as defined
in Utah Code Annotated section 19-5-102, shall constitute a nuisance within the
meaning of this Chapter.
   F.   Breeding Places For Flies And Disease Carrying Animals And Insects: To
maintain a condition within the City which unreasonably promotes through lack
of care and cleanliness, or encourages the breeding of flies, mosquitoes,
insects, rats or other form of animal life which may be disease carriers
constitutes a nuisance within the meaning of this Chapter.
   G.   Loud And Continuous Noises: To make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others, within the limits of the City shall constitute a nuisance within the
meaning of this Chapter. The following acts, when prolonged, unusual and
unnatural in their time, place and use, may be a detriment to the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity: horns, radios,
stereos, loudspeakers, yelling or shouting, exhausts, motor vehicles, drums or
musical instruments, construction equipment, commercial vehicles, large diesel
vehicles with refrigeration units, airplanes or blasting.
   H.   Construction And Concrete Work: Work shall not proceed on Saturday,
Sunday or on any legal holidays without prior approval from an authorized city
employee. Contractors with construction, demolition, or concrete requests
scheduled between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. shall submit an application to the City office and notify all residents
within a three hundred foot (300') radius of a scheduled work site no less than
forty eight (48) hours prior to proposed work request.
   I.   Garbage: Debris, dross, rubbish, or other garbage outside of garbage
cans or outside of bags shall constitute a nuisance within the meaning of this
Chapter. During the period of twenty four (24) hours preceding scheduled
collection of such debris, dross, rubbish or other garbage, they must be placed
at curbside within bags, cans or other receptacles, unless the trash material
is of such size and nature that it would not be practical to fully enclose it.
   J.   Nuisance Animals: The keeping of "Nuisance Animals" as that term is
defined in section
5-1-7 of this code shall constitute a nuisance within the meaning of this
Chapter.
   K.   Light Trespass: The allowance of Light Trespass to continue which
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others. Light Trespass means (1) any light emitted by an outdoor
luminaire that shines directly beyond the property on which the luminaire is
installed, or (2) indirectly shines beyond the property on which the luminaire
is installed at a brightness (illuminance) that exceeds one Lux at the property
line. Any directional luminaire facing a residential property line must be
shielded to a level that the illuminating source is not visible at the property
line.
   L.   Drug House: Every building or premises where the unlawful sale,
manufacture, service, storage, distribution, dispensing or acquisition of any
controlled substance, precursor or analog specified in Utah Code Annotated
title 57, chapter 37 (Utah controlled substances act) occurs. (Ord. 03-09-06,
3-9-2006; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2019.05, 9-5-2019; Ord. 2020.10, 5-14-2020; Ord.
2020.17, 11-12-2020; Ord. 2022.08, 8-3-2022)
4-1-3: MAINTENANCE OF NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to remain or be
maintained upon his premises any nuisance as in this chapter designated. (Ord.
03-09-06, 3-9-2006; amd. Ord. 2019.05, 9-5-2019)
4-1-4: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of a law enforcement official, a fire official, an animal
control officer and any other city officer charged or entrusted with the duty
of enforcing those laws intended to protect the public health, safety and well
being, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city, by and through its
agents, have authority within those areas, by themselves or by their agents, in
the daytime, to enter upon any lot or other premises, or any building or
structure, in order to inspect and examine the same for the purpose of
determining whether or not any conditions or nuisances exist which are
prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 03-09-06, 3-9-2006; amd. 2014 Code; Ord.
2019.05, 9-5-2019)
4-1-5: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice To Abate: The city may notify in writing the owner or occupant
of any property within the city upon which a nuisance may be found, or it may
notify such other person who causes or permits a nuisance to exist, advising
that there is a nuisance, describing the same, and requiring the nuisance to be
abated in a manner described in the notification within ten (10) days after
receipt thereof, unless some other time is specified therein. However, failure
to give notice as provided herein shall not relieve the author of a nuisance
from the obligation to abate such nuisance, or from the penalty provided herein
for the maintenance of that nuisance.
   B.   Refusal To Abate: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any person to
abate a nuisance after notice in writing has been given, the city is hereby
authorized and empowered to order the disposal of the nuisance or to pay for
the disposing of the same. When the city effects removal of a nuisance or pays
for such removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of
ten percent (10%) per annum from the date of the completion of the work, shall
be charged to the owner of the property on which the nuisance existed. The city
may cause a sworn statement to be recorded in the office of the county recorder
showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done,
and the location of the property on which the work was done. Such recordation
of sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in
full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus
collection costs, if any, until final payment has been made. A sworn statement
recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence
that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been
done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person
concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge
against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same
is due and collectible as provided by law. (Ord. 03-09-06, 3-9-2006; amd. Ord.
2019.05, 9-5-2019)
4-1-6: PENALTY:
Every nuisance shall be removed or abated as herein provided, and unless
otherwise provided, any person who shall be the author or keeper of a nuisance
or otherwise guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 03-09-06, 3-9-2006; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2019.05, 9-
5-2019)
CHAPTER 2
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
(Rep. by Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-2020)
CHAPTER 3
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Prohibitions
4-3-3: Exemption For Native American Ceremony
4-3-4: Signage Required
4-3-5: Enforcement By Proprietors
4-3-6: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
CITY: Toquerville City, a Utah municipal corporation.
CITY PARK: Means and includes City owned or managed parks, public squares, ball
diamonds, golf courses, soccer fields and other recreation areas, City owned
cemeteries and trails, but not designated smoking areas specified by the City.
MASS GATHERING: An outdoor assembly of one hundred (100) or more people on City
owned property that reasonably can be expected to continue for two (2) or more
hours.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCESS: Shall have the meaning set forth in Utah Code Annotated
section 26-38-2, as such section may be amended.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Shall have the same meaning set forth in Utah Code Annotated
section 26-38-2, as such section may be amended. (Ord. 2010.06, 9-9-2010; amd.
2014 Code)
4-3-2: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Specified: Smoking is hereby prohibited in:
      1.   All indoor places of public access, subject to all limitation set
forth in Utah Code Annotated section 26-38-1 et seq.;
      2.   All City parks;
      3.   Within one hundred feet (100') of bus stops; and within one hundred
feet (100') of mass gatherings;
      4.   Within one hundred feet (100') of any school, daycare, care facility
or place of worship.
   B.   Exceptions: Subsection A of this section does not apply to:
      1.   Areas not commonly open to the public of owner-operated businesses
having no employees other than the owner-operator;
      2.   Guestrooms in hotels, motels, dwellings permitted and being used for
nightly rental, and other similar lodging facilities, but smoking is prohibited
under subsection A of this section in the common areas of these facilities,
including dining areas and lobby areas. (Ord. 2018.06, 10-11-2018)
4-3-3: EXEMPTION FOR NATIVE AMERICAN CEREMONY:
A person is exempt from the restrictions of this chapter if the person:
   A.   Is a member of an American Indian/Alaska Native tribe whose members are
recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the
United States to American Indians/Alaska Natives who are members of those
tribes;
   B.   Is an American Indian/Alaska Native who actively practices an American
Indian/Alaska Native religion, the origin and interpretation of which is from a
traditional American Indian/Alaska Native culture;
   C.   Is smoking tobacco using the traditional pipe of an American Indian/
Alaska Native tribal religious ceremony, of which tribe the person is a member,
and is smoking the pipe as part of that ceremony; and
   D.   The ceremony is conducted by a pipe carrier, American Indian/Alaska
Native spiritual person, or medicine person recognized by the tribe of which
the person is a member and by the American Indian/Alaska Native community.
(Ord. 2010.06, 9-9-2010)
4-3-4: SIGNAGE REQUIRED:
"No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in all city parks.
(Ord. 2010.06, 9-9-2010)
4-3-5: ENFORCEMENT BY PROPRIETORS:
   A.   An owner or the agent or employee of the owner of an indoor place of
public access where smoking is prohibited under this chapter who observes a
person in possession of a lighted tobacco product in apparent violation of this
chapter shall request the person to cease smoking.
   B.   If the person fails to comply, the proprietor or the agent or employee
of the proprietor shall ask the person to leave the premises. (Ord. 2010.06, 9-
9-2010; amd. 2014 Code)
4-3-6: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter is subject to the maximum civil penalty set forth
in Utah Code Annotated section 26-38-8, as may be amended. (Ord. 2010.06, 9-9-
2010; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Defined
4-4-2: Conditional Use Permit Required
4-4-3: Application For Conditional Use Permit
4-4-1: DEFINED:
Offensive businesses, within the meaning of this chapter, shall include, but
not be limited to, packinghouses, dairies, tanneries, canneries, renderies,
junk or salvage yards, bone factories, slaughterhouses, butcher shops, soap
factories, foundries, breweries, distilleries, livery stables, blacksmith
shops, or any other enterprise or establishment which creates excessive odors,
fumes, smoke, gases or noises. (1977 Code § 10-241B)
4-4-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall commence or change the location of an offensive business or
establishment within the limits of the city without first obtaining a
conditional use permit and only if said use is specifically a permitted or
conditional use within the zoning district in which the business or
establishment is located. (1977 Code § 10-241A; amd. 2014 Code)
4-4-3: APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A conditional use permit for an offensive business shall be in compliance with
title 10, chapter 20 of this code. (1977 Code § 10-241C; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 5
LITTER; HANDBILLS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Handbills And Posters; Restricted Activity
4-5-3: Litter Regulations
4-5-4: Handbill Regulations
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE: A public or private litter storage and collection
receptacle.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:
   A.   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
   B.   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest in sales thereof;
   C.   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. However, the terms of this
subsection shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the
same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained
in this subsection shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking
place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this
state, or under any ordinance of the city; or
   D.   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
GARBAGE: Waste from the preparation, cooking or consumption of food, condemned
food products and all refuse and waste from the handling, storage, preparation
and sale of produce. Garbage originates primarily in kitchens, stores, markets,
restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled, stored, sold,
cooked and consumed.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety, welfare or appearance of the city.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general or local circulation or any periodical or
current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per
year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a "commercial handbill"
or "newspaper".
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, recreation center, trail, sidewalk,
right of way or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city.
REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks. (1977 Code § 10-431; amd. 2014 Code)
4-5-2: HANDBILLS AND POSTERS; RESTRICTED ACTIVITY:
No person or business shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise fix, or
cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card,
poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the
attention of the public, or upon any sidewalk, curb or any other portion or
part of any public way or public place or any lamppost, electric light,
telegraph, telephone or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or
upon the columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any
bridge or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture
of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be authorized
or required by the laws of the United States or state, and the ordinances of
the city. (1977 Code § 10-449A)
4-5-3: LITTER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Public Places: No person shall throw or deposit litter in or on any
street, sidewalk or other public place except:
      1.   In authorized receptacles for collection or in official city garbage
dumps; or
      2.   For collection as authorized by the city council. (1977 Code § 10-
432)
   B.   Placement In Receptacles: Persons placing litter in authorized
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on
private property. (1977 Code § 10-433)
   C.   Sweeping Into Gutters Prohibited: No person shall sweep into or deposit
in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway, except as
authorized by the city council. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep
the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (1977 Code § 10-434)
   D.   Merchants' Duty To Keep Sidewalks Clear: No person owning or occupying
a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
business shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of
litter. (1977 Code § 10-435)
   E.   Thrown By Person In Vehicle: No person, while a driver or passenger in
a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter on any street or other public place,
or on private property. (1977 Code § 10-436)
   F.   Loads Causing Litter: No person shall drive or move any truck or other
vehicle unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or other
public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other
public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any
kind. (1977 Code § 10-437)
   G.   Parks: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park, except in
authorized receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the park or on
any street or other public place. Where authorized receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein. (1977 Code § 10-438)
   H.   Lakes And Fountains: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any
fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere
within the city. (1977 Code § 10-439)
   I.   Occupied Private Property: No person shall throw or deposit litter on
any occupied private property, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on any private property. (1977 Code § 10-447)
   J.   Vacant Lots: No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or
vacant private property, whether or not owned by such person. (1977 Code § 10-
448)
4-5-4: HANDBILL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Throwing Or Distributing In Public Places; Penalty: No person shall
throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Unless otherwise
authorized by the city council, it is an infraction and, upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to hand out, distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not
be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place for any person to
hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (1977 Code § 10-440;
amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   Placing On Vehicles: Unless otherwise authorized by the city council,
no person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
on any vehicle; provided however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public
place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver
thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to
accept it. (1977 Code § 10-441)
   C.   Depositing On Uninhabited Or Vacant Premises: No person shall throw or
deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any private premises
which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (1977 Code § 10-
442)
   D.   Prohibiting Distribution Where Properly Posted: No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill on any private
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on
said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign being
the words "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers Or Agents", "No Advertisements", or
any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises
do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed or to
have any such handbills left on such premises. (1977 Code § 10-443)
   E.   Distributing At Inhabited Private Premises: No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on private
premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or on
such private premises. However, in case of inhabited private premises which are
not posted, as provided in this section, such person, unless requested by
anyone on such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in
or on such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or
deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted
about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except
that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or
regulations. (1977 Code § 10-444)
   F.   Exception For Mail And Newspapers: The provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers,
except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner so
as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on private property. (1977 Code § 10-445)
   G.   Posting Notice Prohibited: No person shall post or affix any notice,
poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the
public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or on any public
structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.
(1977 Code § 10-446)
CHAPTER 6
BURN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Adoption By Reference
4-6-2: Burn Permit Required And Application Process
4-6-3: Enforcement Authority
4-6-4: Penalties
4-6-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
   Washington County Code Title 4, Chapter 4 (Bum Permits) Sections 1 through
4, as currently adopted and as may be amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference and shall apply within the incorporated limits of
Toquerville City. All provisions, requirements, and procedures of Washington
County Code Title 4, Chapter 4 Sections 1 through 4, are enforceable as though
fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 2025.05, 6-4-2025)
4-6-2: BURN PERMIT REQUIRED AND APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A valid bum permit is required for all open burning within Toquerville City
limits. Bum permits must be submitted electronically through the Washington
County Interagency Bum Permit Management System, which is accessible via the
Toquerville City website.
   Availability is subject to daily review based on air quality, weather
conditions, and fire safety considerations. Permits may be denied or restricted
on any day due to environmental or public safety concerns.
   Trash, building materials, and field burns are strictly prohibited. A water
source must be present, and the fire must be attended and fully extinguished by
sundown.
   Burning without a valid permit or in violation of permit conditions may
result in civil and/or criminal penalties, including reimbursement for fire
suppression costs.
(Ord. 2025.05, 6-4-2025)
4-6-3: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by law enforcement officers
with jurisdiction in Toquerville City and the Hurricane Valley Fire District
Fire Marshal.
(Ord. 2025.05, 6-4-2025)
4-6-4: PENALTIES:
   Violations of this chapter shall be subject to the same penalties and
enforcement procedures as outlined in the applicable provisions of Washington
County Code Title 4, Chapter 4.
(Ord. 2025.05, 6-4-2025)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-1-1: Title
5-1-2: Purpose
5-1-3: Definitions
5-1-4: Care And Keeping Of Animals And Livestock
5-1-5: Unlawful Acts
5-1-6: Striking With Motor Vehicle
5-1-7: Nuisance Animals
5-1-8: Vicious Animals
5-1-9: Impounding
5-1-10: Court Order; Procedure
5-1-11: Civil Disputes
5-1-12: Penalty
5-1-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the TOQUERVILLE CITY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 2015.04, 6-11-2015)
5-1-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the City by regulating and governing the
keeping and controlling of animals in the City limits.
   B.   The Toquerville dog control ordinance is intended to govern and
regulate the keeping and controlling of dogs in the City limits. The provisions
of this chapter may be interpreted and used to supplement the Toquerville dog
control ordinance. However, in the event of any conflict or inconsistency
between this chapter and the Toquerville dog control ordinance with respect to
the keeping and controlling of dogs in the City limits, then the Toquerville
dog control ordinance shall govern and control. (Ord. 2015.04, 6-11-2015)
5-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
words shall mean:
ABANDONED: An animal whose owner cannot be immediately identified through
reasonable diligence.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The animal control officer or agents of the City
retained by hire or contract.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility owned and/or operated by a governmental entity or
any society incorporated in the State of Utah for the purpose of preventing
cruelty to animals and used for the care and custody of seized, stray,
homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other small domestic
animals.
AT LARGE: Any animal off the premises of the owner or custodian of the animal,
and not under immediate control of the owner or custodian.
EXOTIC ANIMALS: Any animal whose native habitat is not indigenous to the
continental United States, excluding Alaska, except tropical fish, fur-bearing
animals commercially bred for the furrier trade, and birds. Constrictor snakes
in excess of ten feet in length are defined as dangerous animals.
IMPOUNDED: Having been received into the custody of an animal control officer
for confinement in an animal shelter or into the custody of any authorized
agent or representative of the City.
QUARANTINE: The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the
animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
WILD ANIMAL: Any animal of a species that in its natural habitat is wild. (Ord.
2015.04, 6-11-2015; amd. Ord. 2020.12, 6-11-2020)
5-1-4: CARE AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS AND LIVESTOCK:
   A.   The keeping of livestock shall be a permitted use in the Agricultural
District or Zone. As specified in Section
10-10A-3 of this Code, the keeping of livestock shall be a conditional use on
lots within the Single-Family Residential Districts, provided the lot includes
a permitted single-family dwelling as defined in Section
10-2-1 of this Code. Vacant lots and lots improved with only temporary or
accessory structures shall not be used for keeping livestock.
   B.   For the keeping of chickens in the Single-Family Residential Districts,
the following standards shall apply:
      1.   Chickens may only be kept on lots that are twelve thousand (12,000)
square feet or larger.
      2.   No roosters in Single-Family Residential Districts.
      3.   No more than twenty (20) chickens may be kept on a qualifying lot.
      4.   Chickens shall be housed in a secure outdoor enclosure, equipped
with a covered, well-ventilated, and predator-resistant coop, pen, or cage.
This enclosure shall be restricted to the rear or backyard of the dwelling,
maintaining a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from any neighboring lot line.
The structure shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height or occupy an area
larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
      5.   All coops, pens, or cages, along with their surrounding areas, shall
be kept in a condition that prevents the excessive buildup of waste or debris,
or any conditions that could result in unpleasant odors, thereby ensuring the
health, safety, and comfort of adjoining properties.
   C.   For the keeping of livestock in the Single-Family Residential
Districts, a conditional use permit, with payment of required fees, must be
reviewed and approved by the city staff. A conditional use applicant
dissatisfied with the determination or interpretation by the city staff may
appeal that determination and/or interpretation of this Code to the Planning
Commission. Permits may be reviewed annually for Code compliance.
   D.   Number:
      1.   The number of domesticated animals which may be maintained on the
property shall be determined on the basis of point. No parcel of property shall
exceed one hundred (100) points per acre (or a fractional share thereof) based
on the following or a proportionate combination thereof, considering the size
of the parcel or set of parcels concerned (e.g., 0.25 acre x 100 = 25 animal
points). 1 Acre = 43,560 square feet. .5 acre = 21,780 square feet.
      2.   Type of animal or fowl/number of points per animal:
         a.   Cow (bovine), horse (equine), donkey, mule, or similar large
animal (25 points).
         b.   Miniature horses, ponies, goats, llamas, alpacas, and/or similar
medium size animals (12 points).
         c.   Ostriches or other similar large fowl (12 points).
         d.   Turkeys, geese, pheasants, and similar medium size fowl (4
points).
         e.   Ducks, pigeons, doves, or similar small fowl (3 points).
         f.   Rabbits or similar small domesticated or farm animals (3 points).
         g.   For animals not specified above, the Planning Commission shall
determine the type and number of points per animal. A property owner
dissatisfied with the determination or interpretation of the Planning
Commission may appeal that determination and/or interpretation of this Code to
the appeal authority in accordance with the procedures and provisions of
chapter 4 of this title.
      3.   The unweaned offspring of a residing animal or fowl, under six (6)
months of age, shall be excluded from consideration for the purpose of
determining compliance with this section.
      4.   Residential Beekeeping shall be limited to not more than three (3)
hives and in accordance with the Utah Bee Inspection Act set forth in Title 4,
Chapter 11 of the Utah Code, as amended. Beehives are to be kept in side or
rear yard and at least ten (10) feet away from any adjoining property line.
      5.   For residentially zoned properties (one or more adjacent lots under
the same ownership or tenancy and referring to usable acreage vs. deeded
acreage):
         a.   That are less than one-half (1/2) acre in size, no large or
medium size animals or large or medium sized fowl shall be allowed.
         b.   That are ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size, or smaller, a
maximum number of animals and/or fowl equivalent to a total of twelve (12)
points under the terms of this section are allowed, subject to the following:
            (1)   No medium size animals or medium sized fowl shall be allowed
on the property; and
            (2)   No animals other than household pets shall be allowed on
properties that are six thousand (6,000) square feet or smaller in size.
      6.   The following animals may not be maintained on the property: exotic
animals, wild animals, dangerous animals, pigs (porcine), mink, and peacocks.
      7.   Adequate containment of the animal(s) shall be provided by the
applicant.
      8.   Manure shall be cleaned at least weekly and odors shall be
controlled.
      9.   In Agricultural Zones roosters and peafowl are allowed.
(Ord. 2017.11, 9-7-2017; amd. Ord. 2020.12, 6-11-2020; Ord. 2024.11, 7-17-2024;
Ord. 2025.06, 6-18-2025)
5-1-5: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful:
   A.   Interference With Officer: For any person, after verbal warning, to
intentionally interfere with, molest, hinder or obstruct any peace officer or
any animal control officer in the lawful discharge of their duties as herein
prescribed.
   B.   Animals At Large:
      1.   For the owner or custodian of any animal, other than domestic cats,
to allow such animals at any time to run at large. The owner or person charged
with responsibility for an animal found running at large shall be strictly
liable for a violation of this subsection, regardless of the precautions taken
to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of whether or not they know
that the animal is running at large.
      2.   For cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats or swine to be allowed to
run at large, or to be picketed or staked out upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the limits of this city, and all such animals so
found may be impounded.
   C.   Animals On Unenclosed Premises: For any person to chain, stake out or
tether any animal on any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal
may go beyond the property line unless such person has permission of the owner
of the affected property.
   D.   Retaking Animal: For anyone to take any animal out of the possession of
anyone lawfully holding the same under the provisions of this chapter, either
by stealth, force, fraud or to intercept or hinder any person lawfully taking
up or attempting to take up such animals.
   E.   Disposal Of Waste: For the owner or custodian of an animal to permit
the animal to defecate upon a public street, sidewalk, park or other area, or
upon the property of another unless the owner or custodian promptly removes and
properly disposes of all animal waste that results.
   F.   Abandonment: For any person to abandon or turn out at large any sick,
diseased or disabled animal, but such animal shall, when rendered useless by
reason of sickness or other disability, be killed by the owner thereof and its
carcass disposed of in such manner as to create no nuisance or hazard to
health.
   G.   Trespassing Animals And Fowl: For any owner or caretaker of any
domestic fowl or animal to permit such fowl or animal to trespass upon the
premises of another person.
   H.   Killing Or Poisoning: For any person willfully to kill any domestic
animal not belonging to them, or to administer poison to any such animal or to
expose any poisonous substance with the intent that it shall be taken by any
such animal.
   I.   Dead Animals; Disposal: For the owner of any animal or fowl that has
died or been killed to fail to remove or bury the carcass of such animal within
ten (10) hours after its death. No horse, cow, ox or other animal shall be
buried within the closely inhabited portions of this city. A violation of this
subsection is an infraction.
   J.   Diseased Animals:
      1.   For any person to bring into the city for sale or have in his
possession with intent to sell or offer for sale, any animal which has a
communicable disease or which has been exposed to or which is liable to carry
infection from a communicable disease.
      2.   For any person to bring into the city for sale or to sell, or offer
for sale, any cattle, sheep, swine, fish, game, fowl or poultry which is
diseased, unsound, and unwholesome or which for any other reason is unfit for
human food.
   K.   Mistreating: For any person to overdrive, overload, drive when
overloaded, overwork, torture, cruelly beat, mutilate or needlessly kill, or
carry or transport in any vehicle or other conveyance in a cruel or inhuman
manner, any animal or cause any of these acts to be done. Any person who does
so, directly or indirectly, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
   L.   Fail To Provide Sustenance And Protection: For any person to fail to
provide any animal in his charge or custody with necessary sustenance, drink
and protection from the elements, or cause any of these acts to be done. Any
person who does so, directly or indirectly, shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
   M.   Cruelty: For any person to engage or take part in any act or behavior
considered cruelty to animals, or to cause any such act or behavior to be done.
Cruelty to animals shall consist of those acts designated in Utah Code
Annotated section 76-9-301, together with injurious hobbling and malicious
impounding. Any person who does so, directly or indirectly, shall be guilty of
a crime as classified in Utah Code Annotated section 76-9-301.
   N.   Intentional Exhibition: For any person to intentionally exhibit any
stud, horse or bull or other animal indecently, or let any male animal to any
female animal for the purpose of providing entertainment or viewing to any
person.
   O.   Wild Animals: For any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, give
away, keep or purchase any wild animal which is not domesticated, or an animal
belonging to an endangered species, except for the animal shelter, a zoological
park, veterinary hospital, circus, sideshow, amusement show or facility for
education or scientific purposes if protective devices adequate to prevent such
animal from escaping or injuring the public are provided.
   P.   Vicious Animals: For any person to own and possess a vicious animal, as
defined in Section
5-1-8  of this chapter.
   Q.   Exhibition Fighting:
      1.   For any person to maintain any place where fowl or any animals are
suffered to fight upon exhibition or for sport upon any wager. Any person who
does so, directly or indirectly, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
      2.   For any person to raise, keep or use any animal, fowl or bird for
the purpose of fighting or baiting; and for any person to be a party to or to
be present as a spectator at any such fighting or baiting of any animal or
fowl. Any person who does so, directly or indirectly, shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor.
      3.   Law enforcement officers or animal control officials may enter any
building or place where there is an exhibition of the fighting or baiting of
live animals, or where preparations are being made for such an exhibition. The
law enforcement officers may arrest persons there present and take possession
of all animals engaged in fighting, along with all implements or applications
used in such an exhibition. This provision shall not be interpreted to
authorize search or arrest without a warrant when such is required by law.
(Ord. 2015.04, 6-11-2015; amd. Ord. 2020.12, 6-11-2020)
5-1-6: STRIKING WITH MOTOR VEHICLE:
The operator of a motor vehicle that strikes and injures any domestic animal
shall immediately stop and give such aid as can reasonably be rendered. In the
absence of the owner, he shall also immediately notify an animal control
officer or law enforcement officer, furnishing requested facts relative to the
incident. Emergency vehicles operating in accordance with or responding to an
emergency are exempted from the requirements of this provision. (Ord. 2015.04,
6-11-2015)
5-1-7: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
   A.   Specified: Any owner or custodian of an animal causing a "nuisance", as
defined below, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the
penalties provided herein. An animal creates a "nuisance" if it:
      1.   Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner;
      2.   Is a vicious animal not in compliance with section
5-1-8 of this chapter;
      3.   Causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors;
      4.   Causes continuous unsanitary conditions in enclosures or
surroundings;
      5.   Makes disturbing noises in excessive, continuous or untimely
fashion; persons making a complaint must sign the summons against the violator
before the city will act;
      6.   Molests passersby;
      7.   Chases passing vehicles;
      8.   Attacks other domestic animals;
      9.   Is otherwise determined by the city to be a public nuisance by
virtue of being offensive or dangerous to the public health, welfare or safety;
      10.   Any animals kept in violation of section
5-1-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Nuisance Birds: It shall be lawful for any person to take or kill birds
deemed pests and that are legal to kill by statute of the state of Utah,
including, but not limited to, starlings, sparrows, Eurasian collared doves,
etc. (Ord. 2015.04, 6-11-2015)
5-1-8: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
Every animal so vicious and dangerous that it cannot be reasonably controlled
shall be considered a hazard to the public safety, and the animal control
officer may impound the animal and shall seek a court order for destruction of
the animal. An animal impounded pursuant to this section may not be redeemed,
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, while awaiting final decision as to
the disposition to be made of the animal. (Ord. 2015.04, 6-11-2015)
5-1-9: IMPOUNDING:
   A.   Shelter: The city and/or the animal control officer may provide
suitable premises and facilities to be used as an animal shelter where
impounded animals can be adequately kept and supplied with food and humane
care. It shall provide for the painless and humane destruction of animals where
necessary, or it may furnish medical treatment for impounded animals and is
empowered to charge the owner of the animal for this service.
   B.   Conditions Necessitating Impounding Without Complaint: The animal
control officer is empowered to place all animals which he takes into custody
in a designated animal impound facility. The following animals may be taken
into custody by an animal control officer and impounded without the filing of a
complaint:
      1.   Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of
this chapter;
      2.   Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this
chapter;
      3.   Any abandoned animal;
      4.   Any vicious animal;
      5.   Any sick or injured animal whose owner cannot be located; and
      6.   Any animal to be held for quarantine.
   C.   Information Maintained: The impounding facility shall keep a record of
any animal impounded and permanent impound records, which include the following
information:
      1.   Complete description of the animal;
      2.   The manner and date of impound;
      3.   The location of the pick up and name of the officer picking up the
animal;
      4.   The manner and date of disposal;
      5.   The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser;
      6.   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the
impound facility;
      7.   All fees received; and
      8.   All expenses accruing during impoundment.
   D.   Disposition: Animals shall be impounded for a minimum of seventy two
(72) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, before further disposition, unless
relinquished by the owner or custodian for the express purpose of destruction.
Reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner of any animal wearing a
license or other identification during that time. Notice shall be deemed given
when sent to the last known address of the listed owner.
   E.   Destruction: Any animal, except for those quarantined or confined by
court order, held longer than the minimum impound period, and any animal
voluntarily relinquished to the impound facility, may be destroyed or sold as
the animal control officer shall direct. Any licensed animal impounded and
having or suspected of having serious physical injury or contagious disease
requiring medical attention, may, without waiting the minimum impound period,
in the discretion of the animal control officer, be released to the care of a
veterinarian or destroyed for humane reasons, provided consent be obtained in
advance from the owner or custodian, if known and available.
   F.   Redemption: The owner of any impounded animal or his authorized
representative may redeem such animal before disposition as provided in
subsection E of this section, provided he pays:
      1.   The impound fee;
      2.   The daily board charges;
      3.   Veterinary costs incurred during the impound period, including
rabies vaccination;
      4.   License fee, if required.
   G.   Fees For Impound: Impound fees shall be established by the city
council. (Ord. 2015.04, 6-11-2015)
5-1-10: COURT ORDER; PROCEDURE:
Court orders shall be filed according to the following minimum notice and
procedure:
   A.   Petition For Action: The animal control officer shall petition the
court for the desired action.
   B.   Service: The petition for the action, together with supporting
affidavits, shall be served on the party against whom the action is taken at
least five (5) days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 2015.04, 6-11-2015)
5-1-11: CIVIL DISPUTES:
Any emergency incident relating to animals, and where such incident is not
reported within five (5) calendar days constitutes a civil dispute. Neither the
city nor its employees shall become involved in disputes arising between
persons because of damages caused by animals. Should any dispute arise from a
violation of this chapter, and if the animal control officer responds, the
limit of the city's responsibility is to provide testimony by order of a
subpoena as to what was personally observed and make public records available.
Any settlement or claims for damages are strictly a civil matter and must be
pursued by the damaged party. (Ord. 2015.04, 6-11-2015)
5-1-12: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, either by failing to do those
acts required herein or by doing any act prohibited herein shall be considered
an infraction of the law and subject to court fines unless otherwise stated in
this chapter. (Ord. 2015.04, 6-11-2015)
CHAPTER 2
CRIMES AND OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Criminal Code Adopted By Reference
5-2-1: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, penalties,
provisions and sections of the Utah criminal code, Utah Code Annotated title
76, as amended, with a corresponding penalty of infraction, class C misdemeanor
or class B misdemeanor, are hereby adopted by the city. Any and all violations
thereof shall be considered violations of this section and each such violation
shall be subject to the penalties provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2014 Code)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS; CURFEW
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Curfew Established
5-3-3: Exceptions
5-3-4: Aiding Minor To Violate Curfew
5-3-5: Business Liability
5-3-6: Enforcement And Parental Responsibility
5-3-7: Penalty
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CARE AND CUSTODY: The legal authority of a parent or guardian to supervise or
otherwise be responsible for a minor, or the express authority given from such
parent or legal guardian of a minor to a responsible adult to supervise or
otherwise be responsible for the activities and care of the minor.
EMERGENCY ERRAND: Any errand or travel undertaken to directly seek to prevent
or reduce the consequences of an illness or injury, potential criminal
activity, or fire or other accident, seeking aid and assistance from medical or
emergency personnel; or the purchase of needed medications.
MINOR: Any unmarried, unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed
forces of the United States and who is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
PUBLIC PLACES: Any place open to the public, whether privately owned,
including, but not limited to, parking lots and the interiors and exteriors of
commercial establishments, such as restaurants, stores or places of
entertainment. (Ord. 2009.08, 8-13-2009, eff. 8-13-2009)
5-3-2: CURFEW ESTABLISHED:
Minor curfew is established to prevent the unlawful loitering of any minor
under the age of eighteen (18) years on sidewalks, streets, roads or public
places within city boundaries, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., Sunday through Saturday. (Ord. 2009.08,
8-13-2009, eff. 8-13-2009; amd. 2014 Code)
5-3-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of curfew violation shall not apply to any circumstance in which
the minor is:
   A.   Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other responsible adult having
care and custody of such minor.
   B.   Engaged in legitimate work, employment or occupation which requires the
minor's presence in or on the places or times restricted during the curfew
hours.
   C.   Engaged on an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent, guardian
or other responsible person having care and custody.
   D.   In a motor vehicle engaged in normal travel beginning in, traveling
through or ending in the city.
   E.   Attending or engaged in travel between minor's home or place of
residence and a place where any religious, municipal, social, entertainment,
sporting, political, library or school function is occurring.
   F.   Within the boundaries of the minor's place of residence. (Ord. 2009.08,
8-13-2009, eff. 8-13-2009)
5-3-4: AIDING MINOR TO VIOLATE CURFEW:
It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor
to violate the provisions of this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to use
any influence or otherwise to entice or persuade any minor from his or her
parents, guardians or other persons having charge or custody of such minor
without the consent of such parents, guardians or custodians. (Ord. 2009.08, 8-
13-2009, eff. 8-13-2009)
5-3-5: BUSINESS LIABILITY:
No person owning or operating a business shall knowingly permit any minor to
remain on the premises of such business in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, unless the minor is lawfully employed by the owner. (Ord. 2009.08, 8-
13-2009, eff. 8-13-2009)
5-3-6: ENFORCEMENT AND PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Arrest And Citation: Any minor who is in violation of the provisions of
this chapter is subject to arrest and citation, under the guidelines of the
Washington County sheriff's department.
   B.   Permitting Violation: It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or
other person having care and custody of any minor to knowingly allow or permit
the minor to violate the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Return To Custody Of Parent: Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned
to the custody of the parent, guardian or other person charged with the care
and custody of the minor.
   D.   Refusal To Take Custody: It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian
or other person charged with the care and custody of a minor who is in
violation of this chapter to knowingly refuse to appear and take custody of
said minor within a reasonable time after being ordered to do so by a peace
officer. (Ord. 2009.08, 8-13-2009, eff. 8-13-2009)
5-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class C
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2009.08, 8-13-2009, eff. 8-13-2009; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 4
DOG CONTROL
SECTION:
5-4-1: Title
5-4-2: Definitions
5-4-3: Animal Control Officials
5-4-4: Dog License
5-4-5: Impounding
5-4-6: Dogs Attacking Persons And Animals
5-4-7: Vicious Dogs
5-4-8: Nuisance Dogs
5-4-9: Disruptive Dogs
5-4-10: Female Dogs In Heat
5-4-11: Unlawful Acts
5-4-12: Court Order; Procedure
5-4-13: Civil Disputes
5-4-14: Penalty
5-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the TOQUERVILLE DOG CONTROL ORDINANCE. (Ord.
2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section (words in the singular number include the
plural, and those in the plural include the singular):
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The animal control officer or agents of the city
retained by hire or contract.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner
or a member of his immediate family either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.
IMPOUND: The picking up or the taking into the control or the possession of any
animal by the animal control officer.
UNLICENSED DOG: A dog for which the license for the current year has not been
paid, or to which the tag provided for in this chapter is not attached. (Ord.
2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-3: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICIALS:
   A.   Powers:
      1.   Enforce Chapter: The animal control officer or any person employed
by the city as an animal control officer shall take the oath of office and
shall be vested with the power and authority to enforce this chapter.
      2.   Apprehend And Impound: The animal control officer is authorized and
empowered to apprehend and impound any dog found in violation of this chapter
and including licensable dogs for which no license has been procured in
accordance with this chapter, or any licensed or unlicensed dogs for any other
violation hereof.
      3.   Enter Onto Premises: In the enforcement of this chapter, any peace
officer and/or animal control officer is authorized to enter onto open
premises, excluding dwellings, of any person, to take possession of any dog in
violation of this chapter. Any peace officer, and animal control officer, when
in the company of a peace officer or animal control officer, when there is
probable cause, may enter onto open premises to investigate any violation of
this chapter.
      4.   Issue Citations: A peace officer or the animal control officer is
empowered to issue citations in regard to acts in violation of this chapter.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Any peace officer or animal control officer shall:
         a.   Enforce this chapter and perform other responsibilities pursuant
thereto;
         b.   Supervise the city animal shelter under their jurisdiction;
         c.   Keep adequate records of all animals impounded and all monies
collected;
         d.   See that all dogs and animal holding facilities in their
jurisdiction are licensed, controlled and permitted in accordance with any
applicable ordinance and/or regulations.
      2.   Animal control officers shall:
         a.   Enforce this chapter in all respects pertaining to dog control
within the jurisdiction, including the care and impounding of dogs and
prevention of cruelty to animals.
         b.   Carry out all duties prescribed or delegated by city
administration. (Ord. 2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-4: DOG LICENSE:
   A.   Required: All dogs must be licensed each year.
   B.   Time Limit To Obtain: Any person owning, possessing or harboring any
dog shall obtain a license for such animal within thirty (30) days after the
dog reaches the age of six (6) months, or in the case of a dog over six (6)
months, within five (5) days of acquisition of the dog.
   C.   Application: License application must be submitted annually to the city
office, utilizing a standard form which requests the name, address, telephone
number of applicant; breed, sex, color and age of dog; and rabies information.
The application shall be accompanied by the prescribed license fee and by
current rabies vaccination certificate. Rabies vaccination shall be current and
given by a licensed veterinarian.
   D.   Fees: License fees shall be due and payable at the time of submitting
the license application required in this section. The fees shall be as
established and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city
council.
   E.   Effective Date: The license shall be effective from the date of
purchase through the end of December of the same calendar year. The new license
must be purchased between January 1 and the end of February, after which a late
fee shall be imposed.
   F.   Kennels: Any person owning, possessing, maintaining or caring for four
(4) or more dogs and/or cats over the age of four (4) months shall constitute
operation of a kennel and shall be required to pay the kennel license fee. Any
person having two (2) or more dogs and/or cats for the purpose of breeding and
selling pedigreed offspring shall constitute operating a kennel and shall pay
the required kennel fee, which is as established and as may be amended from
time to time by resolution of the city council. Any person having over five (5)
dogs and/or cats shall constitute boarding and shall not be permitted in
residential zones, nor within two hundred feet (200') of residential zones.
(Ord. 2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-5: IMPOUNDING:
   A.   Subjected Animals: The animal control officer shall place all dogs
which are taken into custody in a designated animal impound facility. The
following dogs may be impounded and taken into custody by the animal control
officer without the filing of a complaint:
      1.   Any dog being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.
      2.   Any dog running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Any dog which is by this chapter required to be licensed and is not
licensed; any dog not wearing a tag shall be presumed to be unlicensed for
purposes of this section.
      4.   Any sick or injured dog whose owner cannot be located.
      5.   Any abandoned dog.
      6.   Dogs which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
      7.   Any dog to be held for quarantine.
      8.   Any vicious dog not properly confined.
      9.   Any dog not having proof of rabies vaccination which bites a person
shall be impounded and quarantined for a period of not less than ten (10) days.
   B.   Disposition Of Dogs:
      1.   Dogs shall be impounded for a minimum of seventy two (72) hours,
excluding weekends and holidays, before further disposition, except as
otherwise provided herein. Reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner
of any dog wearing a license or other identification during that time. Notice
shall be deemed given when sent to the last known address of the listed owner.
Any dog voluntarily relinquished to the animal control facility by the owner
thereof for destruction or other disposition need not be kept for the minimum
holding period before release or other disposition as herein provided.
      2.   All dogs, except for those quarantined or confined by court order,
held longer than the minimum impound period and all dogs voluntarily
relinquished to the impound facility may be destroyed or sold as the animal
control officer shall direct. Any healthy dog may be sold to any persons
desiring to purchase such animal for a price to be determined by the animal
control officer, plus license and rabies vaccination if required.
      3.   Any licensed or unlicensed dog impounded and having or suspected of
having serious physical injury or contagious disease requiring medical
attention may, at the discretion of the animal control officer, be released to
the care of a veterinarian with owner consent or, in the event the owner is not
known because of no tags or licenses, be destroyed.
      4.   When, in the judgment of the animal control officer, it is
determined that a dog should be destroyed for humane reasons or to protect the
public from imminent danger to persons or property, such animal may be
destroyed without court order and without permission of the owner.
   C.   Redemption:
      1.   The owner of any impounded dog or their authorized representative
may redeem such animal before disposition, provided they pay:
         a.   The impound fees.
         b.   The daily board charge.
         c.   The veterinary costs incurred during the impound period,
including rabies vaccination.
         d.   License fees, if required.
      2.   No impound fee will be charged to the reporting owners of suspected
rabid animals.
   D.   Records Maintained: The impounding facility shall keep a record of each
animal impounded and permanent impound records, which include the following
information:
      1.   Complete description of the animal, including tag numbers.
      2.   The manner and date of impound.
      3.   The location of pick up and name of person picking up the animal.
      4.   The manner and date of disposal.
      5.   The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser.
      6.   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the
impound facility.
      7.   All fees received.
      8.   All expenses accruing during impoundment. (Ord. 2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-6: DOGS ATTACKING PERSONS AND ANIMALS:
   A.   Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having charge,
care, custody or control of any dog to allow such dog to attack, chase or worry
any person, domestic animal or any species of hoofed, protected wildlife, or to
attack domestic fowl.
   B.   Owner Liability: The owner in violation of subsection A of this section
shall be strictly liable for violation of this section. In addition to being
subject to prosecution under subsection A of this section, the owner of such
dog shall also be liable for damages to any person injured or to the owner of
any animal injured or destroyed thereby.
   C.   Defenses: The following shall be considered in mitigating the penalties
or damages, or in dismissing the charge:
      1.   That the dog was properly confined on the premises.
      2.   That the dog was deliberately or maliciously provoked.
   D.   Dog May Be Killed: Any public safety officer person may kill a dog
while it is committing any of the acts specified in subsection A of this
section or while such dog is being pursued thereafter, pursuant to Utah Code
Annotated section 18-1-3.
   E.   Destruction Of Animal: Upon trial of any offense under this section, or
upon failure to appear after citation, the court may, after attempting to
notify the animal's owner, order the animal control officer or other authorized
person of the city, to destroy the animal, or may order such other disposition
of the animal, as will protect the inhabitants and animals of the city. (Ord.
2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-7: VICIOUS DOGS:
   A.   Court Order For Destruction: Every dog so vicious and dangerous that it
cannot be controlled by reasonable restraints, and every dangerous and vicious
dog not effectively controlled by its owner or person having charge, care or
control of such dog, so that it shall not injure any person or property, is a
hazard to public safety and the animal control officer shall seek a court order
for destruction of the dog. If any dog attacks or bites a person or animal two
(2) times or more in a twelve (12) month period, such dog may be immediately
impounded by the animal control officer without court order and held at owner
expense pending court action. Any such dog shall be deemed a vicious animal and
the animal control officer shall seek a court order for destruction of the dog.
Parties owning such dogs shall, if possible, be notified immediately of the
dog's location by the animal control officer. This section shall not limit any
other section in this chapter.
   B.   Ownership Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog
that bites a person or domestic animal without provocation, or to own a dog
that has a known propensity to attack or bite human beings or domestic animals
without provocation. (This shall not prohibit ownership of particular breeds of
dogs, but is meant only to apply to individual dogs who have such a
propensity.) After a dog bites a person or domestic animal, the animal control
officer may impound the dog, which may not be redeemed while awaiting final
decision of the court as to the disposition to be made of the dog. (Ord.
2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-8: NUISANCE DOGS:
   A.   Defined: Any owner or person having charge, custody or control of, or
caring for or feeding a dog causing a "nuisance", as defined below, shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided herein. Any dog
falling under one or more of the following shall be deemed a nuisance. Any dog
which:
      1.   Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner;
      2.   Is a "vicious animal", as defined herein;
      3.   Causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors;
      4.   Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings;
      5.   Defecates on any public sidewalk, park or building, or on any
private property without the consent of the owner of such private property,
unless the person owning, having a proprietary interest in, harboring or having
care, charge, control, custody or possession of such dog shall remove any such
defecation to a proper trash receptacle;
      6.   Barks, whines or howls or makes other disturbing noises in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion; persons making a complaint must sign
the summons against the violator which will subsequently be delivered by the
animal control officer;
      7.   Molests passersby by barking, snapping, pawing, clawing, biting or
growling;
      8.   Chases passing vehicles;
      9.   Attacks other domestic animals;
      10.   Is determined by the department of public safety to be a public
nuisance by virtue of being offensive or dangerous to the public health,
welfare or safety;
      11.   Is "boarding", as defined herein, in or within two hundred feet
(200') of a residential zone.
   B.   Citation; Remedy: Nuisances will be cited pursuant to the violation
section of the city's fee schedule. Persons cited shall have five (5) days to
remedy the nuisance. If the nuisance continues for more than five (5) days,
each day of continuance will constitute a separate offense and may be cited as
additional violations. (Ord. 2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-9: DISRUPTIVE DOGS:
No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog which by loud, continued or
frequent barking, howling or yelping endangers the health and welfare of any
person or neighborhood. A violation of this section shall be an infraction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and such is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and each day
a violation is permitted to exist or continue shall constitute a separate
offense. This section shall not apply to the city dog pound, veterinary
hospitals or medical laboratories. (Ord. 2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-10: FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT:
Any owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of any female dog
in heat shall, in addition to restraining such dog from running at large, cause
such dog to be constantly confined in a building or secure enclosure so as to
prevent it from coming into contact with other dogs, except for planned
breeding. (Ord. 2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-11: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful:
   A.   Interference With Officer: For any person, after verbal warning, to
intentionally interfere with, molest, hinder or obstruct any peace officer or
any animal control officer in the lawful discharge of their duties as herein
prescribed.
   B.   Running At Large: For the owner or person having charge, care, custody
or control of any dog to allow such animals at any time to run at large. Any
dog at large shall be in violation of this subsection regardless of the
precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal and to prohibit it from
running at large.
   C.   Retaking Animal: For anyone to take any animal out of the possession of
anyone lawfully holding the same under the provisions of this chapter, either
by stealth, force, fraud or to intercept or hinder any person lawfully taking
up or attempting to take up such animals.
   D.   Abandonment: For any person to abandon or turn out at large any sick,
diseased or disabled dog, but such dog shall, when rendered useless by reason
of sickness or other disability, be humanely destroyed by the owner thereof and
its carcass disposed of in such manner as to create no nuisance or hazard to
health.
   E.   Harbor Stray Dogs: For any person to harbor or keep any lost or strayed
dog. Whenever any dog shall be found which appears to be lost or strayed, it
shall be the duty of the finder to notify the animal control officer within
twenty four (24) hours, and the department shall impound the dog as herein
provided.
   F.   Unenclosed Premises: For any person to chain, stake out or tether any
dog on any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the dog may go beyond the
property line, unless such person has permission of the owner of the affected
property.
   G.   Killing Or Poisoning: For any person wilfully to kill any domestic dog
not belonging to them, or to cruelly kill or administer poison to any dog or to
expose any poisonous substance with the intent that it shall be taken by any
such dog. Any person who does so, directly or indirectly, shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor.
   H.   Mistreating: For any person to overdrive, overload, drive when
overloaded, overwork, torture, cruelly beat, mutilate or needlessly kill, or
carry or transport in any vehicle or other conveyance in a cruel or inhuman
manner, any dog or cause any of these acts to be done. Any person who does so,
directly or indirectly, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
   I.   Fail To Provide Sustenance And Protection: For any person to fail to
provide any animal in his charge or custody with necessary sustenance, drink
and protection from the elements, or cause any of these acts to be done. Any
person who does so, directly or indirectly, shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
   J.   Intentional Exhibition: For any person to intentionally exhibit any dog
indecently, or let any male dog to any female animal for the purpose of
providing entertainment or viewing to any person. Any person who does so,
directly or indirectly, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord.
2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-12: COURT ORDER; PROCEDURE:
Court orders shall be filed according to the following minimum notice and
procedure:
   A.   Petition For Action: The animal control officer shall petition the
court for the desired action.
   B.   Service: The petition for the action, together with supporting
affidavits, shall be served on the party against whom the action is taken at
least five (5) days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 2015.03, 6-11-2015)
5-4-13: CIVIL DISPUTES:
Any emergency incident relating to dogs attacking persons or livestock, and
where such incident is not reported within five (5) calendar days constitutes a
civil dispute. Neither the city nor its employees shall become involved in
disputes arising between persons because of damages caused by animals. Should
any dispute arise from a violation of this chapter, and if the animal control
officer responds, the limit of the city's responsibility is to provide
testimony by order of a subpoena as to what was personally observed and make
public records available. Any settlement or claims for damages are strictly a
civil matter and must be pursued by the damaged party. (Ord. 2015.03, 6-11-
2015)
5-4-14: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, either by failing to do those
acts required herein or by doing any act prohibited herein shall be considered
an infraction of the law and subject to court fines unless otherwise stated in
this chapter. (Ord. 2015.03, 6-11-2015)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE
SECTION:
6-1-1: Traffic Code Adopted By Reference
6-1-2: Definitions
6-1-3: Prima Facie Speed; Posted Streets
6-1-4: Dynamic Braking Devices
6-1-5: Driving Animals On Streets
6-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, penalties,
provisions and sections of Utah Code Annotated, Title 41, as amended ("Title
41"), with a corresponding penalty of infraction, class C misdemeanor or class
B misdemeanor, are hereby adopted by the City. Any and all violations thereof
shall be considered violations of this Title and each such violation shall be
subject to the penalties provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2014 Code; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
CAMPING: Has the meaning provided in Section
10-2-1 of this Code.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Has the meaning provided in Utah Code Annotated Section 72-
9-102(1), as it may be amended.
PERSON: An individual, an association, an institution, a corporation, a
company, a trust; a limited liability company; a partnership, or any other
organization or entity.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of any
nature when any part of it is conveyed or dedicated to the use of the public as
a matter of right for vehicular travel.
Terms not defined in this Title shall have the meaning provided in the Title
41, as applicable. (Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-1-3: PRIMA FACIE SPEED; POSTED STREETS:
   A.   When appropriate traffic control or regulatory signs giving notice of
speeds are posted, the prima facie maximum speed limits designated upon said
streets shall apply to the appropriate streets or portions of streets so
posted.
   B.   In the absence of any speed limit sign designating a speed limit
applicable thereto, the prima facie speed limit shall be thirty five (35) miles
per hour. (1977 Code § 11-323; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-1-4: DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICES:
   A.   Declaration Of Policy: It is declared to be the policy of the City to
prohibit the making of excessive, unnecessary loud noises which are unnatural
in their place and use and are detrimental to the public health, comfort,
welfare and peace and quiet of the residents of the City.
   B.   Defined: "Dynamic braking device" (commonly referred to as "jake
brake") means a device used primarily on trucks for the conversions of the
engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose
of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
   C.   Use Prohibited: No person shall operate or permit the operation of any
motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged within the boundaries of
the City, except to avert imminent danger. The emitting of any compression
noise shall be prima facie evidence of the use of engine compression.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(Ord. 10-14-97-A, 3-12-1997; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-1-5: DRIVING ANIMALS ON STREETS:
   A.   Every person who drives any herd of sheep or band of horses, cattle or
other animals upon any public street or highway without first obtaining a
permit from the City so to do is guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   No person shall drive livestock through the City upon streets not
designated for that purpose except upon permission and according to the
direction of the City. (1977 Code § 11-331; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING AND SIDEWALK SAFETY
SECTION:
6-2-1: Stopping Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
6-2-2: Alley Parking
6-2-3: Parking Prohibitions And Time Limits
6-2-4: Parking Contiguous To Schools
6-2-5: Narrow Street Or Alley Parking
6-2-6: Standing And Parking On One-Way Roadway
6-2-7: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
6-2-8: Camping Restrictions
6-2-9: Handicapped Parking Zones
6-2-10: Parking In Fire Lanes
6-2-11: Lights On Parked Vehicles
6-2-12: Approach To Parking Space
6-2-13: Unattended Vehicle; Duty Of Driver
6-2-14: Exceptions For Disabled Vehicles
6-2-15: Parking Of Bicycles And Other Nonmotorized Vehicles
6-2-16: Parking For Display Prohibited
6-2-17: Traffic Control Devices And Markings
6-2-18: Authority To Move Vehicle
6-2-19: Obstructions In Streets
6-2-20: Public Sidewalk And Parking Area Regulations
6-2-21: Penalty
6-2-1: STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether attended or
unattended:
      1.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
      2.   On a sidewalk;
      3.   Within an intersection;
      4.   On a crosswalk;
      5.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
      6.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      7.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway, or
within a highway tunnel;
      8.   Upon a roadway in such a way so as to obstruct the free passage of
other vehicles;
      9.   Upon a roadway in such a way that a clear view of the parked vehicle
is not visible within two hundred feet (200) in each travel direction of the
roadway;
      10.   On any railroad tracks;
      11.   On any controlled access highway;
      12.   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers;
      13.   In front of a public or private driveway;
      14.   Within fifteen feet (15) of a fire hydrant;
      15.   Within twenty feet (20) of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      16.   Within thirty feet (30) upon the approach to any flashing signal,
stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
      17.   Within twenty feet (20) of the driveway entrance to any fire
station; and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station,
within seventy five feet (75) of said entrance when properly signposted;
      18.   Within fifty feet (50) of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
at any place where official traffic control devices prohibit parking.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under such person's control
into any prohibited area or any unlawful distance from the curb. (Ord. 2013.05,
12-12-2013; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-2: ALLEY PARKING:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except during the necessary and
expeditious loading and unloading of merchandise and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property or interfere with the free movement
of traffic through the alley. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-
2025)
6-2-3: PARKING PROHIBITIONS AND TIME LIMITS:
No person shall park any vehicle, trailer, pole trailer, semitrailer, bus, farm
tractor, bicycle, low-speed vehicle, mobile home, moped, truck tractor, off-
highway vehicle, off-highway implement of husbandry, watercraft, or any
implement similar to any of the foregoing upon any street, highway, alley,
right of way or roadway, except for locations not prohibited elsewhere under
this Title, for a time period which exceeds seventy two (72) hours in any
eighty (80) hour period. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd. 2014 Code; Ord.
2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-4: PARKING CONTIGUOUS TO SCHOOLS:
No person shall park a vehicle upon that side of any street contiguous to any
school property during school hours when posted with signs prohibiting the
same. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-5: NARROW STREET OR ALLEY PARKING:
No person shall park a vehicle:
   A.   On any private or public street or alley where the width of the roadway
is less than twenty feet (20');
   B.   Upon any private driveway within a central traffic district where the
width of the driveway is less than twenty feet (20');
   C.   On the south or east side of any private or public street or alley
where the width of the roadway is over twenty feet (20'), but less than thirty
feet (30'), unless otherwise directed by traffic control devices. (Ord.
2013.05,12-12- 2013; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-6: STANDING AND PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAY:
Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be stopped or
parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in the direction of
authorized traffic movement with its right hand wheels within twelve inches
(12") of the right hand curb, or as close as practical to the right edge of the
right hand shoulder. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the
left side of any such roadway. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-
5-2025)
6-2-7: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park, stand, stop or operate a vehicle upon any roadway,
parking lot or area abutting any roadway within the City, for the principal
purpose of:
   A.   Greasing, repairing or servicing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
   B.   Selling foodstuffs or any other merchandise. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013;
amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-8: CAMPING RESTRICTIONS:
No person may sleep, camp, or establish a campsite, on any street, alley or
right- of-way, or any public property within the City limits, except as
specifically authorized beforehand in writing by the City. Said prohibition
shall include, without limitation, camping in any vehicle or trailer. (Ord.
2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-9: HANDICAPPED PARKING ZONES:
Except for those vehicles carrying a distinctive handicapped license plate or
transferable identification card and actually transporting a handicapped
person, no person shall park any vehicle in a parking space located on any
public property or private property which is used or intended for use by the
public, which is clearly identified as reserved for use by the handicapped. For
purposes of this Section, a parking space is clearly identified as reserved for
use by the handicapped if it has vertical signage which includes the
international symbol of accessibility that is visible from a passing vehicle. A
parking space reserved for use by the handicapped includes an access aisle, if
provided, that is adjacent to and considered part of the parking space if the
access aisle is clearly marked on the surface. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd.
Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-10: PARKING IN FIRE LANES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
in any portion of a fire lane as designated by a traffic control device, or
obstruct any portion thereof, unless specifically marked and designated for
parking with the written approval of the fire chief (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013;
amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-11: LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES:
Whenever any vehicle is lawfully parked upon any street within a residential
district, no lights need be displayed upon the parked vehicle. (Ord.
2013.05,12- 12-2013; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-12: APPROACH TO PARKING SPACE:
   A.   No person shall move a vehicle in any manner or leave a parking space
and then reenter it to avoid the intent of this Chapter.
   B.   Every driver of a vehicle about to enter a parking space being vacated
by another vehicle shall stop the vehicle and wait to the rear of the vehicle
in actual process of vacating a parking space and having so waited shall have
prior right to the parking space over all other drivers.
   C.   No driver of a vehicle shall stop his vehicle ahead of a parking space
being vacated and attempt to interfere with a driver who has waited properly to
the rear of a parking space being vacated.
   D.   No driver of a vehicle shall stop and wait for a parking space to be
vacated unless the vehicle vacating the space is actually in motion in the
process of vacating such space. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-
5-2025)
6-2-13: UNATTENDED VEHICLE; DUTY OF DRIVER:
No person driving or in charge of a vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended
without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the key,
placing the transmission in "park" or the gears in "low", or "reverse" if the
vehicle has a manual shift, or effectively setting the brakes thereon, and,
when standing upon any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to the curb
or side of the highway. No person driving or in charge of a commercial vehicle
shall park or stand such commercial vehicle on any street, parking lot or area
abutting any street within the City where there is a perceptible grade without
first securely blocking the wheels of the commercial vehicle and turning the
front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd.
Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-14: EXCEPTIONS FOR DISABLED VEHICLES:
The provisions of Sections 6-2-1 through 6-2-12 of this Chapter shall not apply
to the driver of any vehicle or commercial vehicle which is disabled while on
the paved or main traveled shoulder portion of any highway, street, alley,
park, right- of-way, or roadway in such manner and to such extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in
such position. (Ord. 2013.05, 12-12-2013; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-15: PARKING OF BICYCLES AND OTHER NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES:
Except as provided herein, bicycles and nonmotorized vehicles parked anywhere
on a street within the City shall conform with the requirements of this Chapter
regarding the parking of vehicles.
   A.   A bicycle or nonmotorized vehicle may not be parked on any roadway in a
manner as to obstruct the movement of a legally parked vehicle.
   B.   Unless otherwise prohibited or restricted by an official traffic
control device, a person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk so long as the
parking of such bicycle does not impede the normal and reasonable movement of
pedestrian or other traffic.
   C.   Except as otherwise prohibited or restricted by an official traffic
control device, a bicycle or nonmotorized vehicle may be parked on the roadway
at any angle to the curb or edge of the roadway at any location where parking
is allowed, and may be parked on the roadway abreast of another bicycle or
bicycles near the side of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed.
(Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-16: PARKING FOR DISPLAY PROHIBITED:
Parking of any vehicle for display or for commercial advertising purposes on a
City street, sidewalk, improved lot or unimproved lot (whether public or
private) is prohibited. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013)
6-2-17: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS:
   A.   Authority For Placement: The City staff are hereby authorized to place
traffic control devices prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles on any highway where, in the opinion of a City staff
member, such stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those using the
highway, or where the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly
interfere with the free movement of traffic. Where appropriate signs or traffic
control devices have been erected or placed according to this Section, no
person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the restriction
indicated by such devices.
   B.   Curb Markings Defined: When the City staff determines that it is
appropriate to use painted curbs or zones to indicate parking restrictions,
such markings shall designate the zones and shall have the meanings herein set
forth below:
      1.   "Red" shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time,
except for the individual purposes of emergency vehicles.
      2.   "Yellow" with the words "restricted zone" stenciled thereon, shall
mean no stopping, standing or parking except as stated on any accompanying
signs or markings giving notice thereof, except that this provision shall not
apply on Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd. Ord.
2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-18: AUTHORITY TO MOVE VEHICLE:
Whenever any law enforcement officer or authorized City staff member finds a
vehicle in violation of this Chapter, such officer or staff member is hereby
authorized to have said vehicle moved by a licensed and bonded towing operator
to a place of storage, or require the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle to move the same, to a position off the roadway, or in compliance with
the provisions of this Chapter.
   A.   Any law enforcement officer or authorized City staff member is
authorized to have removed by a licensed and bonded towing operator to a place
of storage any unattended vehicle illegally left standing upon any highway,
bridge, causeway or in any tunnel in such position or under such circumstances
as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic.
   B.   Any law enforcement officer or authorized City staff member is
authorized to have removed by a licensed and bonded towing operator to a place
of storage any vehicle found upon a highway when:
      1.   Report has been made that such vehicle has been stolen or taken
without the consent of its owner; or
      2.   The person or persons in charge of such vehicle are unable to
provide for its custody or removal; or
      3.   When the person driving or in control of such vehicle is arrested
for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the
person arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay; or
      4.   When it is discovered that there are five (5) or more outstanding
parking violations with respect to the subject vehicle. (Ord. 2013.05, 12-12-
2013; amd. Ord. 2020.18,11-12-2020; Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-19: OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to place or permit to be placed upon or in the sidewalk, parking area,
gutter or on the street next to such premises:
   A.   Refuse: Any broken wares, glass, filth, rubbish, sweepings, refuse
matter, ice, snow, water, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances.
   B.   Building Materials: Any wagons, lumber, wood boxes, fencing, building
materials, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other thing which shall
obstruct such public street, gutter, parking area or sidewalk, or any part
thereof, or the passage over and upon the same, or any part thereof, except as
expressly authorized by City ordinances.
   C.   Permanent Or Temporary Structures: Any permanent or temporary
structure, mechanism, device, vehicle or other thing of any kind or character,
except trees planted pursuant to the provisions of applicable City ordinances.
   D.   Exception: Construction dumpsters no larger than six (6) yards, are
exempted under this Section during home construction, with building official
approval, as long as corner setbacks are observed and the dumpster has
reflective material for nighttime safety. (Ord. 2013.05,12- 12-2013; amd. Ord.
2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-20: PUBLIC SIDEWALK AND PARKING AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Driving Or Parking: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
park motorized vehicles or lead, drive or ride any livestock upon any sidewalk,
except across a sidewalk at established crossings.
   B.   Businesses To Keep Clean: It shall be unlawful for any owners or
occupants of any place of business to refuse, neglect or fail to cause the
sidewalk abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned.
   C.   Placing Goods For Sale Or Show: No goods, wares or merchandise shall be
placed, maintained or permitted for sale or show in or on any public parking
area or sidewalk.
   D.   Placing Goods For Receipt Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, or suffer to be placed or kept upon any public sidewalk or
parking area, any goods, wares or merchandise which they may be receiving or
delivering.
   E.   Obstructing Travel: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
any activity which obstructs free travel on any sidewalk or public parking
area. (Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd. Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
6-2-21: PENALTY:
Persons guilty of violating sections of this Chapter shall be punished
according to the following fee schedule and be required to pay all towing and
storage fees:
 
Violation              Section          Fine    Fee After Fine After
                                                5 Days    10 Days
Fire lane violation    6-2-10           $ 35.00 $135.00   $275.00 ($125.00 per
                                                          month thereafter)
Handicapped zone       6-2-9            125.00  435.00    $825.00 ($125.00 per
                                                          month thereafter)
Parking of vehicle for 6-2-16           25.00   225.00    $500.00 ($125.00 per
display                                                   month thereafter)
                       6-2-1 through
All other parking      6-2-8,           25.00   105.00    $225.00 ($125.00 per
violations             6- 2-11 through                    month thereafter)
                       6-2-15
All obstruction        6-2-19,          25.00   105.00    $225.00 ($125.00 per
violations             6-2-20                             month thereafter)
 
(Ord. 2013.05,12-12-2013; amd. Ord. 2020.18,11-12-2020; Ord. 2025.01, 2-5-2025)
CHAPTER 3
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Purpose
6-3-2: Designated Streets
6-3-3: Operational Requirements And Regulations
6-3-1: PURPOSE:
The main objective in designating permissible streets is for legal access to
public and private lands approved for off highway vehicle uses. (Ord. 01-12-06,
1-12-2006; amd. 2014 Code)
6-3-2: DESIGNATED STREETS:
   A.   The following city streets are designated as permissible for off
highway vehicle routes:
Ash Creek Drive.
Berry Lane.
Center.
Cholla.
Hunter Lane.
Old Church.
Pioneer Road south of Berry, then south along Frontage to SR 17.
Springs Drive.
Sunset Avenue.
Westfield Road.
   B.   Those living on city streets not mentioned in subsection A of this
section may access them by traveling the shortest distance between their
residence and the designated street. (Ord. 01-12-06, 1-12-2006)
6-3-3: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   License Required: No person sixteen (16) years or older shall operate
an off highway vehicle on the designated streets listed in subsection 6-3-2A of
this chapter unless such person has a valid driver's license.
   B.   Operation By Persons Under Sixteen Years Of Age: No person under
sixteen (16) years of age may operate and no owner may give permission to a
person under sixteen (16) to operate an off highway vehicle on the designated
streets listed in subsection 6-3-2A of this chapter unless such person has an
approved safety certificate and under the direct visual supervision of an adult
eighteen (18) years of age or older holding a valid driver's license.
   C.   Protective Headgear: A person under the age of eighteen (18) may not
operate or ride on an off highway vehicle on any public road unless the person
is wearing a properly fitted and fastened, United States department of
transportation safety rated protective headgear designed for motorized vehicle
use.
   D.   Where To Ride And Yielding: Persons operating on designated streets
listed in subsection 6-3-2A of this chapter will travel in the same lane of
travel as general motor vehicles, but must travel within the outer five feet
(5') of asphalt. Travel in the dirt on the shoulder of the streets is
prohibited. Persons operating an off highway vehicle must yield the right of
way to general motor vehicle traffic.
   E.   Speed Limit: The maximum speed for an off highway vehicle on designated
streets listed in subsection 6-3-2A of this chapter shall be as posted for
general motor vehicular traffic, and the operation of an off highway vehicle
shall otherwise be in accordance with applicable motor vehicle laws and
regulations for general motor vehicles. Off highway vehicles accessing
designated streets from nondesignated streets is restricted to five (5) miles
per hour. (Ord. 01-12-06, 1-12-2006)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Removal Of Snow
7-1-2: Openings In Streets; Doors Obstructing
7-1-3: Discharge Of Water
7-1-1: REMOVAL OF SNOW:
   A.   Failure To Remove Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for the owner,
occupant, lessor or agent of any property, abutting on a paved sidewalk, to
fail to remove, or have removed from such paved sidewalk, all hail, snow, or
sleet thereon within a reasonable time after such snow, hail or sleet has
fallen.
   B.   Depositing In Gutter Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person
removing snow from the sidewalk, to deposit snow, dirt, leaves, or any other
material, in the gutter so as to clog or prevent the free flow of water
therein. (1977 Code § 11-361; amd. 2014 Code)
7-1-2: OPENINGS IN STREETS; DOORS OBSTRUCTING:
   A.   Cellars: It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building
having a cellar which opens upon any street or sidewalk to fail to keep the
door or other covering in good repair and safe for the passage of the customary
traffic on the street or sidewalk. (1977 Code § 11-363; amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   Doors: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having the control
or management of any alley, road or passageway to construct or hang gates or
doors to such alley, road or passageway so that the gates or doors thereto,
when open, shall project outwardly more than two feet (2') over or upon the
sidewalk beyond the property line. (1977 Code § 11-364)
7-1-3: DISCHARGE OF WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to fail, refuse or neglect to prevent water from the roof or eaves of
any house, building or other structure, or from any other source under the
control of such person, to be discharged upon the surface of any sidewalk or
street. (1977 Code § 11-365; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 2
STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-2-1: Conform To Established Specifications
7-2-2: Changing Existing Construction
7-2-3: Building Materials In Street
7-2-4: Mixing Concrete On Paved Streets Or Sidewalks
7-2-5: Overflowing Of Water
7-2-6: Irrigation Ditches
7-2-7: Removal Of Sod Or Earth
7-2-1: CONFORM TO ESTABLISHED SPECIFICATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, agent, servant, contractor
or employee to construct a street or sidewalk which does not conform to the
standards and specifications for public improvements established by the city,
unless special permission to deviate from such specification is first obtained
from the city council. (1977 Code § 11-351; amd. 2014 Code)
7-2-2: CHANGING EXISTING CONSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway across a sidewalk
or cut or change the construction of sidewalk, curb or gutter without first
obtaining from the city a building permit to do so. The acceptance of such
permit shall be deemed an agreement on the part of such person to construct
said driveway in accordance with specifications furnished by the city. (1977
Code § 11-353; amd. 2014 Code)
7-2-3: BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of the public
streets when erecting or repairing any building upon land abutting thereon.
(1977 Code § 11-354; amd. 2014 Code)
7-2-4: MIXING CONCRETE ON PAVED STREETS OR SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful to:
   A.   Place, Pile Or Permit: Place or pile, or permit to be placed or piled,
any sand, gravel, lime, cement, mortar, plaster, concrete or any other like
substance or mixture, or allow the same to remain on any portion of any paved
street or sidewalk.
   B.   Make, Mix Or Permit: Make or mix, or permit to be made or mixed, any
mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture on any portion of
any paved street or sidewalk. (1977 Code § 11-355; amd. 2014 Code)
7-2-5: OVERFLOWING OF WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow water to overflow from any ditch,
canal, well or irrigation stream onto the streets, sidewalks or property of the
city. (1977 Code § 11-356)
7-2-6: IRRIGATION DITCHES:
All owners or occupants of lots in the city who require water from a ditch for
irrigation or other purposes shall dig ditches, erect flumes, lay pipes and
install culverts, as needed, and maintain the same to convey water under
sidewalks to or from their respective lots. All culverts, ditches, pipes and
flumes conveying water under sidewalks shall meet such reasonable standards and
specifications as may be established by the superintendent of streets. (1977
Code § 11-357)
7-2-7: REMOVAL OF SOD OR EARTH:
No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any street or other
public place without permission from the city. (1977 Code § 11-358; amd. 2014
Code)
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Permit Requirements
7-3-2: Bond Required
7-3-3: Subject And Excluded Excavations
7-3-4: Restoration Standards
7-3-5: Protection Of Public
7-3-6: Relocation And Protection Of Utilities
7-3-7: Revocation Or Refusal Of Permit
7-3-8: Exception In Emergency
7-3-9: Penalty
7-3-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to break, excavate,
tunnel, undermine or in any manner affect the surface or base of any street, or
to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or any other excavated
material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of a street,
trail, sidewalk or public right of way, unless such person shall first have
obtained an encroachment permit therefor from the city.
   B.   Streets And Sidewalks:
      1.   No person shall make any excavation in any street, land, right of
way or alley, or remove any pavement or other material from any street or
improvement thereon without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the
city.
      2.   No person shall excavate any curb, gutter or sidewalk without first
obtaining an encroachment permit from the city.
   C.   Franchise; Public Utility: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed to waive the franchise required for any person by city ordinances or
laws of the state. (Ord. 4-12-2001, 4-4-2001; amd. 2014 Code)
7-3-2: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   Conditions: In order to ensure proper backfill and restoration of
surface, the permittee shall deposit a surety bond or cash deposit with the
city recorder, payable to the city, except that a public utility operating or
using any of the streets under a franchise from the city will not be required
to furnish such bond, providing such franchise obligates the holder thereof to
restore the streets and to hold the city harmless in the event of any injury to
any person or damage to any property due to negligence of such holder in
conducting excavation and restoration operations under such franchise. The
required surety bond must be:
      1.   With good and sufficient surety;
      2.   By a surety company authorized to transact business in the state;
      3.   Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance;
      4.   Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this chapter in
order to secure and hold the city and its officers harmless against any and all
claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation and other work
covered by the excavation permit for which the city, the city council or any
city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to any
person or property through the fault of the permittee arising out of failure to
properly guard the excavation or for any other negligence of the permittee;
      5.   Conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe
condition, as near as may be original condition, and to the satisfaction of the
city, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street
where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of twenty four
(24) months after the work shall be done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it
was before the work shall have been done. (Ord. 4-12-2001, 4-4-2001)
   B.   Amount: The amount of the surety bond or cash deposit shall be
established by resolution and may be changed from time to time, but until such
resolution is passed, the amount of the surety or cash deposit shall be five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and ten dollars ($10.00) for each square foot of
street the permittee shall excavate. (Ord. 4-12-2001, 4-4-2001; amd. 2014 Code)
7-3-3: SUBJECT AND EXCLUDED EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Types Subject To Provisions: The types of excavations subject to the
provisions of this chapter are excavations for installation or repair of water
lines, sewer lines, gas lines, electrical cable and conduits, telephone cable
and conduits, and all other excavations for any other purpose within the street
rights of way of the city or in other public places.
   B.   Types Not Subject To Provisions: The types of excavations which do not
come within the scope of this chapter are excavations of any kind in city
streets in projects designed, contracted for and inspected by the city engineer
or other authorized personnel of the city. (Ord. 4-12-2001, 4-4-2001)
7-3-4: RESTORATION STANDARDS:
The restoration of all excavations made within a city street or right of way
shall be performed in compliance with the city standards and specifications for
public improvements and the following:
   A.   Preparation: The pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surface shall be
cut vertically along the lines forming the trench in such a manner as to not
damage the adjoining pavement or hard surfacing. An undercut bevel at the rate
of one inch (1") per foot of thickness will be provided at the proposed
junction between the old and new surfaces. The portion to be removed shall be
broken up in a manner that will not cause damage to the pavement outside the
limits of the trench. However, any pavement damaged by operations outside the
limits of the trench shall be replaced. All waste material resulting from the
excavation shall be removed immediately from the site of the work.
   B.   Backfill:
      1.   Materials: Materials for backfill will be of select nature. All
broken concrete, peat, decomposed vegetable matter and similar materials
obtained from excavation will be removed from the site prior to beginning of
backfilling. All backfill will be placed in layers not over eight inches (8")
loose measure in thickness. Compaction will be obtained by mechanical rollers,
mechanical tampers or similar means. Material for backfilling will have optimum
moisture to ensure compaction to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed
ground in which the trench was dug. Jetting or internal vibrating methods of
compacting sand fill or similar methods of compacting sand or similar granular
free draining materials will be permitted.
      2.   Density: The density (dry) of the backfill under pavements,
sidewalks, curbs or other structures will be not less than that existing prior
to excavation. The fill shall be restored and placed in a good condition which
will prevent settling.
   C.   Restoration Of Hard Surfaces:
      1.   General: All street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways
or other hard surfaces falling in the line of the excavation which must be
removed in performance of the work shall be restored in kind by the excavator,
unless otherwise directed by the city, in accordance with the specifications
contained herein governing the various types of surfaces involved.
      2.   Protection Of Paved Surfaces: In order to avoid unnecessary damage
to paved surfaces, track equipment shall use pavement pads when operating on or
crossing paved surfaces.
      3.   Time: In traffic lanes of paved streets, the excavator shall provide
temporary gravel surfaces or cold mulch in good condition immediately after
backfill has been placed, and shall complete permanent repairs on the street,
sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway and other surfaces, within five (5) days from
the date of completion of the backfill, except for periods:
         a.   When permanent paving material is not available;
         b.   When weather conditions prevent permanent replacement;
         c.   When an extension of time is granted by the city.
      4.   Temporary Repair: If temporary repair has been made on the paved
street with gravel and a permanent repair cannot be made within the time
specified above due to any of the above mentioned conditions, then the
excavator shall be required to replace the gravel with cold mulch as soon as
possible.
   D.   Restoring Bituminous; Concrete Or Asphalt Street Surfaces:
      1.   Temporary Grade Surface: Where excavations are made in paved areas,
the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface. The gravel shall
be placed deep enough to provide a minimum of six inches (6") below the bottom
of the bituminous or concrete surface. Normally, this will require nine inches
(9") of gravel for bituminous surfaces, twelve inches (12") of gravel for
concrete, and concrete base for asphalt wearing surfaces. The gravel shall be
placed in the trench at the time it is backfilled. The temporary gravel surface
shall be maintained by blading, sprinkling, rolling, or adding gravel to
maintain a safe, uniform surface satisfactory to the city until the final
surface is laid. Excess material shall be removed from the premises
immediately. Material for use on temporary gravel surfaces shall be obtained
from sound, tough, durable gravel or rock meeting the following requirements
for gradings:
 
Passing 1 inch sieve   100 percent
Passing 3/4 inch sieve 45 - 100 percent
No. 4 sieve            45 - 65 percent
Passing no. 10 sieve   30 - 50 percent
Passing no. 200 sieve  5 - 10 percent
 
      2.   Bituminous Surface: The exposed edges of existing pavement shall be
primed with type MC-1 bituminous material. The type, grade and mixture of the
asphalt to be used for street surface replacement shall be approved by the
city. The thickness shall be equal to the adjacent surface thickness but not
less than three inches (3"). The complete surface shall not deviate more than
one-half inch (1/2") between old and new work.
      3.   Policy:
         a.   A written warranty in a form approved by the city that if such
trench compaction subsides, sinks or otherwise fails for any reason, or the
pavement over the compacted trench cracks, during the life of said trench, that
the contractor, utility company or other entity will repair and recompact said
trench at no cost to the city according to the standards set forth in
subsection B of this section within thirty (30) days after receiving written
notice that such trench has failed, except that in an "emergency", which is
defined as the failure of any trench due to a natural or artificial condition
and which poses an imminent risk to persons or property, such contractor,
utility company or entity whose trench failed will, within twenty four (24)
hours after receiving notice from the city, undertake all reasonable steps to
protect persons or property from further damage, including, but not limited to,
erecting barricades, warning lights, lanterns, flares, or other devices to
alert the public to the potential hazard. Thereafter, such contractor, utility
company or entity shall commence repairs to the affected trench as soon as
practicable according to the standards set forth herein; and
         b.   Any contractor, utility company or entity incapable of providing
evidence of a net worth in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) must,
in lieu thereof, also post a cash bond for the estimated and reasonable cost to
repair said trench as established by the city engineer. The city will retain
said cash bond for two (2) years following completion of the trench work. If,
after the expiration of two (2) years, the trench is still intact and has not
subsided, sunk or otherwise failed for any reason, the city will release such
bond after inspection by the city engineer or inspector.
   E.   Conflicts: Where the provisions of this section conflict with the
provisions of other sections, the provisions of this section shall take
precedence. (Ord. 4-12-2001, 4-4-2001; amd. 2014 Code)
7-3-5: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC:
Excavation operations shall be conducted in such a manner that a minimum amount
of interference or interruption of street traffic will result. Inconvenience to
residents and businesses fronting on public streets shall be minimized.
Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades shall be available and used where
necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must
be in place until all of the excavator's equipment is removed from site and
excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in place.
From sunset to sunrise, all barricades and excisions must be clearly outlined
by acceptable warning lights, lanterns, flares and other devices. Police and
fire departments shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours in advance
of any planned excavation requiring street closures or detour. (Ord. 4-12-2001,
4-4-2001)
7-3-6: RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES:
An excavator shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written
consent of the city and without advance notice to the owner of the utility. If
it becomes necessary to relocate an existing utility, it shall be done by its
owner unless the owner otherwise directs. No utility, whether owned by the city
or by a private enterprise, shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless
the cost of such work be borne by the permittee or an expressly written
agreement is made whereby the utility owner and the excavator make other
arrangements relating to such cost. The permittee shall support and protect by
timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which
may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and shall do everything
necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across the
work. In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be
damaged (and for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement or devices are
to be considered as part of a substructure), they shall be repaired by the
agency or person owning them, but the utility owner shall be reimbursed for the
expense of such repairs by the permittee. It is the intent of this chapter that
the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to substructures, and any
resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such substructure damage and
such assumption of liability shall be deemed a contractual obligation which the
permittee accepts upon acceptance of an excavation permit. The city need not be
made a party to any action because of this chapter. The permittee shall inform
itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and
protect the same against damage. (Ord. 4-12-2001, 4-4-2001; amd. 2014 Code)
7-3-7: REVOCATION OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT:
All permits shall be subject to revocation and the city may refuse to issue a
permit for failure of the permittee or applicant to abide by the terms and
conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 4-12-2001, 4-4-2001)
7-3-8: EXCEPTION IN EMERGENCY:
Excavation permits will not be requested prior to excavation in case of
emergency endangering life or property, providing the city is notified as soon
as practicable and a permit is applied for upon the next regular working day
following the emergency. (Ord. 4-12-2001, 4-4-2001)
7-3-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code, and then must meet all the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 4-12-2001, 4-4-2001; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 4
NEW OR RECONSTRUCTED STREET DISTURBANCE MORATORIUM
SECTION:
7-4-1: Regulation
7-4-2: Exemptions
7-4-3: Exigent Conditions
7-4-4: Emergency Disturbances
7-4-5: Penalty
7-4-1: REGULATION:
After any street has been constructed, reconstructed or paved by the city,
under contract with the city, or under a permit from the city, the pavement
surface of such street shall not thereafter be disturbed, cut, trenched or
opened for a period of two (2) years from the time construction or
reconstruction of such street is completed. (Ord. 2011.02, 4-14-2011; amd. 2014
Code)
7-4-2: EXEMPTIONS:
The city council may grant exemptions to the moratorium imposed by this chapter
in order to facilitate development of adjacent properties and as required by
exigent or emergency conditions, as set forth in this chapter. When granting
exemptions to this chapter, the city council may impose conditions determined
to ensure the rapid and complete restoration of the street and the surface
paving. A grant of an exemption to the moratorium imposed by this chapter by
the city council does not negate or limit a party's obligation to comply with
all other applicable laws, regulations, ordinances and rules for the
disturbance, cutting or trenching of a street. (Ord. 2011.02, 4-14-2011)
7-4-3: EXIGENT CONDITIONS:
Exigent conditions may exist when a project is proposed which would impact a
street which is subject to the two (2) year moratorium and appropriate planning
could not have foreseen the necessity to encroach on the street's surface. The
determination to declare a condition as exigent is in the sole discretion of
the city council. Prior to making an exigent encroachment, the party requesting
to do so must obtain all licenses and permits required by applicable laws,
regulations, ordinances and rules for disturbing, cutting or trenching the
street and pay all applicable fees. (Ord. 2011.02, 4-14-2011; amd. 2014 Code)
7-4-4: EMERGENCY DISTURBANCES:
Emergency disturbances, cuts and trenches may be made to streets without prior
permit if the disturbance, cut or trench is reasonably calculated to prevent
loss of life or damage to property which appears to be imminent if the action
is delayed by waiting to secure permits for such excavations or encroachments.
In such emergency situations, the person making the excavation or encroachment
must contact the city immediately and contact must be made with the city
building department within two (2) business days after the emergency in order
to secure an encroachment permit and any other permits required by applicable
law, regulation, ordinance or rule. Emergency situations and conditions do not
negate or limit a party's obligation to comply with, and abide by, applicable
laws, regulations, ordinances and rules, except for the requirement to obtain
proper permits before commencing excavation or encroachment. The party making
an emergency disturbance, cut or trench to a street will be liable for all
costs incurred by the city for returning the impacted street to its prior
condition. (Ord. 2011.02, 4-14-2011; amd. 2014 Code)
7-4-5: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate violation and offense. (Ord. 2011.02, 4-14-2011; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-5-1: Unlawful Use
7-5-2: Repair Or Restoration After Unlawful Use
7-5-3: Franchise; Easement
7-5-4: Acts Exempted
7-5-1: UNLAWFUL USE:
Unless authorized by permit or other written authorization issued by the city,
or unless authority is granted by provisions of this code or other ordinance of
the city, now or hereafter enacted, it shall be a class B misdemeanor, subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to: (1977 Code § 8-111; amd. 2014 Code)
   A.   Property Controlled By City: Construct, lay, excavate, erect, operate
or maintain over, under, across, in or through any property owned or controlled
by the city, any utility, canal, ditch, construction or building.
   B.   Restricted Areas: Enter upon any property of the city contrary to any
posting or marking restricting or prohibiting use of the area.
   C.   Damage To Property: Intentionally use or perform acts upon property of
the city which materially impairs, alters or damages the property. (1977 Code §
8-111)
7-5-2: REPAIR OR RESTORATION AFTER UNLAWFUL USE:
The city, in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, may order any
person who has damaged, altered or changed any property of the city to repair
or restore the property to its original condition prior to the damage,
alteration or change. (1977 Code § 8-112; amd. 2014 Code)
7-5-3: FRANCHISE; EASEMENT:
   A.   Provisions: The city council may grant to any person a franchise or
easement on such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable, for the purpose
of entering upon, constructing, building, operating and maintaining any
business or for other use of the property of the city and the provisions of
sections
7-5-1 and
7-5-2 of this chapter shall not apply to the extent such provisions are waived,
qualified or made inapplicable to the rights or privileges granted in the
franchise ordinance or easement.
   B.   In Writing: Any franchise or easement granted by the city shall be in
writing and any franchise or easement not in writing shall be void. (1977 Code
§ 8-113)
7-5-4: ACTS EXEMPTED:
It shall not be a violation of this chapter where any person uses the public
property of the city in the manner or for the purpose for which such property
has been made available for public use. (1977 Code § 8-114)
CHAPTER 6
TREES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Purpose And Intent
7-6-2: Definitions
7-6-3: City Tree Board
7-6-4: Interference With Board Prohibited
7-6-5: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
7-6-6: Arborist Permit And Bond
7-6-7: Review By Or Appeal To City Council
7-6-8: Nonliability Of City
7-6-9: Existing Trees
7-6-10: Violation And Penalty
7-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The city recognizes and attributes substantial economic, environmental and
aesthetic value to the trees within the community. It is in the best interests
of the citizens and public that a plan be developed to standardize the planting
and maintenance of trees within the city. It is the intent of the city council
that the terms of this chapter shall be construed as to promote the planning,
planting, maintenance, restoration, protection and survival of desirable trees
within the city. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-13-2014)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks, or to which the public has free access as a park, and all areas owned by
the city.
STREET TREES: Trees on land lying ten feet (10') from the back of all street
curbs or, where there is no physical curb in place, from the curb line as
designated on the city survey. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-13-2014)
7-6-3: CITY TREE BOARD:
   A.   Created, Established: There is hereby created and established a city
tree board for the city (the "city tree board" or "board") which shall consist
of five (5) to nine (9) sitting members (in odd numbers only), citizens and
residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval
of the city council.
   B.   Term Of Office: The term of the members of the city tree board shall be
three (3) years, except that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to
the first board shall be for only one year and the term of two (2) members of
the first board shall be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy shall
occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the approval of the city council, for the unexpired portion of the
term.
   C.   Compensation: Members of the city tree board shall serve without
compensation.
   D.   Officers, Rules And Regulations: The city tree board shall select its
chairperson and other officers as it may deem necessary from among its members,
for terms of one year, with eligibility for reelection.
   E.   Operation: The city tree board shall choose its own officers, draft its
own bylaws and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
   F.   Duties And Responsibilities:
      1.   It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate,
counsel and develop, and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for
the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition
of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets on city property and in other
public areas. Such plan will be presented periodically as needed to the city
council and upon its acceptance and approval shall constitute the official
comprehensive city tree plan.
      2.   The city tree board, when requested by the city council, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, reports and recommendations upon any
special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
   G.   Recommended Tree Species To Be Planted: The city tree board shall draw
up a list of official street tree and park tree recommended species, organized
into three (3) size classes based on height at maturity, i.e., small, medium
and large. This list may also contain information deemed important for the
public, such as trees that grow well in the area, low water consumption trees,
etc. This list shall be updated periodically by the board. A current copy of
this list shall be available to any citizen upon request at the city offices.
   H.   List Of Undesirable, Noxious Trees: The city tree board shall draw up a
list of trees deemed to be undesirable and noxious. A current copy of this list
shall be available to any citizen upon request at the city offices. The list
may be updated periodically by the board. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-13-2014)
7-6-4: INTERFERENCE WITH BOARD PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning or removing of any street trees or
park trees, as authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-13-2014)
7-6-5: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Distance From Street Corners And Hydrants: No street tree or park tree
shall be planted closer than twenty feet (20') from any street corner, measured
from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street tree or
park tree shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') from any fire hydrant or
any further distance as may be prescribed by the most current version of the
international fire code as may be adopted by the city from time to time.
   B.   Utilities: No park tree or street tree, other than those species listed
as small trees on the recommended list, as determined in subsection 7-6-3G of
this chapter, may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any
overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
   C.   Public Tree Care:
      1.   The city shall have the right to plant, prune and remove any park
trees or street trees as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
      2.   The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed any
tree, or part thereof, which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of
its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines
or other public improvement, or which is infected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest.
   D.   Tree Topping: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or city
department to top any park tree or street tree. "Topping" is defined as the
severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter
within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or
certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning
practices are impractical, may be exempted from this subsection at the
determination of the city tree board.
   E.   Pruning; Corner Clearance:
      1.   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way
within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not
obstruct the light from any traffic signal, or obstruct the view of any street
intersection. Also, there shall be a clear space of eight feet (8') above
public sidewalks and a clear space of thirteen feet (13') above city streets.
      2.   The city shall notify in writing the owners of trees that are not in
compliance with these pruning requirements. The owner shall have thirty (30)
days after such notification to complete the pruning, at which time the city
will have the right to complete the pruning and then charge the cost of pruning
to the owner's property tax notice.
   F.   Dead Or Diseased Tree Removal On Private Property: Owners of trees
shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs,
which constitute a menace or hazard to the safety of the public. The city shall
have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private
property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and
property, or when they harbor insects or diseases which constitute a potential
threat to other trees within the city. The city tree board will notify, in
writing, the owners of such trees. Except in the event of emergencies that
require immediate removal, as determined by the city tree board, removal
thereof shall be done by said owners, at their own expense, within sixty (60)
days after the date of their receipt of such notice. In the event of failure of
owners to comply with such notification, the city reserves the right to remove
such trees and charge the cost of removal thereof to the property owner, or
cause such cost to be added upon the owner's property tax notice for that year
in which such removal occurs.
   G.   Removal Of Stumps: All stumps of park trees and street trees shall be
removed to below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall
not project above the surface of the ground.
   H.   Planting In Public Areas: No person shall plant, construct or place
trees, shrubs, bushes or plants in or on a public park, city right of way or
other public place owned and/or managed by the city, or any property to be
dedicated to the city or the public in accordance with an approved subdivision
application or development agreement, without first obtaining the approval of
the city. The city may condition approval for the planting, constructing or
placement of trees, shrubs, bushes or plants in a right of way that is owned or
managed by the city on the person's agreement to remove such trees, shrubs,
bushes or plants from the right of way at the request of the city.
   I.   Abuse Or Mutilation Of Public Trees: Unless specifically authorized by
the city, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or
remove any park or street tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising
posters or other contrivance to any park or street tree; allow any gaseous
liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come into contact
therewith; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat
therefrom may injure any portion of any park or street tree. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-
13-2014)
7-6-6: ARBORIST PERMIT AND BOND:
It is unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation
of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the city without
first applying for and procuring a permit. The permit fee shall be prescribed
by the business licensing code of the city; provided, however, that no permit
shall be required of any public service company, including electric utilities
and their agents and contractors, or city employees doing such work in the
pursuit of the public service endeavors. Before any permit is issued, each
applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the
minimum amounts of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily
injury, and one hundred thousand dollars' ($100,000.00) property damage,
indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the
pursuit of such endeavors as described in this section. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-13-
2014)
7-6-7: REVIEW BY OR APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions
of the city tree board. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the city
tree board to the city council, which may hear the matter and make a final
decision. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-13-2014)
7-6-8: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the city is not
assuming, and hereby expressly disclaims, any liability or responsibility for
any trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation in or on property or areas that
are not city rights of way or other public places owned and/or managed by the
city. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-13-2014)
7-6-9: EXISTING TREES:
Subsections 7-6-5A, B and E of this chapter shall not apply to trees that were
planted prior to February 10, 2011. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-13-2014)
7-6-10: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, at the discretion of the court. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-13-2014;
amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this chapter,
the injury, mutilation or death of a tree, shrub or other plant located on city
owned property is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree, shrub
or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value
of trees and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision
of valuation of landscape shrubs and other plants, as published by the
International Society Of Arboriculture. (Ord. 2014.10, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 7
CEMETERY
SECTION:
7-7-1: Definitions
7-7-2: Applicability
7-7-3: Cemetery Superintendent
7-7-4: Fees And Charges
7-7-5: Sale Of Burial Rights
7-7-6: Regulation Of Cemetery And Burials
7-7-7: Perpetual Care
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the
context otherwise clearly requires:
 
BURIAL     The right to be buried in the Cemetery pursuant to Utah Code § 8-5-7. Burial
RIGHT:     Rights may reference specific locations or Burial Plots.
CEMETERY:  Any burial or cemetery ground located within, and owned/operated by, the City
           or a private party as permitted by the City.
PLOT,      Shall include the area within a sectioned portion of a cemetery suitable in
BURIAL     size and dimensions for a grave or series of graves and as depicted in a plat
PLOT:      maintained by the Cemetery Superintendent with a copy kept in the Official
           Records of the City.
PLOT       The owner or purchaser of burial privileges or the collateral right of use of
OWNER,     any burial plot evidenced by a deed or burial right for a described plot or
GRAVE      by proved and recognized descent or devise from the original owner. (1977
OWNER OR   Code § 8-201; amd. Ord. 2021.24, 10-20-2021; Ord. 2023.14, 6-21-2023)
PURCHASER:
 
7-7-2: APPLICABILITY:
All cemeteries, regardless of whether they are owned and/or maintained by the
City or which may hereafter be acquired by the City, wherever situated, are
hereby declared subject to the provisions of this chapter. (1977 Code § 8-203;
amd. Ord. 2021.24, 10-20-2021; Ord. 2023.14, 6-21-2023)
7-7-3: CEMETERY SUPERINTENDENT:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created the position of Cemetery
Superintendent.
B.   Duties: The Cemetery Superintendent shall have the general supervision and
administration of the cemetery, including, but not limited to:
   1.   Recommending to the City Council such additional rules and regulations
as may be necessary for the operation, maintenance, use and protection of the
cemetery.
   2.   Subdividing the cemetery into plots for gravesites.
   3.   Maintaining a record of the location of the graves and preventing any
plot from being used beyond its capacity.
   4.   Keeping in proper repair the enclosure around the cemetery and
preventing it being entered by noxious animals and, so far as practical,
preventing the destruction or defacing of any tablet or marker placed or
erected therein.
   5.   Keeping a duplicate plat of the cemetery and, at the request of any
person wishing to purchase of a Burial Right for any of the plots or parts of
plots, pointing out any of the plots or parts of plots for sale; and, upon
disposal of any plots or part thereof, notifying the City Cemetery Clerk of
such fact. The City Cemetery Clerk shall, after payment of the purchase price
for the Burial Right has been received by the City Treasurer, issue a
certificate of burial rights, which shall describe the plot to which the right
to burial is granted. The certificate shall be signed by the Cemetery
Superintendent and the City Recorder.
   6.   Opening any graves in the cemetery upon application to the Cemetery
Superintendent being made by the City Cemetery Clerk or by any person having
the right to make such application and being responsible for closing all
graves.
   7.   Removal of floral pieces or displays left on any grave as deemed
necessary to the appearance of the cemetery. Removal of decorations will be
subject to the City’s current cemetery policy.
   8.   Keeping the streets, alleys, walks and avenues in the cemetery in good
order and unobstructed.
   9.   Erecting a suitable marker firmly set upon the northwest corner of each
lot section, with the number of the plot inscribed thereon and which location
shall be shown on the cemetery records. (1977 Code § 8-212; amd. Ord. 2021.24,
10-20-2021; Ord. 2023.14, 6-21-2023; Ord. 2024.02, 3-6-2024)
7-7-4: FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Collection Of Fees: The City Cemetery Clerk, and such other persons as
the City Council may designate, are hereby authorized and required to collect
prices and fees for the opening and closing of graves or other services which
shall include, but not be limited to, properly disinterring bodies and properly
restoring the earth and grounds, recording each burial, disinterment or
removal, and raised monument privileges. The fees shall be such amounts as are
determined by the City Council (with input from the Cemetery Superintendent)
from time to time as listed on the City’s uniform fee schedule.
   B.   Fee To Be Paid For Opening Grave: No grave shall be opened in the city
cemetery until payment of a fee for the labor and expense in so opening the
grave shall be paid. The presentation of a receipt from the City Cemetery Clerk
or person designated by the City Council when presented to the Cemetery
Superintendent in addition to a death certificate or a vital statistics sheet,
shall be authority to open a grave for the burial of a deceased person.
   C.   Purchase Price And Fees: The City Council shall from time to time fix
the size of Plots, the price at which Burial Rights shall be sold and the fees
which shall be charged for the various cemetery services to be provided as
listed on the City’s uniform fee schedule. (1977 Code § 8-243; amd. 2014 Code;
Ord. 2021.24, 10-20-2021; Ord. 2023.14, 6-21-2023; Ord. 2024.02, 3-6-2024)
7-7-5: SALE OF BURIAL RIGHTS:
   A.   Procedure For Sale Of Burial Rights:
      1.   The City Cemetery Clerk, and such other person as the City Council
may designate, are hereby authorized to sell the Burial Right for use of Plots
in a cemetery owned by the City for burial purposes only and to collect all
sums arising from the sale. The City Cemetery Clerk shall keep a complete
record of all sales, which record shall describe the location of the plot
purchased and the price paid therefore. The City Cemetery Clerk or designated
person shall deliver to each purchaser a certificate of burial rights for each
Plot purchased, which certificate shall, among other things, describe the
location of the plot and the purchase price.
      2.   A certificate of Burial Rights to burial shall be exempt from
execution, taxation or assessment for care and maintenance from and after full
payment of the purchase price.
      3.   “Perpetual Care” also known as prepaid continued maintenance shall
be deemed to include the placing of topsoil upon the grave, seeding the grave
with grass, and watering and cutting the grass. No other services are included.
      4.   No other improvements, changes or service, except perpetual care,
shall be made on any plot without the certificate holder or his/her heirs first
submitting to and receiving from the Cemetery Superintendent, written approval
for such improvements, changes or services, which improvements, changes or
services shall be subject to the rules and regulations promulgated by the City
Council.
   B.   Restrictions Of Resale:
      1.   From and after January 1, 1978, the plots sold by the City shall not
be further sold, transferred, conveyed or assigned to any person, except by the
City. The City hereby agrees to buy back any plot which it may hereafter sell.
The repurchase of such plots shall be for the original price paid by the
purchaser, or the current selling price of the plot, whichever is less.
      2.   Whenever a certificate to burial rights or plot reverts to the City,
as provided for in this subsection, or becomes vested in the City for any
reason, before new certificates are issued, the original certificate shall be
canceled or an assignment given, and the record shall be so changed.
      3.   The certificate to Burial Rights shall be issued and signed by the
Cemetery Superintendent and shall be attested by the City Recorder. All Plots
or parts of Plots, as provided in this subsection, together with all
improvements, shall be exempt from execution and from taxation and assessment
for care and maintenance charges from and after said payment.
   C.   Unused Plots: If a Plot or Plots remain unused after sixty (60) years
from date of purchase, the City may initiate procedures in compliance with
chapter 5, title 8 of the Utah Code to reclaim burial rights previously granted
on a Plot. (1977 Code § 8-252; amd. Ord. 2021.24, 10-20-2021; Ord. 2023.14, 6-
21-2023; Ord. 2024.02, 3-6-2024)
7-7-6: REGULATION OF CEMETERY AND BURIALS:
   A.   Burials: Before any deceased person is buried in a cemetery within the
City, a death certificate properly issued by the Utah Bureau of Vital
Statistics shall be required by the Cemetery Superintendent. After burial, the
City Cemetery Clerk shall endorse upon the permit a description of the location
where the deceased is buried and shall enter all of the information contained
in the permit in the cemetery records.
   B.   Burial Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the
body of a deceased person in a cemetery within the City without first obtaining
a certificate of Burial Right for the Plot used or producing satisfactory
evidence of a right to burial based on a properly acquired certificate of
Burial Right.
   C.   Registration Of Burials: Before any deceased person may be buried in a
cemetery within the City, the relatives or person having charge of the deceased
shall provide the City Cemetery Clerk with a written statement which shall be
filed by the City Cemetery Clerk, which statement shall contain, if known,
information about the deceased regarding his or her name, when and where born,
the date and cause of death, the name of the attending physician, date of
burial, name of cemetery and the description of the location of the grave.
   D.   Burials And Disinterment:
      1.   It is a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code, for any person to:
         a.   Disinter any body buried in any cemetery, except under the
direction of the Cemetery Superintendent who shall, before disinterment,
require written permission from both the Southwest Health Department and the
owner of the Burial Right to the Plot, or his or her heirs, which written
authorization shall be filed and preserved in a record kept for such purposes.
         b.   Disinter or remove the body of a person who has died from a
contagious disease within two (2) years after the date of burial, unless the
body was buried in a hermetically sealed casket or vault and is found to be so
incased at the time of disinterment.
      2.   It is a Class B Misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code, to inter anything other than the remains of human
bodies in a Cemetery located within the City.
      3.   It is a Class B Misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code, to bury the body of any person within the municipal
boundaries of the City except in a cemetery, unless by special permission of
the City Council under such rules and regulations that it may prescribe.
   E.   Cremations:
      1.   Any single Plot within the cemetery may occupy multiple cremation
urns. Urn burials shall include a placard on the surface above the urn denoting
name, birth and death dates of deceased person.
      2.   Burials eligible with a casket and urn(s) are permitted only in
areas of a cemetery designated by the Cemetery Superintendent in the cemetery
plat, subject to the following restrictions:
         a.   A casket cannot be placed above an urn.
         b.   If an urn is the first, by date, to be placed in a plot, then
there can be no casket interred at a later date.
         c.   Urn burials must comply with the limitations set forth in
subsection E.1., above.
         d.   Urn placement is subject to approval by Cemetery Superintendent.
      3.   Scattering cremation ashes on a purchased cemetery plot is permitted
subject to the approval of the Cemetery Superintendent and placement of
identification marker.
   F.   Vaults Required:
      1.   Unless in writing waived by the Cemetery Superintendent, it shall be
unlawful for any person to lie buried in the cemetery unless the casket shall
be placed in a vault made of concrete or of such other material approved by the
City Council, substantially constructed and covered with a similar durable
material.
      2.   No wood shall be used as a permanent part of the construction of any
part of the vault.
   G.   Sale Subject To Rules: Every Burial Right sold is subject to rules and
regulations that have been or may be adopted. The rules and regulations shall
be subject to such changes as are found necessary for the protection of Burial
Right owners, the remains of the dead and the preservation of the cemetery as
determined by the City Council, with input from the Cemetery Superintendent.
   H.   Care Reserved: The City reserves the right to enter upon any plot or
gravesite and to perform all work necessary for the care and upkeep of all
plots and graves in its cemeteries.
   I.   Orders And Responsibilities For Errors: Under no circumstances will the
City assume responsibilities for errors in opening graves when orders are not
given in person with City Staff or the Cemetery Superintendent having the
ability to ask questions and verify the accuracy and content of the request.
   J.   Traffic Rules:
      1.   The provisions of the City traffic ordinances relative to the
operation of vehicles and conduct of pedestrians shall be in effect in the
cemetery, except as herein otherwise modified by this chapter.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive within a
cemetery owned by the City at a speed greater than five (5) miles per hour.
   K.   Children: Children under the age of eight (8) years shall not be
allowed in cemeteries unless accompanied by their parents or other adults,
except for the purposes of attending authorized funerals or, in the company of
adults, placing flowers on the grave of a deceased relative or friend, or
performing any other customary evidence of respect in accordance with their
religious principles.
   L.   Animals Prohibited: No animal shall be allowed in any cemetery, except
in the confines of a vehicle and must be at all times retained within the
confines of said vehicle while the vehicle remains in the cemetery.
   M.   Decorum: Cemetery grounds are sacredly devoted to the interment and
repose of the dead. Strict observance of decorum due such a place shall be
required of all persons.
   N.   Injury To Cemetery Property Prohibited:
      1.   It is a Class B Misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code, for any person to tie or attempt to tie any horse,
animal or motor vehicle to any monument, gravestone, tablet, marker, tree,
shrub, fence or enclosure on the premises of cemetery for the purpose of
injuring, defacing or attempting the removal of same.
      2.   It is a Class B Misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code, for any person to injure, deface, break, destroy or
remove any headstone, tombstone, monument, tree, shrub or any other property in
a cemetery.
      3.   It is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this code, for any person to erect or maintain any fence, corner post,
bench on which to sit, coping or boundary of any kind, to plant any vegetation
upon any plot or plots, street, alley or walk in the cemetery, or to grade the
ground or land thereof. The Cemetery Superintendent shall, whenever required,
furnish the true lines of any plots according to official cemetery plat and
corresponding survey, shall prevent and prohibit any markings of the same,
except by official landmarks, and shall prevent and prohibit any grading
thereof that might destroy or interfere with the general slope of the land.
   O.   Headstones and Markers: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
place or cause to be placed any marker or monument on any plot in the cemetery
in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the City Council
regarding the placement, construction and design of all such markers. Specific
requirements for headstones and markers are subject to the City’s current
cemetery policy.
   P.   Additional Rules And Regulations:
      1.   The City Council may promulgate by ordinance such additional rules
and regulations concerning the care, use, operation and maintenance of the
cemetery as it shall deem necessary.
      2.   The Cemetery Superintendent may, from time to time as the City
Council deems necessary, direct and publish a booklet of rules and regulations
for the convenience of the purchasers of plots in City owned cemeteries. Such
rules and regulations shall constitute a part of the terms and conditions under
which owners and users may utilize the cemetery and shall form a supplement to
this chapter after they have been adopted as official by ordinance of the City
Council.
      3.   Toquerville City’s current cemetery policies shall dictate
additional rules and regulations. (2014 Code; amd. Ord. 2017.04, 5-11-2017;
Ord. 2021.24, 10-20-2021; Ord. 2023.14, 6-21-2023; Ord. 2024.02, 3-6-2024)
7-7-7: PERPETUAL CARE:
   A.   Contracting For Perpetual Care: No grave shall be hereafter opened in a
cemetery owned by the City until the perpetual care fee associated with the
plot where the grave is to be opened shall have been paid in full, and the
vital statistics sheet or death certificate shall have been provided.
   B.   Scope Of Perpetual Care: The essential perpetual care that the City
agrees to give shall consist of care of the cemetery generally, and shall
include, but is not limited to, mowing of all plots and graves at reasonable
intervals, resodding, seeding and filling in sunken graves, sodding the surface
of the graves to plot level, removing dead flowers and trimming trees and
shrubbery when necessary, raking and cleaning the Plots but shall not include
repairing or replacing markers or memorial structures of any nature, except
when the need for repair or replacement is directly caused by the City.
   C.   Perpetual Care Fund:
      1.   There hereby is established a perpetual care fund according to the
laws of the State of Utah and this chapter. All funds received from the sale of
perpetual care services shall be placed in a special perpetual care fund,
invested in compliance with the laws of the State and used for the purposes
herein provided.
      2.   The income from the perpetual care fund shall be used to pay the
upkeep and development of the City’s cemeteries. The City may borrow from the
fund from time to time, but any funds borrowed shall be repaid to the fund with
interest thereon at the prevailing rate paid by the City to borrow funds from
commercial lenders.
      3.   If the City, borrows from the fund, it shall pay into a fund for the
operation of the City’s cemeteries the interest accrued upon money annually.
Should it be found that the interest returned upon the perpetual care funds
shall be more than is required to pay for the operation and upkeep of the
City’s cemeteries, then the surplus shall be added to the principal amount of
the perpetual care fund herein created, and shall be so handled until changed
by resolution to provide for the use of such accumulated interest.
   D.   Duties of the City Treasurer: It shall be the duty of the City
Treasurer to keep an accurate record of the perpetual care fund account,
including investments, to see that the principal portion thereof is properly
invested in accordance with resolutions of the City Council and the laws of the
State of Utah, and to advise the Mayor or City Manager when funds are available
for investment in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more. The
Mayor or City Manager shall advise the City Council of the availability of such
fund.
   E.   Duties Of The City Council: It shall be the duty of the City Council,
when funds are available for investment, to direct by resolution all purchases
of securities for the perpetual care fund or to name a suitable trustee for
such investment.
   F.   Income: All income from investments held in the perpetual care fund
shall be quarterly credited to the cemetery maintenance fund for use in
providing the perpetual care as required herein. (1977 Code § 8-274; amd. 2014
Code; Ord. 2021.24, 10-20-2021; Ord. 2023.14, 6-21-2023)
CHAPTER 8
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
SECTION:
7-8-1: Definitions
7-8-2: Rules, Regulations, And Requirements
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
 
             City-owned property held for parks or recreational activities,
             including but not limited to, a groomed park, playground, paved
             and unpaved trails and paths, athletic field, basketball or
PUBLIC PARK: pickleball courts, pedestrian or bicycle paths, open space
             wilderness areas, or similar public land within the city which is
             under the control, operation, or management of the city, including
             the adjoining parking lot. (Ord. 2024.08, 5-15-2024)
 
7-8-2: RULES, REGULATIONS, AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Posted Rules: The city has the right to post rules and regulations for
all public parks. No person shall violate any provision of a posted rule or
regulation.
   B.   Open Fires: No person shall make or kindle any open fire in a public
park except in fireplaces and grills provided by the city for this purpose or
approved by the city manager or designee.
   C.   Fireworks: Fireworks are prohibited in public parks except if approved
with a special event permit or approved by the city manager or designee.
   D.   Motor Vehicles; Speed Limit And Parking: No person shall ride in or
drive any motor vehicle in any public park except upon approved roads or as
approved by the city. It is prohibited for any person to commit any act, by use
or operation of any motor vehicle in any public park, which if committed upon a
public highway or street in the state, would be prohibited and unlawful. All
vehicles shall comply with the requirements of Title 6, Chapter 2 of the
Toquerville City Code.
   E.   Signs And Advertising: No person shall erect, paint, paste, or
otherwise affix any signs in a public park except as approved by the city.
   F.   Vending: No person or group may utilize any public park for profit or
financial gain without a special event license as required in Chapter 5 of
Title 10, or written approval of the city manager or designee. This includes
but is not limited to selling, entertainment, concerts, and other activities
that charge a fee.
   G.   Park Hours Of Operation: No person shall enter, remain, stay, or loiter
in any public park between the posted hours.
   H.   Reservations: All reservations shall comply with the City's current
reservation policy. (Ord. 2024.08, 5-15-2024)
 
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-1-1: Water Department
8-1-2: Applications For Connection, Service
8-1-3: Rates And Connection Fees; Payment Provisions
8-1-4: Separate Connections Required; Visitors
8-1-5: Water Meters
8-1-6: Line Installation
8-1-7: Extensions Of Water Mains
8-1-8: Backflow And Cross Connections
8-1-9: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
8-1-10: Prohibited Acts And Activities
8-1-11: Landscape Irrigation
8-1-12: Service Outside City
8-1-13: Discontinuance Of Service Request By Customer
8-1-14: Fire Hydrants
8-1-15: Nonliability For Damages
 
8-1-16: Penalty
8-1-1: WATER DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Created: The water department of the city is hereby created. It shall
administer the operation and maintenance of the water system of the city.
   B.   Superintendent: There is hereby created the position of superintendent
of the water department.
   C.   Duties Of Superintendent: The superintendent of the water system shall
manage and supervise the city water system pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and pursuant to resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the city
council from time to time prescribing his powers and duties and directing the
manner and frequency with which he shall make reports to the mayor relating to
the water system. All of the functions and activities of the superintendent
shall be carried on under the direction of the mayor. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012,
eff. 4-12-2012)
8-1-2: APPLICATIONS FOR CONNECTION, SERVICE:
   A.   Application For Water Service: Any person who desires or is required to
secure water service when such service is available from the municipal water
system, shall file with the water department a written application and
agreement for the service.
   B.   Application For Water Connection: Any person, other than a subdivider
or developer seeking multiple connections, who desires or is required to secure
a new connection to the city water system, shall file with the water department
for each connection a written and signed connection application.
   C.   Application For Water Connection By Subdivider: Whenever a subdivider
or developer desires or is required to install water connections and extensions
for a subdivision or development, the subdivider or developer shall enter into
a written extension agreement which shall constitute an application for
permission to make the extensions and connections and an agreement specifying
the terms and conditions under which the water extensions and connections shall
be required.
   D.   Nonowner Applicants; Agreement Of Owner: Applications for water service
made by the tenant of an owner must, in addition to the above requirements, be
guaranteed by an agreement signed by the owner of the premises or his duly
authorized agent. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-2012; amd. 2014 Code;
Ord. 2024.04, 4-17-2024)
8-1-3: RATES AND CONNECTION FEES; PAYMENT PROVISIONS:
   A.   Rate Setting; Promulgation Of Rules: The rates, penalty fee for
delinquency in payment, connection fee, reservoir fee, inspection fee and other
charges incidental to connection and services from the city water system shall
be fixed from time to time by the city council. The city council may from time
to time promulgate rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and collecting
charges for water services and all other rules necessary for the management and
control of the water system. Rates for services furnished shall be uniform with
respect to each class or classes of service established or that may hereafter
be established.
   B.   Deposits:
      1.   Any individual or entity requesting a water connection within the
city limits shall be required to pay a deposit upon service application
submission. The specific deposit amount shall be determined in accordance with
the current fee schedule established by the city council.
      2.   Any individual or entity requesting a water connection and use of a
fire hydrant meter shall be required to pay a deposit upon application
submission. The specific amount shall be determined in accordance with the
current fee schedule established by the city council.
      3.   Refunds: Any individual or entity that has paid a deposit and has
twelve (12) months of on time payments may be entitled to a refund of their
deposit in the form of a credit to their billing account.
   C.   Special Rates: The city council may from time to time fix by agreement,
ordinance or resolution special rates and conditions for users using
exceptionally large amounts of water service or making use of the water system
under exceptional circumstances, upon such terms and conditions as they may
deem proper.
   D.   Use Without Payment Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, by
himself, family, servants or agents, to utilize the city water system without
paying therefor, as herein provided or, without authority, to open any fire
hydrant, stopcock, valve or other fixture attached to the system of water
supply unless it is done pursuant to proper application, agreement or
resolution. It shall be unlawful to injure, deface or impair any part or
appurtenance of the water system, or to cast anything into any reservoir or
tank belonging to the water system.
   E.   Billings; Delinquency; Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   The city shall furnish to each user, or mail to, or leave at his
place of residence or usual place of business, a written or printed statement
stating thereon the amount of water service charges assessed against him once
each month, or at such other regular interval as the city council shall direct.
      2.   The statement shall specify the amount of the bill for the water
service and the place of payment and date due. If any person fails to pay the
water charges within sixty (60) days of the date due, the city shall give the
customer notice in writing of intent to discontinue the service to the customer
unless the customer pays the bill in full within five (5) days from the date of
notice.
      3.   If the water service is thereafter discontinued for failure to make
payment, then before the water service to the premises shall again be provided,
all delinquent water charges must have been paid to the city treasurer or
arrangements made for their payment in a manner satisfactory to the city. In
the event water is turned off for nonpayment of water charges, then before the
water service to the premises shall again be provided, the customer shall pay,
in addition to all delinquent water charges, such extra charge for turning the
water on and off as the city council may have established. Furthermore, in
addition to such payments and penalties, a delinquent customer may be required
to make and file a new application and deposit if the previous deposit has
theretofore been applied to the payment of delinquent bills. The utility clerk
is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the payment of all delinquent
water charges by an action at law in the name of the city. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-
2012, eff. 4-12-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2023.01, 1-4-2023; Ord. 2024.04, 4-
17-2024)
8-1-4: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED; VISITORS:
   A.   Separate Connections: It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more families
or service users to be supplied from the same service pipe, connection or water
meter, unless special permission for such combination usage has been granted by
the city council and the premises served are owned by the same owner. In all
such cases, a failure on the part of any one of the users to comply with this
subsection shall warrant a withholding of a supply of water through the service
connections until compliance or payment has been made, and in any event, the
property owner shall be primarily liable to the city for all water services
utilized on all such premises. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the
power of the city to require separate pipes, connections or meters at a
subsequent time.
   B.   Period For Visitors: Individuals visiting the premises of an authorized
user in a recreational vehicle, not including a mobile home, and continuing to
live therein during the period of visitation may receive water service from the
service pipes or facilities of the host during the visitation period, which
shall not exceed three (3) months. Continued use thereafter shall be deemed
unauthorized and violative of the provisions of this chapter relating to
separate connections and unauthorized use. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-
2012)
8-1-5: WATER METERS:
   A.   Required: Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this section, all
structures, dwelling units, establishments and persons using water from the
city water system must have such number of water meters connected to their
water system as are necessary in the judgment of the water superintendent to
adequately measure use and determine water charges to the respective users.
   B.   Furnished By City: Meters will be furnished by the city upon
application for connection, and upon payment of such connection fees and other
costs as may be established by the city council from time to time.
   C.   Ownership; Disputes Regarding Required Number: Meters shall be deemed
to be and remain the property of the city. Whenever a dispute between the water
superintendent and the property owner arises as to the appropriate number of
meters to be installed on any premises, the matter shall be heard and
determined by the city council after due notice in writing to the parties
involved.
   D.   Readings: The water superintendent shall cause meter readings to be
taken regularly and shall advise the utility clerk thereof for the purpose of
recording the necessary billings for water service.
   E.   Adjustments And Inspections: Meters may be checked, inspected or
adjusted at the discretion of the city, and they shall not be adjusted or
tampered with by the customer. Meter boxes shall not be opened for the purpose
of turning on or off water, except by an authorized representative of the city,
unless special permission is given by the city through its representatives to
the customer to do so.
   F.   Testing: If a customer submits a written request to the water
superintendent to test his water meter, the city may, if under the
circumstances it deems it advisable and in its discretion, order a test of the
meter measuring the water delivered to such customer. If such request is made
within twelve (12) months after the date of the last previous test, the
customer may be required to pay the cost of such test. If the meter is found in
such test to record from ninety seven percent (97%) to one hundred three
percent (103%) of accuracy under methods of testing satisfactory to the city,
the meter shall be deemed to accurately measure the use of water.
   G.   Meter Failure: If the city meters fail to register at any time, the
water delivered during the period of failure shall be estimated on the basis of
previous consumption during a period which is not questioned. In the event a
meter is found to be recording less than ninety seven percent (97%) or more
than one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy, the city shall make such
adjustments in the customer’s previous bills as are just and fair under the
circumstances.
   H.   Damage Or Injury: All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other
materials of the city on or near the customer’s premises caused by any act or
neglect of the customer shall, in the discretion of the city, be repaired by
and at the expense of the customer, and the customer shall pay all costs and
expenses, including a reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue to the
city through its efforts to repair the damage to the lines, meters or to other
equipment of the department or collect such costs from the customer. (Ord.
2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2023.01, 1-4-2023)
8-1-6: LINE INSTALLATION:
   A.   Permits For Installation: It shall be unlawful for any person to lay,
repair, alter or connect any water line to the city culinary water system
without first having received a construction permit from the city. (Ord.
2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   Applications For Installation Permit:
      1.   Applications for permits to make water connections or other
alteration, or for laying or repairing lines connected directly or indirectly
to the city water system, must be made in writing by a licensed plumber, his
authorized agent, or by the owner of the premises, who shall describe the
nature of the work to be done for which the application is made.
      2.   The application shall be granted if the superintendent determines
that:
         a.   The connection, repair, alteration or installation will cause no
damage to the street in which the water main is laid, or that it will not be
prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or may
thereafter be connected to the water main.
         b.   The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations,
specifications and standards of materials required by the city.
      3.   All connections, alterations or installations shall be to the line
and grade designated by the water superintendent. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012,
eff. 4-12-2012)
      4.   Fees for permits or for inspection services shall be of such amounts
as the city council shall from time to time determine. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-
2012, eff. 4-12-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
   C.   Moving Or Replacement Of Water Lines: In the event that the city, it
its sole discretion, determines that any water line of the city must be moved
or replaced, the city shall bear that portion of the cost of such move or
replacement which applies to the main lines up to the property line of the
customer. The cost of reconnecting such new line or lines from the house of the
customer to his property line shall be borne by the customer.
   D.   When Permits Shall Not Be Issued: Permission to connect with the city
water system shall not be given unless the plumbing in the house or building to
be connected meets the provisions of the building and plumbing codes of the
city. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-2012)
8-1-7: EXTENSIONS OF WATER MAINS:
   A.   Petition: Any person or persons, including any subdivider, who desires
to have the water mains extended within the city, and is willing to advance the
whole expense of such extension and receive the return of an agreed portion
thereof, as hereinafter provided, may make application of the city council by
petition. The petition shall contain a description of such proposed extension,
accompanied by a map showing the location of the proposed extension, together
with an offer to advance the whole expense thereof, which cost shall be
verified by the water superintendent. The city council may grant or deny the
petition as in its discretion deems best for the welfare of existing water
users in the city.
   B.   Costs Of Extensions Determined: Upon the receipt of such petition and
map and before the petition is granted, the city council shall obtain from the
water superintendent a certified statement showing the whole cost of expense of
making such extension.
   C.   Amount Of Cost Deposited With Recorder: If the city council grants the
petition, the amount of the cost of making the extension, as certified by the
superintendent, shall be deposited with the city recorder before any work shall
be done on such extension. The deposit shall be made within thirty (30) days,
or such other time as the city council shall indicate, after the granting
thereof.
   D.   Return Of Any Money; Forfeiture:
      1.   At the time the city council decides whether or not to grant the
petition for an extension, it shall also decide whether or not any portion of
the costs is to be refunded and the manner and the circumstances under which
such refund shall be made or credited to the applicant, his successors or
representatives. Such determination shall be duly recorded in writing and a
copy thereof furnished to the applicant. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-
2012)
      2.   In the event any deposit remains unclaimed for a period of two (2)
years after the depositor has discontinued water service, the deposit may be
forfeited and then transferred to the water utility fund. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-
2012, eff. 4-12-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
   E.   Ownership Of Extension: Any such extension shall be deemed the property
of the city. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-2012)
8-1-8: BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the backflow and cross connection ordinance is
to protect the public drinking water supply of the city from the possibility of
contamination or pollution by requiring compliance with the Utah State Rules
for Public Drinking Water Systems and the Plumbing Code as adopted by the State
of Utah, that require cross connection control protection of all public
drinking water systems in the State of Utah. Compliance with these codes will
be considered reasonable diligence for the prevention of contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow into the public drinking water system. To
promote the reasonable elimination or control of cross connection in the
plumbing fixtures and industrial piping system(s) of the consumer, as required
by the state and plumbing regulations to assure water system safety. To provide
for the administration of a continuing program of backflow prevention which
will systematically examine risk and effectively prevent the contamination or
pollution of the drinking water system.
   B.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall be observed and applied, unless the context of the subject matter
requires otherwise:
 
                    The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
BACK PRESSURE:      under pressure into the feeding distribution pipes of a
                    potable water supply system from any sources other than the
                    intended source.
                    The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
                    into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply
BACK SIPHONAGE:     system from any source, other than the intended source,
                    caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water
                    supply system.
BACKFLOW:           Reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
                    pressure or back siphonage.
                    An assembly or device designed to prevent backflow.
                    Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are
BACKFLOW PREVENTER: contained within the Utah State Rules for Public Water
                    Systems and the International Plumbing Code (IPC) as
                    adopted by the State of Utah.
                    An impairment of the quality of the potable water supply by
                    sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or
CONTAMINATION:      other materials to a degree which creates an actual or
                    potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or
                    through the spread of disease.
                    Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
                    fixtures which may allow non-potable water or industrial
                    fluids or other material of questionable quality to come in
                    contact with potable water inside a distribution system.
CROSS CONNECTION:   This would include any temporary connections, such as swing
                    connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves,
                    spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover
                    devices or sliding multi-part tubes or other plumbing
                    arrangements.
 
   C.   Responsibility Of City: The water department shall be responsible for
the protection of the drinking water distribution system from the foreseeable
conditions leading to the possible contamination or pollution of the drinking
water system due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants into the
drinking water supply.
   D.   Protection Required: No water service connection to any premises shall
be installed or maintained by the city, or any other water utility, unless the
water supply in the premises is protected as required herein.
   E.   Notification Of Public: Although failure of a consumer to be aware of
these provisions shall be no defense to violation hereof, the water department
shall use reasonable means to notify its consumers of the hazards of cross
connection and the need for annual inspection of backflow prevention
assemblies. Drinking water system surveys or inspections of the consumer's
water distribution system shall be conducted by individuals deemed qualified by
and representing the city. Survey records shall indicate compliance with state
regulations. All such records will be maintained by the water department. The
water department shall schedule and notify, in writing, all consumers of the
need for the periodic system survey to ensure compliance with the existing
applicable minimum health and safety standards.
   F.   New Construction: The city will review all plans for new construction
to ensure that unprotected cross connections are not an integral part of the
consumer's water system. All systems that are using culinary water to irrigate
landscaping or agriculture or to be used where cross connections or backflow
could enter the city's system, a backflow preventer, as approved by the current
International Plumbing Code and this section will be installed to IBC rules and
regulations. The assembly will be installed within six feet (6') of the city's
water connection into the property and cannot be tied into before assembly. The
owner shall provide the water superintendent with verification of a certified
test of all the backflow prevention assemblies before a certificate of
occupancy is issued.
   G.   Installation Required: Whenever the city or the water department deems
a service connection water usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water
supply, installation of an approved backflow preventer shall be required on the
lateral service line of the consumer's water system, at or near the property
line, or immediately inside the building being served, but before the first
branch line leading off the lateral service line in any event. The type of
backflow preventer required shall depend upon the degree of hazard existing at
the point of cross connection. All backflow preventers shall be tested within
ten (10) working days of installation, relocation, or repair and annually
thereafter.
   H.   Assessment; Access For Water Department: A consumer's system shall be
open for assessment at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of
the water department in order to determine whether cross connections or other
structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this chapter, exist. In
order to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary
hazards exist or if a backflow preventer has been installed in such manner as
to create a safety hazard, the city or water department may inspect and access
areas on a consumer's property above and beyond water meters, sealing areas,
pits, paneled interior areas, or other locations where cross connections might
exist. The consumer shall be responsible to provide a route of access across
his property for inspection purposes that is free from litter, overgrowth, the
threat of vicious animals, or other hindrance that may be detrimental to the
safety of the inspector or obstructive to his ease of access.
   I.   Duty To Inspect Annually: It shall be the responsibility of the
consumer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to
have certified backflow tests made at least once per year at the consumer's
expense. In those instances where the water department deems the hazard to be
great, it may require certified surveys or inspections and tests at a more
frequent interval.
   J.   Testing By Certified Backflow Technicians: All tests of backflow
preventer assemblies shall be conducted by a certified backflow technician who
will be responsible for the competence and accuracy of all tests and reports.
Such technicians shall be responsible for the following:
      1.   Assure that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for
the testing, repairing or overhauling of backflow prevention assemblies.
      2.   Make reports of such testing and/or repairs to the consumer and the
water department on a form approved for such use by the water department, and
submit report directly to the water department within thirty (30) days of test
performed.
      3.   Include in all reports a list of any materials or replacement parts
used.
      4.   Ensure that replacement parts are equal in quality to parts
originally supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired.
      5.   Ensure that his/her license is current, the testing equipment being
used is acceptable to the state and is in proper operating condition.
      6.   Be equipped with, and competent to use, all necessary tools, gauges
and other equipment necessary to properly test and maintain backflow prevention
assemblies.
      7.   Tag each backflow prevention assembly showing the serial number,
date tested and by who, including the technician's license number.
   K.   Repair And Maintenance: The maintenance, including necessary repairs,
of all backflow prevention assemblies and cross connection control devices
required by this section shall be the responsibility of the consumer, and
failure to adequately maintain any required equipment shall be a violation
hereof. All installations and repairs of such equipment shall be effected by a
certified journeyman plumber, properly licensed landscaper or other agent of
the owner, provided he/she is a certified backflow technician as provided in
subsection I of this section.
   L.   Records Maintenance: The water department shall keep reasonable records
of cross connection hazards and the test reports of backflow assemblies,
including those records required by the state and federal agencies.
   M.   Suspension Or Shut Off Of Water Service: The city or water department
may suspend, discontinue or shut off water service to consumers on an emergency
basis, as the city and/or water department deems reasonably necessary, in the
event of a cross connection or suspected cross connection to prevent or limit
contamination of the water supply or water system.
   N.   Violations:
      1.   Conditions Constituting Violations: Service of water to a consumer
found to be in violation of this section shall be discontinued by the city or
water department after written notice of the violation, and appropriate times
suspended for voluntary compliance, and the due process entitlements otherwise
extended by the city or water department before termination of water services.
A violation exists if:
         a.   A backflow prevention assembly required by this section for
control of cross connections is not installed, tested or maintained in
accordance with this section, the Utah State Rules for Public Drinking Water
Systems, and the International Plumbing Code as adopted by the State of Utah.
         b.   It is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed
or bypassed.
         c.   An unprotected cross connection exists on the premises.
         d.   The periodic system inspection has not been conducted.
      2.   Failure To Correct: Where written notification of a deficiency is
provided by the city or water department, in the event of a failure by the
consumer to take the required corrective action within ten (10) days after the
date of mailing such notice, the city or water department shall immediately
discontinue service in accordance herewith. Water service will not be restored
until all such conditions or defects are corrected. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012,
eff. 4-12-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2020.07, 3-12-2020; Ord. 2023.01, 1-4-
2023; Ord. 2024.10, 6-20-2024)
 
8-1-9: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Pipes To Be Kept In Good Repair: All users of water services shall keep
their service pipes and connections and other apparatus in good repair and
protected from frost at their own expense. No person, except under the
direction of the water superintendent, shall be allowed to dig into the street
for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe.
   B.   Quality Of Service Pipe:
      1.   All service and other pipe used in conjunction with the water
services of the city shall be of such material and quality and be installed at
such distances below ground as may be specified by the standards and
specifications for public improvements adopted and amended from time to time by
the city. All work, alterations or extensions affecting water pipes shall be
subject to the acceptance of the water department.
      2.   No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water pipes across lots or
buildings to adjoining premises without permission from the water department
and subject to such requirements relating to controls as may be imposed by him.
   C.   Sprinkling Vehicles: Vehicles for sprinkling shall be regulated and
controlled by the water department through the superintendent of the water
department.
   D.   Department To Have Free Access: The water superintendent and his agents
shall at all ordinary hours have free access to any place supplied with water
services from the city system for the purpose of examining the apparatus and
ascertaining the amount of water service being used and the manner of its use.
   E.   Water Not Supplied For Motors, Syphons, Etc.: No water shall be
supplied from the pipes of the city water system for the purpose of driving
motor, syphon, turbine or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines or elevators,
or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind whatsoever, nor shall any
license be granted or issued for any such purpose, except by special permission
of the city council.
   F.   Sprinklers:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use such number of outlets
simultaneously or to use such sprinkler or combinations of sprinklers or
outlets as will, in the opinion of the city council, materially affect the
pressure or supply of water in the city water system or any part thereof, and
the city council may from time to time, by resolution, specify combinations or
numbers of outlets which may have such effect.
      2.   The city council shall, after determining that such improper use
exists, notify the affected water user or the owner of the premises whereon
such use occurs of such determination in writing, order such use discontinued
and advise that such continued usage constitutes a violation of this
subsection.
   G.   Scarcity Of Water: In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in
the judgment of the mayor and the city council be necessary, the mayor shall by
proclamation limit the use of water to such extent as may be necessary. It
shall be unlawful for any person, his family, servants or agents, to violate
any proclamation made by the mayor in pursuance of this subsection.
   H.   Waste Of Water:
      1.   Users of water from the city water system shall not permit water to
continue to run wastefully and without due efforts to conserve water. If, in
the judgment of the water superintendent or any of the officers of the city, a
user of city water engages in practices which result in the needless waste of
water and continues so to do after reasonable notice to discontinue
wastefulness has been given, the superintendent, or any officer, may refer the
matter to the city council.
      2.   The city council may thereupon consider terminating the right of the
individual to use culinary water. If it elects to consider the matter of
termination, it shall give notice to the water user of the intention to
terminate their water connection at least five (5) days prior to the meeting of
the city council at which termination of water service is to be considered. The
notice shall inform him of the time and place of the meeting and of the charges
which led to the consideration of the termination.
      3.   A water user whose right to utilize city water is being reviewed
shall have the opportunity to appear, with or without counsel, and present his
reasons why his water service should not be discontinued.
      4.   After due hearing, the city council may arrive at a determination.
If the determination is to discontinue the wasteful water user's service
connection, it shall notify them of the decision and of the period during which
the service will remain discontinued. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-2012;
amd. 2014 Code)
8-1-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Turning On Water After Being Turned Off: It shall be unlawful for any
person, after the water has been turned off from the premises for nonpayment of
water charges or other violations, or resolutions pertaining to the water
supply, to turn on or to allow the water to be turned on or used without
authority from the city. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-2012; amd. 2014
Code)
   B.   Unauthorized Users: It shall be unlawful for any water service user to
permit any person from other premises or any unauthorized person to use or
obtain water services regularly from his premises or water facilities, either
outside or inside his premises.
   C.   Faulty Equipment: It shall be unlawful for any water user to:
      1.   Waste water.
      2.   Allow it to be wasted by stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes,
or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow.
      3.   Wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets or stops, or through
basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus.
      4.   Use the water for purposes other than for those which he has
applied, or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for
controlling the water supply. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-2012)
8-1-11: LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION:
   A.   Prohibited Time Specified: Sprinkler irrigation of all landscapes is
prohibited between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. during the months of May, June, July, August and September.
   B.   Applicability; Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall apply
to all landscapes within the city. This section does not apply in the following
situations:
      1.   New lawns that require frequent irrigation during the first thirty
(30) days within planting.
      2.   Short cycles required for testing, inspecting and maintaining
irrigation systems.
      3.   Other situations as permitted in writing by the city.
   C.   Penalty:
      1.   Violations of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an
infraction, punishable as follows:
         a.   First offense: Warning.
         b.   Second offense: Twenty five dollar ($25.00) fine.
         c.   Third and subsequent offenses: Thirty five dollar ($35.00) fine.
      2.   Each day such violation is committed shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 03-13-03, 3-13-2003, eff. 4-12-
2003)
8-1-12: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Permitted: The city may furnish water service from its water system to
persons outside the city in accordance with provisions of this section.
   B.   Petition For Service: Any person located outside the city limits who
desires to be supplied with water services from the city water system and is
willing to pay in advance the whole expense of extending the water system to
his property, including the cost of extending any water main beyond its present
location, may make application to city council by petition containing:
      1.   A description of the proposed extension.
      2.   A map showing the location thereof.
      3.   An offer to pay the whole expense incurred by the city in providing
such extension and to advance such expense as shall be verified by the water
superintendent. The city council and the person or persons seeking such
extension may enter into an agreement providing in detail the terms under which
the extension may be utilized by others in the future and the terms under which
all or any portion of the cost of installing such extension may be refunded.
      4.   An acknowledgment that the city, in granting the petition, need
supply only such water to the petitioner which from time to time the city
council deems beyond the requirements of water users within the city limits,
and that such extension shall be the property of and subject to the control of
the city.
   C.   Extensions May Be Master Metered: When an extension supplying more than
one house or user outside the city limits is connected to city water mains, the
water superintendent may require a master meter to be installed near the point
where the connection is to be made to the city main. This installation will be
at the expense of the persons served by such extension according to the regular
rates for meter installation. Responsible parties must agree to pay all bills
for the water served through the meter at the applicable water rates.
   D.   Cost Of Extensions Determined By Water Superintendent: Upon receipt of
such petition and map and before the petition is granted, the city council
shall determine what portion, if any, of the extension of the city water mains
to the city limits the city shall construct, and shall obtain from the water
superintendent a verified statement showing the whole cost and expense of
making such extension. Such costs and expenses shall include administrative and
supervisory expenditures of the city water department, which shall in no event
be deemed to be less than ten percent (10%) of the costs of materials and
labor. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-2012)
8-1-13: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE REQUEST BY CUSTOMER:
Any customer desiring to discontinue service shall notify the city in writing
of such fact at least ten (10) days before the date when such service shall be
discontinued. On giving such written notice, the customer shall not be
responsible for water bills incurred after the date specified in the notice.
Any credit balance in favor of the customer as a result of an advance payment
of bills or a deposit made will be refunded upon discontinuance of service.
(Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff. 4-12-2012)
8-1-14: FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Water For Fire Hydrants; Easements: Water for fire hydrants will be
furnished free of charge by the city. Installation and repairs on such hydrants
shall be at the expense of the city and shall be made under the direction of
the city. All customers shall grant the city, upon demand, a right of way or
easement to install and maintain such hydrants on their premises if the city
concludes that hydrants shall be so installed for the protection of the
residents of the city.
   B.   Use Regulations:
      1.   Except for emergency use by emergency personnel, any person or
entity desiring to use water from any fire hydrant located within the
boundaries of the city shall be required to obtain a fire hydrant meter from
the city in accordance with the provisions of this section.
      2.   No fire hydrant meter shall be issued to any person or entity except
upon:
         a.   Submission to the city of a signed, written application on such
form as may be provided by the city and containing such information as deemed
necessary or desirable by the city; and
         b.   Payment to the city of a deposit to guarantee return of fire
hydrant meter in an amount set from time to time by the city council.
      3.   Upon approval of a submitted request, a fire hydrant meter will be
issued by the water department.
      4.   All fire hydrant meters will be removed from the hydrant each night.
      5.   All fire hydrant meters will be read monthly by the user and the
readings will be reported to the water department on a monthly basis by
telephone or fax.
      6.   All fire hydrant meters will only be used on city fire hydrants. All
fire hydrants will be operated with a hydrant wrench.
      7.   All persons or entities to which a fire hydrant meter has been
issued shall:
         a.   Obtain, prior to using the fire hydrant meter, approval from the
city for use at such location and for such period of time as may be authorized
by the city.
         b.   Pay a water usage fee to the city at a rate set from time to time
by the city council.
         c.   Pay a monthly rental for fire hydrant meter at a rate set from
time to time by the city council.
If the customer or contractor does not report hydrant meter readings as
required by the water department, an additional penalty in an amount set from
time to time by the city council shall be assessed. Failure to report readings
for two (2) consecutive months will cause the meter to be located and
impounded. Impounded meters will be returned to the customer upon payment of a
fee in an amount set from time to time by the city council. In the event a
customer fails to pay amounts due for two (2) consecutive months, the account
will be suspended and privilege to use a hydrant meter will be revoked for one
year.
Customer agrees to pay for any damage incurred to fire hydrant meter or fire
hydrant as a result of customer's use of a fire hydrant meter.
Use of the fire hydrant meter issued hereunder is permitted only within the
corporate limits of the city. Failure to comply with this section will result
in impound of hydrant meter, loss of deposit and forfeiture of privilege for
one year.
   C.   Penalty: Any person or entity that uses water from a fire hydrant
without having first obtained a fire hydrant meter as required by this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. Each violation of this section shall be considered to be a
separate offense. Any person or entity who, having first obtained a fire
hydrant meter in accordance with the provisions hereof, thereafter violates the
provisions of this chapter, shall be required to immediately return the fire
hydrant meter to the city, and any unpaid water usage fees shall be immediately
due and owing or deducted from the deposit, with the balance of said deposit,
if any, to be refunded to said person or entity. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-2012, eff.
4-12-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
8-1-15: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
   A.   The city shall not be liable for any damage to a water service user by
reason of stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply service:
      1.   Caused by fires, scarcity of water or accidents to the water, the
water system or its mains;
      2.   Which occurs as the result of maintenance and extension operations;
      3.   Which results from suspension, discontinuance or shut off of water
services pursuant to section
8-1-8 of this chapter to limit or prevent contamination of the water supply or
water system due to a cross connection or suspected cross connection; or
      4.   From any other unavoidable cause.
   B.   This section shall not be construed to extend the liability of the city
beyond that provided in the governmental immunity act. (Ord. 2012.03, 4-12-
2012, eff. 4-12-2012)
8-1-16: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2014 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SECONDARY WATER CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Development Activity Defined
8-2-2: Connection Required
8-2-3: Performance Of Connections
8-2-4: Waiver Of Mandatory Connection
8-2-5: Penalty
8-2-1: DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY DEFINED:
For purposes of this chapter, the term "development activity" shall mean any
construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, or any change in the
use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates
additional demand upon or affects the city culinary water system or the TSWS.
(Ord. 2009.01, 2-12-2009)
8-2-2: CONNECTION REQUIRED:
Unless waived as provided in section
8-2-4 of this chapter, it is hereby required that at the time any new
development activity occurs on any parcel of real property located within the
city boundaries, the property owner shall be required to physically connect
such real property to the Toquerville secondary water system (TSWS), as
described in this chapter. If the new development activity is to occur on a
single parcel of real property, which is to remain a single parcel of real
property following such development activity, the owner of such real property
shall be required to make at least one connection to the TSWS for such parcel
of real property. If the new development activity is to occur on real property
which is a proposed or existing subdivision, then the owner of each parcel of
real property or each lot within the proposed or existing subdivision shall be
required to make at least one connection to the TSWS for each parcel of real
property or each lot within the proposed or existing subdivision. (Ord.
2009.01, 2-12-2009)
8-2-3: PERFORMANCE OF CONNECTIONS:
   A.   All connections shall be performed by the Washington County water
conservancy district ("district"), unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the
district, which consent shall be granted or withheld by the district pursuant
to its standard operating procedures or guidelines. All connections to the TSWS
shall be made in compliance with all construction and design standards relating
to the TSWS adopted by the district. (Ord. 2009.01, 2-12-2009; amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   If property owner has the district make the connection to the TSWS, the
property owner shall pay to the district any connection or impact fees or
charges required by the district at the time specified by the district. If the
physical connection to the TSWS is being performed by persons or entities other
than the district, said connection shall be inspected and approved by the
district or its designee pursuant to the district's operating procedures or
guidelines. (Ord. 2009.01, 2-12-2009)
8-2-4: WAIVER OF MANDATORY CONNECTION:
The requirements for mandatory connection to the TSWS under section
8-2-2 of this chapter may be waived with respect to a specific parcel or
parcels as provided herein. Any property owner seeking such a waiver of the
requirements to connect to the TSWS may file a written request for a waiver of
such requirements with the city. Any such request should include such
information as may be necessary for the city council to determine if it is
feasible (physically and financially) for the particular parcel or parcels in
question to connect to the TSWS. All such written requests shall be reviewed by
the city engineer and all applications which are confirmed by the city engineer
shall be forwarded to the city council for review. If, after review and written
confirmation by the city engineer, it is determined by the city council that it
is not feasible (physically and/or financially) for a particular parcel or
parcels of real property to connect to the TSWS, the city council may waive the
requirement for mandatory connection set forth in section
8-2-2 of this chapter as to a specific parcel or parcels. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as an implied waiver and such a waiver may only be
granted if specifically requested by the property owner as set forth herein.
(Ord. 2009.01, 2-12-2009)
8-2-5: PENALTY:
Persons commencing development activity without complying with this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2009.01, 2-12-2009; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Adopted
8-3-1: ADOPTED:
   A.   The rules of operation of Ash Creek special service district, dated
February 27, 2014, a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified herein
and by this reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, is hereby
adopted by the city and incorporated into the rules, regulations and ordinances
of the city. (Ord. 2014.01, 3-13-2014; amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   The approval and adoption hereby of said rules of operation shall
specifically included:
      1.   Schedule I, surcharge rate structure.
      2.   Schedule II, monthly rate schedule.
      3.   Schedule III, impact fee schedule. (Ord. 2014.01, 3-13-2014)
CHAPTER 4
WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
SECTION:
8-4-1: Purpose
8-4-2: Requirements
8-4-1: PURPOSE:
The city council finds there is a need to adopt a water conservation plan to
address water conservation programs and practices. The plan shall be used in
reviewing, approving, and administering requests for zone changes, conventional
and phased subdivisions, development in commercial districts, and conditional
use permits. (Ord. 2019.04, 7-11-2019)
8-4-2: REQUIREMENTS:
The city shall adopt or modify a water conservation plan in compliance with
Utah State requirements no less frequently than once every five (5) years
during a regularly schedule city council business meeting. Before adoption or
amending the water conservation plan, the city shall hold a public hearing with
reasonable and advance public notice. The adopted plan shall be filed with the
division of water resources. (Ord. 2019.04, 7-11-2019)
CHAPTER 5
IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Purpose
8-5-2: Definitions
8-5-3: Written Impact Fee Analysis
8-5-4: Impact Fee Facilities Plan
8-5-5: Calculation And Enactment Of Impact Fees
8-5-6: Developer Credits
8-5-7: Impact Fees Accounting And Expenditures
8-5-8: Expenditure Of Impact Fees
8-5-9: Refunds
8-5-10: Other Impact Fees
8-5-11: Additional Fees And Costs
8-5-12: Fees Effective At Time Of Payment
8-5-13: Imposition Of Additional Fee Or Refund After Development
8-5-14: Impact Fee Schedules
8-5-15: Maximum Supportable Impact Fees
8-5-16: Fee Exceptions And Adjustments
8-5-17: Appeal Procedure
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
This Impact Fee chapter establishes the city's impact fee policies and
procedures and conforms to the requirements of the Utah Impact Fees Act, U.C.A
§ 11-36a ("the Act"). This chapter supersedes any prior resolutions and
ordinances related to Parks and Recreation, Culinary Water, Storm Drain and
Transportation Impact Fees within the city; provides a schedule of impact fees
for differing types of land-use development, and sets forth direction for
challenging, modifying and appealing Impact Fees. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Words and phrases that are defined in the Act shall have the same definition in
this impact fee chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings:
IMPACT FEE    Means the City's Impact Fee Facilities Plans required by Section 11-36a-301 of
FACILITIES    the Act, which have been prepared in accordance with the Act and are to be
PLANS or      adopted by passage of this chapter. The Impact Fee Facilities Plans are
IFFPS:        attached hereto as Exhibit "B" and incorporated into this chapter by this
              reference.
DEVELOPMENT   Means any construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, any change
ACTIVITY:     in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land located
              within the City that creates additional demand and need for public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT   Means any written authorization from the City that authorizes the commencement
APPROVAL:     of a development activity.
CITY:         Means Toquerville City, a municipal corporation and political subdivision of
              the State of Utah.
              Means a payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition of
              development approval to mitigate the impact of the development on public
IMPACT FEE:   infrastructure. "Impact Fee" includes development Impact Fees, but is not a
              tax, a special assessment, a hookup fee, a building permit fee, a fee for
              project improvements, or other reasonable permit or application fees.
IMPACT FEE    Means the City's written analysis required by Section 11-36a-303 of the Act.
ANALYSIS or   The Impact Fee Analyses are attached hereto as Exhibit "B" and incorporated
IFAs:         into this chapter by this reference.
              Has the same meaning as Utah Code Annotated § 11-36a-102(14) and includes but
              is not limited to site improvements and facilities that are planned and
PROJECT       designed to provide service for development resulting from a development
IMPROVEMENTS: activity and are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or
              users of said development activity. "Project Improvements" do not include
              "System Improvements" as defined below.
PROPORTIONATE Has the same meaning as Utah Code Annotated § 11-36a-102(15) and includes the
SHARE:        cost of a public facility improvements that is roughly proportionate and
              reasonably related to the service demands and needs of a development activity.
PUBLIC        Has the same meaning as Utah Code Annotated § 11-36a-102(16) and includes Parks
FACILITIES:   and Recreation, Culinary Water, Storm Drain and Transportation and related
              infrastructure improvements of the City for the City-Wide Service Area.
              Means the geographic area within the City's municipal boundaries as identified
SERVICE AREA: in Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated into this chapter by this
              reference.
              Has the same meaning as Utah Code Annotated § 11-36a-102(21) and includes both
SYSTEM        existing public facilities designed to provide services within the service area
IMPROVEMENTS: and to future public facilities identified in the IFFP that are intended to
              provide service to the service area. "System Improvements" do not include
              "Project Improvements" as defined above. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
  
8-5-3: WRITTEN IMPACT FEE ANALYSIS:
Each IFA contains an executive summary as well as two types of analysis
referred to as the "Impact Fee Analysis" and the Proportionate Share Analysis
described more fully as follows:
   A.   Executive Summary: A summary of the IFAs designed to be understood by a
lay person (the "Executive Summary") is included in the attached Exhibit "B"
and demonstrates the need for Impact Fees to be assessed on Development
Activity. The Executive Summary has been available for public inspection at
least ten (10) days prior to the adoption of this Ordinance.
   B.   Impact Fee Analysis: The City has commissioned the IFFPs and IFAs which
identify the impacts upon public facilities required by anticipated development
activity and the anticipated impacts on system improvements required by
anticipated development activity to maintain the established level of service
for each public facility, demonstrate how such anticipated impacts are
reasonably related to the anticipated development activity, estimate the
proportionate share of the costs of impacts on system improvements that are
reasonably related to the development activity, and identify how the impact
fees are calculated. Copies of the IFFPs and IFAs, are attached as Exhibit "B"
which has been available for public inspection at least ten (10) days prior to
the adoption of this chapter.
   C.   Proportionate Share Analysis: In connection with the IFFPs and IFAs,
the City has prepared a proportionate share analysis which analyzes whether or
not the proportionate share of the costs of public facilities is reasonably
related to the service demands and needs related to new development activity.
The proportionate share analysis identifies, as applicable:
      1.   The costs of each existing public facility that has excess capacity
to serve the anticipated development resulting from new development activity;
      2.   The cost of system improvements for each public facility;
      3.   The manner of financing for each public facility (such as user
charges, special assessments, bonded indebtedness, general taxes or funded
grants) other than impact fees;
      4.   The relative extent to which development activity will contribute to
financing the excess capacity of and system improvements for each existing
public facility by such means as user charges, special assessments or payment
from the proceeds of general taxes;
      5.   The relative extent to which development activity will contribute to
the cost of existing public facilities and system improvements in the future;
      6.   The extent to which development cctivity is entitled to a credit
against the impact fees because the development activity will dedicate system
improvements or public facilities that will offset the demand for system
improvements, inside or outside the proposed development;
      7.   Any extraordinary costs in servicing the newly developed properties;
and
      8.   The time-price differential inherent in fair comparisons of amounts
paid at different times.
      9.   A copy of the proportionate share analysis is included in the IFAs,
which is included in Exhibit "B" and has been available for public inspection
at least ten (10) days prior to the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 2021.28,
12-15-2021)
8-5-4: IMPACT FEE FACILITIES PLAN:
The City has developed the IFFPs which identify the existing levels of service,
establish proposed levels of service, identify excess capacity to accommodate
future growth at the proposed levels of service, identify demands placed upon
existing public facilities by new development activity at the proposed levels
of service, and identify the means by which the City will meet those growth
demands. The City has chosen to use a planning horizon of ten years in
preparing the IFFPs. The City has considered all revenue sources to finance the
impacts on system improvements, including grants, bonds, inter-fund loans,
Impact Fees and anticipated dedication of system improvements. The City's plan
for financing system improvements establishes that impact fees are necessary to
maintain a proposed level of service that complies with subsection 11-36a-302
(1)(b) or 11-36a-302(1)(c) of the Act. The IFFPs have been prepared based on
reasonable growth assumptions for the service area, and analyze the general
demand characteristics of current and future users of the systems. Furthermore,
the IFFPs identify the impact on system improvements created by development
activity and estimate the proportionate share of the costs of impacts on system
improvements that are reasonably related to new development activity. Said
IFFPs are included in Exhibit "B" and are incorporated into this chapter by
this reference. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-5: CALCULATION AND ENACTMENT OF IMPACT FEES:
The City Council will, by this chapter, approve impact fees in accordance with
the IFFPs and IFAs. In calculating the impact fees, the City has based all
amounts on realistic estimates and the assumptions underlying those estimates
are disclosed in the IFAs, and the City has included the construction costs,
land acquisition costs, costs of improvements, fees for planning, surveying,
and engineering services provided for and directly related to the construction
of system improvements, and outstanding or future debt service charges if the
City might use impact fees as a revenue stream to pay principal and interest on
bonds or other obligations to finance the cost of system improvements.
   A.   Notice And Hearing: In conjunction with the approval of this chapter,
the City held a public hearing on November 17, 2021, gave public notice of the
IFFPs and IFAs, said hearing and the City's intent to adopt this chapter at
least ten (10) days before the date of said hearing by posting notice in at
least three (3) public places within the City, publishing notice in newspapers
of general circulation in the City and on the Utah Public Notice Website, made
a copy of this Ordinance, the IFFPs, the IFAs and the Executive Summaries
available to the public on the City's website and at the City's offices, all in
conformity with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated 11-36a-502. After the
public hearing, the City Council adopted this Impact Fee Ordinance as presented
herein.
   B.   Contents Of The Ordinance: This chapter adopting or modifying the
impact fees contain such detail and elements as deemed appropriate by the City
Council, including designation of the service area within which the impact fees
are to be calculated and imposed. This chapter herein includes:
      1.   A schedule of impact fees to be imposed, and
      2.   The formula to be used by the City in calculating impact fees.
   C.   Adjustments: The standard impact fee may be adjusted at the time the
fee is assessed in response to unusual circumstances, to fairly allocate costs
associated with impacts created by a development activity or project, or due to
a request for a prompt and individualized impact fee review for the development
activity of the State of Utah or a school district or charter school and an
offset or credit for public facilities for which an impact fee has been or will
be collected. The standard impact fee may also be adjusted to ensure that
impact fees are imposed fairly for development activities attributable to low
income housing or other development activities with broad public purposes. The
impact fee assessed to a particular development may also be adjusted should the
developer supply sufficient written studies and data to the City showing a
discrepancy between the fee being assessed and the actual impact on the system
improvement.
   D.   Previously Incurred Costs: To the extent that new growth and
development activity will be served by previously constructed improvements, the
impact fee may include public facility costs and outstanding bond costs related
to improvements previously incurred by the City. These costs may include all
projects included in the IFFPs which are under construction or completed but
have not been utilized to their capacity, as evidenced by outstanding debt
obligations. Any future debt obligations determined to be necessitated by
growth activity may also be included to offset the costs of future capital
projects. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-6: DEVELOPER CREDITS:
Development activity may be allowed a credit against Impact fees for any
dedication of land for a system improvement, any building and dedication of
some or all of a system improvement, any dedication of a public facility that
the City and the developer agree will reduce the need for a system improvement,
or a dedication of land for, improvement to or new construction of any system
improvement by the developer if the facilities are system improvements or are
dedicated to the public and offset the need for an identified system
improvement. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-7: IMPACT FEES ACCOUNTING AND EXPENDITURES:
The City will account for and hold Impact Fees as follows:
   A.   Accounting And Holding: The City will establish a separate interest-
bearing ledger account for each type of public facility for which an impact fee
is collected, deposit all impact fees in the appropriate ledger account, retain
the interest earned on each account in the ledger account, and otherwise
conform to the accounting requirements provided in the Impact Fees Act. Impact
fees collected prior to the effective date of this chapter should also meet the
requirements of this section.
   B.   Reporting: At the end of each fiscal year, the City shall prepare a
report pursuant to Utah Code Ann. § 11-36a-601. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-8: EXPENDITURE OF IMPACT FEES:
The City may expend Impact fees pursuant to Utah Code Ann. §11-36-602 only for
system improvements that are (i) identified in the IFFPs and (ii) for the
specific Public Facility type for which the fee was collected. Impact fees
collected pursuant to the requirements of this chapter are to be expended,
dedicated or encumbered for a permissible use within six (6) years of the
receipt of those funds by the City, unless the City identifies in writing an
extraordinary and compelling reason why the fees should be held longer than six
(6) years and an absolute date by which the fees will be expended. Impact fees
will be expended on a First-In First-Out ("FIFO") basis, with the first funds
received deemed to be the first funds expended. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-9: REFUNDS:
In accordance with Utah Code Annotated § 11-36a-603, the City shall refund any
impact fees paid by a developer, plus interest actually earned, when (i) the
developer does not proceed with the development activity and files a written
request for a refund; (ii) the fees have not been spent or encumbered within
the "Time of Expenditure" as defined herein; and (iii) no impact has resulted.
An impact that would preclude a developer from a refund from the City may
include any impact reasonably identified by the City, including, but not
limited to, the City having sized facilities and/or paid for, installed and/or
caused the installation of facilities based in whole or in part upon the
developer's planned development activity even though that capacity may, at some
future time, be utilized by another development. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-10: OTHER IMPACT FEES:
To the extent allowed by law, the City Council may negotiate or otherwise
impose impact fees and other fees different from those currently charged. Those
charges may, at the discretion of the City Council, include but not be limited
to reductions or increases in impact fees, all or part of which may be
reimbursed to the developer who installed improvements that service the land to
be connected with the City's system. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-11: ADDITIONAL FEES AND COSTS:
The impact fees authorized hereby are separate from and in addition to user
fees and other charges lawfully imposed by the City and other fees and costs
that may not be included as itemized component parts of the impact fee
schedule. In charging any such fees as a condition of development approval, the
City recognizes that the fees must be a reasonable charge for the service
provided. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-12: FEES EFFECTIVE AT TIME OF PAYMENT:
Unless the City is otherwise bound by a contractual requirement, the impact
fees shall be determined from the fee schedule in effect at the time of payment
in accordance with the provisions of section
8-5-14, below. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-13: IMPOSITION OF ADDITIONAL FEE OR REFUND AFTER DEVELOPMENT:
Should any developer undertake development activities such that the ultimate
density or other impact of the development activity is not revealed to the City
either through inadvertence, neglect, a change in plans, or any other cause
whatsoever, and/or the impact fee is not initially charged against all units or
the total density within the development, the City shall be entitled to recover
the total Impact Fee pursuant the IFFPs and IFAs from the developer or other
appropriate person covering the density for which an impact fee was not
previously paid. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-14: IMPACT FEE SCHEDULES:
The City hereby adopts the following as the Impact Fees in the Service Area:
Parks and Recreation
 
Table 4.6: Park Impact Fee Schedule
Impact Fee per Unit Persons per Unit Fee per Unit Existing Fee per % Change
                                                  Unit
Residential Unit    2.66             $6,607.00    $5,500.00        51%
 
Culinary Water
 
Table 5.8: Water Impact Fee Per Meter Size
Meter Size ERC Multiplier Proposed Fee per ERC Existing Fee % Change
3/4" Meter 1.00           $3,390.00            $1,795.00    88.83%
1" Meter   1.78           $6,033.00            $3,195.00    88.83%
1.5" Meter 4.01           $13,587.00           $7,195.00    88.83%
2" Meter   7.13           $24,152.00           $12,790.00   88.83%
Water Impact Fees for meters larger than 2" will be calculated using the
appropriate multiplier determined for the meter size x $3,390.00
 
Storm Drain
 
Table 6.4: Estimate of Impact Fee Cost per CFS
                      Cost to 10- Year % Eligible Eligible Costs Cost per Acre
                      Demand
Existing Storm Drain  $293,071.00      0%         -              -
System
Interest Expense      $39,570.00       100%       $39,570.00     $12.00
Future Storm Drain    $1,587,644.00    100%       $1,587,644.00  $469.00
Projects
Professional Expenses $12,186.00       100%       $12,186.00     $4.00
Total                 $1,932,470.00              $1,639,400.00  $485.00
 
Transportation
Table 7.7 Impact Fee Summary by Land Use Type
 ITE Code PM Peak Proposed Fee Existing Fee % Change
Table 7.7 Impact Fee Summary by Land Use Type
                 ITE Code      PM Peak Proposed Fee Existing Fee % Change
Single Family    210           0.99    $2,766.00    $2,450.00    130%
Residential
Multi-Family     220, 221, 222 0.45    $1,267.00    $1,111.00    14%
Residential
Retail/          820           2.51    $7,013.00    $6,150.00    14%
Shopping Center
Industrial/      110           0.63    $1,760.00    $1,544.00    14%
Light Industrial
Office           710           1.15    $3,213.00    $2,818.00    14%
Source: ITE Trip Manual (10th Edition), ITE Handbook 2nd Edition, LYRB
 
8-5-15: MAXIMUM SUPPORTABLE IMPACT FEES:
The fee schedules included in the IFFPs and IFAs indicates the maximum impact
fee set forth in Exhibit "B" which the City may impose on development within
the defined service area and is based upon general demand characteristics and
potential demand that can be created by each class of user. The City reserves
the right under the Impact Fees Act to assess an adjusted fee to respond to
unusual circumstances to ensure that fees are equitably assessed. Formulas that
can be used to calculate this adjusted fee are set forth in Exhibit "B". (Ord.
2021.28, 12-15-2021)
8-5-16: FEE EXCEPTIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Waiver for "Public Purpose": The City Council may, on a project by
project basis, authorize exceptions or adjustments to the impact fees due from
development for those projects the City Council determines to be of such
benefit to the community as a whole to justify the exception or adjustment.
Such projects may include facilities being funded by the State of Utah, school
districts, charter schools, low income housing projects, or facilities of a
temporary nature. The City Council may elect to waive or adjust impact fees in
consideration of economic benefits to be received from the development
activity.
   B.   Procedure: Applications for exceptions or adjustments are to be filed
in writing with the City at the time the applicant first requests the extension
of service to the applicant's development or property. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-
2021)
8-5-17: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Subject to the time limitations as provided in Utah Code § 11-36a-702, any
person or entity that has paid an impact fee pursuant to this chapter may
challenge the impact fee as provided in Utah Code Ann. §11-36a-701 et seq., by
filing:
   A.   A written administrative appeal to the City, setting forth the name of
the person or entity challenging the impact fee or fees, the specific impact
fee or fees challenged, evidence that the impact fee or fees challenged have
been paid by the person or entity, and alleged grounds for such challenge. A
written administrative appeal containing the information set forth herein and
filed with the City Recorder shall constitute the necessary document for filing
an administrative appeal as provided in Utah Code Ann. § 11-36a-703(2)(a). An
administrative appeal shall be considered and decided by the City Council
within thirty (30) days after the day on which the appeal is filed;
   B.   A request for arbitration as provided in Utah Code Ann. § 11-36a-705;
or
   C.   An action in the 5th District Court, in and for Washington County,
State of Utah. (Ord. 2021.28, 12-15-2021)
CHAPTER 6
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
8-6-1: Definitions
8-6-2: Use Of Washington County Landfill
8-6-3: Required Use Of Automated/Semi-Automated Containers
8-6-4: Residential Waste Collection And Disposal Services Provided By City
8-6-5: Mandatory Use Of Service
8-6-6: Recycling Opt Out Rules And Guidelines
8-6-7: Residential Waste Collection Procedures
8-6-8: Establishment Of Residential Fees
8-6-9: Fee For Availability Of Service
8-6-10: Monthly Billing
8-6-11: Collection Of Commercial Waste
8-6-12: Regulation Commercial Or Private Haulers
8-6-13: Collection Vehicles
8-6-14: Covered/Contained Transportation Of Waste
8-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
following meanings.
                                       Residential Waste Collection Agreement,
                                       dated September 1, 2020, between
                                       Washington County Special Service
AGREEMENT:                             District No. 1 and Allied Waste
                                       Transportation, Inc, a Delaware
                                       corporation, d/b/a Republic Services of
                                       St. George, licensed to do business in
                                       the State of Utah.
                                       A waste receptacle approved by the
                                       District, with a capacity of sixty (60)
                                       to ninety four (94) gallons, equipped
AUTOMATED OR SEMI-AUTOMATED CONTAINER: with a tight-fitting, permanently
                                       attached lid and wheels for easy
                                       movement, and specifically designed for
                                       automated and semi-automated pick up.
                                       Residential waste materials with
                                       lengths, weights or volumes greater than
                                       those allowed for automated containers,
                                       including but not limited to stoves,
                                       refrigerators, dryers, dishwashers,
                                       televisions, hot water tanks, washing
                                       machines, household furniture, four (4)
                                       or fewer tires, air conditioners,
                                       Christmas trees, bicycles, large toys,
                                       tree limbs of three - six feet (3 - 6')
                                       in length and up to six inches (6") in
                                       diameter, and Bags used for seasonal
                                       disposal of leaves. Bulky Waste does not
BULKY WASTE:                           include automobiles, more than four (4)
                                       tires, motorcycles, boats, Construction/
                                       Demolition Waste, large dead animals,
                                       Hazardous Waste, Special Waste and trees
                                       (other than Christmas trees) or limbs
                                       exceeding six feet (6') in length and
                                       six inches (6") in diameter, and other
                                       similar items. All items must be free of
                                       extraneous materials and shall be
                                       capable of being lifted into Republic's
                                       collection vehicle by two (2) men. A
                                       resident may not place more than three
                                       (3) Bulky Waste items out for collection
                                       per call.
CITY:                                  The City of Toquerville.
                                       Shall mean or refer to property:
                                       A. Used primarily in connection with the
                                       supply of goods or professional services
                                       on a regular basis or in the regular
                                       course of business, and for which a
                                       business or other license is required by
COMMERCIAL:                            Utah state law or local ordinance; and
                                       B. A hotel, motel, recreational vehicle
                                       rental park used for overnight or short
                                       term rental of less than thirty (30)
                                       days, or an apartment complex of more
                                       than eight (8) units used for a rental
                                       term of more than thirty (30) days.
                                       Any person or entity who in the regular
COMMERCIAL HAULER:                     course of business or for a fee collects
                                       and disposes of commercial waste.
                                       Non-hazardous waste materials produced
COMMERCIAL WASTE:                      by businesses or resulting from normal
                                       activities on or use of commercial
                                       property or premises.
                                       At or near any curb, sidewalk or other
                                       location immediately adjacent to any
CURBSIDE:                              street, highway or road which is safely
                                       accessible to Republic's waste
                                       collection vehicles.
DISTRICT:                              Washington County Special Service
                                       District No. 1.
                                       Any metal container with a volume of 1.5
DUMPSTER OR ROLL-OFF:                  cubic yards or more, designed for
                                       storage of waste and to be compatible
                                       with collection equipment.
                                       A solid waste or combination of solid
                                       wastes, other than Household Waste,
                                       which because of its quantity,
                                       concentration, or physical, chemical, or
                                       infectious characteristics may cause or
                                       significantly contribute to an increase
                                       in mortality or an increase in serious
HAZARDOUS WASTE:                       irreversible or incapacitating
                                       reversible illness or may pose a
                                       substantial present or potential hazard
                                       to human health or the environment when
                                       improperly treated, stored, transported,
                                       disposed of, or otherwise managed, and
                                       as further defined in Rule 315-2-3 of
                                       the Utah Administrative Code.
                                       Any waste material, including garbage,
                                       trash, and sanitary wastes in septic
                                       tanks, derived from households,
                                       including single-family and multiple-
HOUSEHOLD WASTE:                       family residences, apartments, hotels
                                       and motels, bunk houses, ranger
                                       stations, crew quarters, campgrounds,
                                       picnic grounds, and day-use recreation
                                       areas.
                                       A solid waste that contains or may
                                       reasonably be expected to contain
                                       pathogens of sufficient virulence and
                                       quantity that exposure to the waste by a
INFECTIOUS WASTE:                      susceptible host could result in an
                                       infectious disease. Infectious Waste is
                                       included in Household Waste unless
                                       subject to regulation in accordance with
                                       Rule 315-316(1) of the Utah
                                       Administrative Code.
                                       Any material or substance included in
                                       waste materials that can be put to
                                       beneficial re-use or sold in recognized
                                       markets for purposes other than
                                       disposal, including, without limitation,
RECYCLABLES OR RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:   uncontaminated, non-hazardous corrugated
                                       cardboard, white paper, newsprint and
                                       other paper; plastics and plastic film;
                                       ferrous and non-ferrous metals; and
                                       glass or such other items as may be
                                       specified from time to time.
                                       Allied Waste Transportation, Inc, a
REPUBLIC OR REPUBLIC SERVICES:         Delaware corporation, d/b/a Republic
                                       Services of St. George, licensed to do
                                       business in the State of Utah.
                                       The use of property or premises
                                       containing a structure which is hooked
                                       to culinary water and power and is
                                       intended or used for human habitation,
                                       including but not limited to:
                                       A. Single homes;
                                       B. Mobile homes;
                                       C. Town homes;
                                       D. Condominiums;
RESIDENCE OR RESIDENTIAL:              E. Short-term vacation rentals (VRBO's)
                                       of less than thirty (30) days;
                                       F. Apartments not contained in or as
                                       part of an apartment complex of more
                                       than eight (8) units;
                                       G. Except as may be specified
                                       hereinafter, each residential unit or
                                       structure on property or premises
                                       classified as residential shall be
                                       considered a separate residence for
                                       purpose of billing and collection.
                                       Household waste, bulky waste, and other
                                       non-hazardous waste produced by or
                                       resulting from the normal activities on
                                       or use of residential property or
                                       premises. Residential Waste includes but
                                       is not limited to waste wood, wood
                                       products, tree trimmings, grass
                                       cuttings, dead plants, seeds, leaves,
                                       chips, shavings, saw-dust, printed
                                       matter, paper, pasteboard, plastic,
                                       aluminum cans, flattened cardboard
                                       boxes, wooden boxes, rags, loose straw,
RESIDENTIAL WASTE:                     used and discarded mattresses, used and
                                       discarded clothing, used and discarded
                                       shoes and boots, combustible and waste
                                       pulp and other products such as are used
                                       for packaging or wrapping crockery and
                                       glass, cold ashes, cinders, floor
                                       sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic
                                       substances and any and all other waste
                                       materials not included in the definition
                                       of bulky waste, construction/demolition
                                       waste, dead animals, garbage or
                                       hazardous waste. Residential Waste does
                                       not include Special Waste or stable
                                       matter as defined herein.
                                       Discarded solid waste that may require
                                       special handling or other solid waste
                                       that may pose a threat to public safety,
                                       human health, or the environment.
                                       Special waste includes:
                                       A. Ash;
                                       B. Automobile bodies;
                                       C. Infectious waste subject to
                                       regulation under Rule 315-316(1) of the
                                       Utah Administrative Rules;
                                       D. Waste tires;
                                       E. Dead animals;
SPECIAL WASTE:                         F. Asbestos;
                                       G. Waste exempt from the hazardous waste
                                       regulations under Rule 315-261-4 of the
                                       Utah Administrative Rules;
                                       H. Very small quantity generator
                                       hazardous waste as defined by Rule 315-
                                       260-10 of the Utah Administrative Rules;
                                       I. Waste containing PCBs;
                                       J. Petroleum contaminated soils;
                                       K. Waste asphalt;
                                       L. Sludge; and
                                       M. Stable matter. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-
                                       2020)
 
8-6-2: USE OF WASHINGTON COUNTY LANDFILL:
All residential waste generated within the corporate limits of City shall be
transported to and disposed of at the Washington County Landfill or such other
waste disposal facility as may be approved by District. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-
2020)
8-6-3: REQUIRED USE OF AUTOMATED/SEMI-AUTOMATED CONTAINERS:
Except for residential developments approved by City where density and lack of
access by waste collection vehicles requires the use of dumpsters or roll offs
as a means of residential waste collection, each residence or residential unit
within the incorporated areas of City shall be required to utilize for
residential waste collection service an automated/semi-automated container or
containers which have been approved and delivered to the property by City or
its authorized agent. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-2020)
8-6-4: RESIDENTIAL WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICES PROVIDED BY CITY:
   A.   City shall provide the following services to all residences within its
corporate limits in accordance with the Agreement:
      1.   Basic Residential Waste Collection Service: once-a-week curbside
collection to all residences of residential waste placed in automated/semi-
automated containers or in dumpsters or roll offs, along with collection of
bulky waste, and
      2.   Collection of Recyclable Materials: every-other-week curbside
collection of recyclable materials placed in recycling containers by residences
participating in curbside residential recycling. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-2020)
8-6-5: MANDATORY USE OF SERVICE:
The use by all residences within the boundaries of City of the basic
residential waste collection services described in Section
8-6-4.1 is hereby declared to be mandatory; however, participation in curbside
residential recycling as described in Section
8-6-4.2 shall be determined in accordance with the opt out rules and guidelines
specified in Section
8-6-6, below. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-2020)
8-6-6: RECYCLING OPT OUT RULES AND GUIDELINES:
Participation in curbside recycling collection services shall be mandatory for
any residential unit within the boundaries of City for which the election to
opt out of such services is not made by the owner between the 1st and the 31st
day of January each year for the following twelve (12) month period ("Annual
Election Window"). The Election shall be made in accordance with the following
opt out rules and guidelines:
   A.   The election to opt out shall be made by the owner of the residential
unit, or by such other person designated in writing by the owner, or as
otherwise approved by the City.
   B.   All City residential units who have opted out of curbside recycling
collection program in previous years and who do not make an election to rejoin
and receive curbside recycling collection program for the upcoming year during
the Annual Election Window shall be deemed to have opted out of receiving
curbside recycling collection program.
   C.   All City residential units who do not opt out by the end of the Annual
Election Window in 2021 (to wit: January 31, 2021) shall be deemed to be
included in the curbside recycling collection program for the upcoming twelve
(12) month period.
   D.   All City residential units who have elected to participate or who have
been deemed to opt in to the curbside recycling collection program for the
previous twelve (12) month period and who do not make an election to opt out of
the program during Annual Election Window shall be deemed to have elected to
continue to participate curbside recycling collection program for the upcoming
twelve (12) month period.
   E.   New residents, i.e., people who move from outside of City to a
residential unit within the boundaries of City, regardless of a prior election
to opt out, shall be automatically included in the curbside recycling program
for the remainder of the twelve (12) month period which concludes at the end of
the Annual Election Window.
   F.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon written request from the owner or
occupant of the residence, the City Council shall have authority to grant a
variance to the above provisions based on a showing of undue hardship or other
extraordinary circumstances.
   G.   City Staff shall be responsible to track all elections for each
residential unit within the City and shall provide a participant list
containing service addresses to the District annually within ten (10) business
days after the expiration of the Annual Election Window. In the instance of
move ins and mid-term opt ins to the curbside recycling collection program,
City Staff shall provide names and service addresses to the District within ten
(10) business days of an owners joinder. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-2020)
8-6-7: RESIDENTIAL WASTE COLLECTION PROCEDURES:
Except where the use of dumpsters or roll offs are authorized, residential
waste shall be placed for collection in accordance with the following:
   A.   All residential waste shall be placed for collection in automated/semi-
automated containers.
   B.   All residential waste shall be placed for collection by 6:00 a.m. of
the day scheduled for collection.
   C.   No hazardous waste, infectious waste or special waste shall be placed
for collection in any automated/semi-automated container or any dumpster or
roll-off.
   D.   Only recyclable materials, as determined from time to time by City,
shall be placed for collection in recycling automated/semi-automated collection
containers.
   E.   Automated/semi-automated containers shall be placed within three feet
(3') of the curbside, blacktop or other roadway surface, with three feet (3')
clearance on either side of the container from parked cars or other objects,
and at other locations readily accessible to collection vehicles and personnel.
   F.   All empty waste containers shall be removed from the street as soon as
reasonably practicable but not later than twenty four (24) hours after being
emptied.
   G.   Bulky waste shall be placed at or near the curbside, blacktop or other
roadway surface, or at other locations readily accessible to collection
vehicles and personnel. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-2020)
8-6-8: ESTABLISHMENT OF RESIDENTIAL FEES:
There is hereby established a monthly residential waste collection and disposal
fee for each residence or residential unit in City, which shall include the
following amounts:
   A.   For basic residential waste collection service:
      1.   The amount to be paid to Republic in the amount of six dollars and
ninety cents ($6.90) per month per residence, which shall be subject to an
annual increase of two and one-half percent (2.5%); and
      2.   The amount to be paid to the District for administrative costs and
expenses;
      3.   The amount of four dollars and forty-five cents ($4.45) per month
per residence, which shall be subject to an annual increase of ten cents
($.10); and
      4.   Such amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of
the City Council for administrative costs and expenses incurred by the City in
billing and collection; and
   B.   For residences receiving curbside recycling collection services, the
following additional amounts:
      1.   The amount to be paid to Republic in the amount of four dollars and
ninety cents ($4.90) per month per residence, subject to an annual increase of
two and one-half percent (2.5%); and
      2.   The amount of seventy-five cents ($.75) per month per residence for
the cost of the recycling container. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-2020)
8-6-9: FEE FOR AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE:
The residential fee established hereby for basic collection service is for the
availability of service provided by City through the District and its
authorized agent, Republic, and said fee shall be due and owing when service is
available, regardless of whether said service is actually utilized. (Ord.
2020.19, 11-12-2020)
8-6-10: MONTHLY BILLING:
Fees for residential waste collection and disposal services provided by City
shall be paid on a monthly basis, and shall be included in any billing for
other municipal services supplied by City, including water, power, sewer, etc.
Payments for residential waste collection and disposal services not received on
or before the 10th day of the month following the month for which services were
provided shall be deemed delinquent and shall thereafter bear interest at the
rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum until paid in full, and shall be subject
to all collection practices or procedures as may be established from time to
time by ordinance. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-2020)
8-6-11: COLLECTION OF COMMERCIAL WASTE:
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the owner or lessee of any commercial
property or premises from transporting his or her own commercial waste to the
landfill, or contracting for its removal with a commercial hauler properly
licensed by the District and authorized to conduct business within City. (Ord.
2020.19, 11- 12-2020)
8-6-12: REGULATION COMMERCIAL OR PRIVATE HAULERS:
No private or commercial hauler shall be allowed to collect or dispose of
commercial solid waste generated by businesses or through the use of commercial
property within City without having first obtained from District a license to
operate as a private or commercial hauler and is authorized to conduct business
within the City via a business license or acknowledgment of a business license
issued by Washington County or another City within the County offering
reciprocity to businesses principally placed within the City. (Ord. 2020.19,
11-12- 2020)
8-6-13: COLLECTION VEHICLES:
All trucks or other vehicles used by any private or commercial hauler to
collect or transport solid waste within City shall:
   A.   Be maintained in a good mechanical condition;
   B.   Be equipped with fully enclosed sides and bottom and otherwise
constructed as to prevent the contents of the vehicle from spilling or blowing
while the vehicle is in motion;
   C.   Clearly bear on the outside of the body of the vehicle the name and
telephone number of the hauler; and
   D.   Comply with all provisions of all applicable state or federal
regulations or laws concerning the collection, transportation or disposal of
solid waste. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-2020)
8-6-14: COVERED/CONTAINED TRANSPORTATION OF WASTE:
All solid waste transported by any private or commercial hauler shall be
contained, covered, tied or enclosed in such a manner that leaking, spilling or
blowing are prevented during transportation. (Ord. 2020.19, 11-12-2020)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CODES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Official
9-1-2: Codes Adopted
9-1-1: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created the position of building official, who
shall also be known as the city building inspector. (1977 Code § 9-511)
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Stop Order: The building inspector shall have the power to order all
work stopped on construction, alteration or repairs of buildings in the city
when such work is being done in violation of any provisions of any ordinance
relating thereto, or in violation of the subdivision or zoning ordinance. Work
shall not be resumed after the issuance of such order, except on the written
permission of the building inspector; provided, that if the stop order is an
oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within one hour. Such
written stop order may be served by any peace officer or other authorized
person. (1977 Code § 9-512)
      2.   Entry Powers: The building inspector shall have the power to enter
into any building or the premises where the work of altering, repairing or
constructing any building or structure is going on, for the purpose of making
inspections at any reasonable hour, pursuant to any of the provisions of this
chapter and title 10 of this code. (1977 Code § 9-513)
      3.   Additional Duties: The building official (inspector) shall, in
addition to all other duties imposed on him by this city:
         a.   Enforce the provisions of the codes adopted in section
9-1-2 of this chapter.
         b.   Inspect all buildings, structures, ditches, signs, fences and
objects to determine their safety and effect on the persons who are within the
city. (1977 Code § 9-514; amd. 2014 Code)
9-1-2: CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Specified Codes: Subject to the limitations which the Utah State
Construction And Fire Codes Act (Utah Code Annotated Title 15A) ("Utah Codes
Act") has specified, the following construction, building and safety codes are
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, and together with the amendments
as may be specified in this section or the adopted codes, are the construction
standards to be applied in the regulation of building, construction,
alteration, remodeling, repair, occupancy and use of buildings and structures
within the City:
      1.   The International Building Code (IBC), issued by the International
Code Council;
      2.   The National Electrical Code (NEC), issued by the National Fire
Protection Association;
      3.   The International Plumbing Code (IPC), issued by the International
Code Council;
      4.   The International Mechanical Code (IMC), issued by the International
Code Council;
      5.   The International Residential Code (IRC), issued by the
International Code Council;
      6.   The International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), issued by the
International Code Council;
      7.   The International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), issued by the International
Code Council;
      8.   The International Fire Code (IFC), issued by the International Code
Council;
      9.   Subject to the IBC, the federal manufactured housing construction
and safety standards act (HUD code), as issued by the department of housing and
urban development and published in 24 CFR parts 3280 and 3282;
      10.   Subject to the IFC, the current edition of the NFPA 225 model
manufactured home installation standard, issued by the National Fire Protection
Association;
      11.   The International Code Council Building Valuation Data (BVD).
   B.   Applicable Code Editions: All the codes set forth in Subsection A,
above, shall be the current edition adopted by the State of Utah, together with
state specific amendments thereto pursuant to the Utah Codes Act.
   C.   Appendices: In addition to the body of the codes set forth in
Subsection A, above, all appendices to these codes, as adopted by the State of
Utah pursuant to Utah Codes Act are hereby adopted.
   D.   Fees: Building Permit & Inspection Fees for all construction shall be
eighty five percent (85%) of the values prescribed in the most current version
of the International Code Council BVD. (Ord. 2014.03, 8-14-2014; amd. Ord.
2014.06, 9-11-2014; 2014 Code; Ord. 2016.03, 6-9-2016; Ord. 2021.22, 8-18-2021)
CHAPTER 2
PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION
SECTION:
9-2-1: Title
9-2-2: Purpose
9-2-3: Duty To Identify Property
9-2-4: Definitions
9-2-5: Names Of Streets Designated In Official Street And Address Files
9-2-6: System Of Numbering
9-2-7: Display Of Property Identification Number
9-2-8: Property Identification Approval Required
9-2-9: Street Identification Change
9-2-10: System Of Street Identification Signs
9-2-11: Thoroughfare Identification Signs
9-2-12: Nonconforming Properties
9-2-13: Nonliability Of City
9-2-14: Enforcement And Violation
9-2-15: Penalty
9-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the TOQUERVILLE CITY ADDRESSING ORDINANCE. (Ord.
2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-13-2008; amd. 2014 Code)
9-2-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations is to establish in the city a uniform system
of property identification in order to foster uniformity and order among street
names and numbers, and structure numbers, within the city, and to provide an
adequate system of property identification for the providers of emergency
services within the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-
13-2008)
9-2-3: DUTY TO IDENTIFY PROPERTY:
It shall be the duty of the planning commission or its designated officer to
establish a uniform property identification system in the city, to name and
number all streets therein, and to designate numbers for houses or buildings
fronting upon all such streets, to issue property identification certificates
and to enforce the provisions of this chapter, consistent with the purpose of
these regulations. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-13-2008)
9-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most recent application. As used in this chapter:
ADDRESS (SITUS ADDRESS): A unique alphanumeric descriptor which identifies the
property location of a parcel of land, a building or other structure on the
citywide grid system maintained by and kept on file with the city.
ADDRESS FORMAT: The order of assemblage and structure of the five (5)
standardized components (frontage number, directional, thoroughfare name or
number, thoroughfare type, substructure suffix) used in the legal situs
address.
BASELINE STREET: The east and west directional street (Center Street in the
city) which intersects with the meridian street (Toquer Boulevard in the city)
to benchmark the permanent origin of the citywide grid system and provide a
datum point from which the coordinates of all other thoroughfares and legal
situs addresses are calculated.
CITYWIDE GRID SYSTEM: The coordinate system which has evolved and developed for
identifying address and thoroughfare locations over the greater part of the
city and a graphic representation which is maintained by and kept on file with
the city.
DIRECTIONAL: The compass direction of the legal situs addresses which
references the citywide grid and the direction in which the frontage numbers
are measured along the roadway of both public and private thoroughfares. When a
thoroughfare number is used in the address, instead of an alphanumeric name, a
directional shall also be used to designate its direction. A directional shall
always be abbreviated with the first letter of its compass direction in
standardized address format.
FINAL PLAT: A map or chart of a subdivision, PUD, condominium or other proposed
development, which has been accurately sited or surveyed, and located on the
ground so that thoroughfares, alleys, blocks, lots and other divisions thereof
can be identified.
FRONTAGE NUMBER: The prefix component of the legal situs address which is
numerically sequenced and assigned to a structure or parcel along a
thoroughfare according to its relative distance perpendicular to the baseline
and meridian axis of the citywide grid system.
INTERSECTION: The point on the citywide grid system which identifies the
location where two (2) or more thoroughfares cross one another.
MERIDIAN STREET: The north and south directional thoroughfare (Toquer Boulevard
in the city) which benchmarks the permanent origin of the citywide grid system
and provides a datum point from which the coordinates of all other streets and
legal situs addresses are calculated (see definition of Baseline Street).
OFFICIAL STREET AND ADDRESS FILES: The computer files and associated maps
adopted by the county, including the general plans of the city.
PRIVATE RIGHTS OF WAY: Thoroughfares, which are retained and maintained under
the ownership of private individuals intended for private use.
PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION CERTIFICATE: The official documentation, including a
certificate number and the registration of a legal situs address, which is
issued to the owner-resident for their parcel, building or premises dwelling.
The official situs address may also be designated on final plats recorded in
the office of the county recorder.
PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY: Thoroughfares which are dedicated for perpetual public
use and are administered by the governing entities in which they are located.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a tract, or lot or parcel of land into two (2) or
more lots, plots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development or redevelopment, and a
plat has therefore been recorded in the office of the county recorder under a
unique name to identify one subdivision from another. In property
identification context, "subdivision name" may also be used to identify other
conditional use or project names.
THOROUGHFARE: Any rights of way, under public or private ownership for public
use, designed for the travel of motorized vehicles to enter and exit through
passage and to include the ways used for internal circulation of traffic.
THOROUGHFARE NAME: The alphabetic name assigned, not including the street type
designator to identify both public and private thoroughfares, which are on the
citywide grid, and is one of the primary components of a legal situs address.
THOROUGHFARE NUMBER: The name of a thoroughfare designated with numerals
according to its numerical position on the citywide grid relative to the
baseline or meridian axis streets. Thoroughfare numbers never contain
alphanumeric characters (e.g., 2nd South Street). When a thoroughfare number is
designated, a directional corresponding to its orientation on the citywide grid
is also required (e.g., 200 South Street).
THOROUGHFARE TYPE: A standardized identification descriptor which corresponds
to physical and functional characteristics of a thoroughfare (i.e., "Avenue",
"Bay", "Boulevard", "Circle", "Court", "Cove", "Drive", "Expressway", "Lane",
"Parkway", "Place", "Road", "Row", "Street" and "Way").
UNIFORM PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM: The established regulations and
guidelines, as revised from time to time, which define specific procedure for
the design and designation of address numbers on all houses and buildings,
including occupancy units therein, as well as the design of names and numbers
for streets, both public and private, including standards for street
intersection markers (signs).
UNIT LOCATOR: The last component of a legal situs address which is an
alphabetical or numerical code used to identify a one to one correspondence
between a building and high density occupancy structures within the building,
such as suites, rooms, apartments and condominium units. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-
2008, eff. 3-13-2008; amd. 2014 Code)
9-2-5: NAMES OF STREETS DESIGNATED IN OFFICIAL STREET AND ADDRESS FILES:
All streets and thoroughfares of the city, whether public or private, shall be
known by the names by which they are so designated in the official street and
address files of the city, filed in the office of the planning commission, with
such additions, changes and corrections of the names as shall from time to time
be placed in the official files by ordinance. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-
13-2008)
9-2-6: SYSTEM OF NUMBERING:
The planning commission, in numbering the houses and buildings upon the streets
and thoroughfares of the city, shall adhere to the following:
   A.   Initial Point Of Intersection: The initial point of intersection in the
citywide grid system shall be the junction of Toquer Boulevard (meridian
street) and Center Street (baseline street) in the city, and the numbering
shall extend thence east, west, north and south. Address numbers shall be even
on the north and west sides of the street and odd on the east and south sides
of the street. One hundred (100) numbers shall be assigned to each identified
grid block with the lowest number beginning at a point nearest the initial
point of intersection in the citywide grid system. Address numbers shall be
determined by the number grid in which the property is located. Address numbers
in central areas with no grid shall be assigned in relation to adjacent
addressing.
   B.   New Residential Subdivisions: In new residential subdivisions, each
standard sized lot shall be given a preassigned street number by the planning
commission upon final plat approval. Address numbers shall be assigned to large
lots relative to their capacity to be subdivided into two (2) or more minimum
sized lots for the minimum width allowed by the zoning district. In commercial
areas, addresses will be assigned as development plans for those lots are
approved, prior to building permits being issued.
   C.   Calculation Of Address Number: Address numbers shall be determined by
calculation. The distance from the center of the property to the last corner of
the citywide grid shall be measured to get a thoroughfare number. The
thoroughfare number is then added to the block number to get the address (i.e.,
if the block number is 1200 and the location number is 43, the address is 1243
or 1244, depending upon which side of the thoroughfare the building is placed.
In other words, the address is the percent of the total distance into the
block, plus the block number).
   D.   Series In Thoroughfare Intersections: When thoroughfare intersections
are within one hundred twenty feet (120') of a grid line, the number series
change shall be made at the intersection to be more logical to the public. When
a long block faces two (2) blocks divided by a street or thoroughfare, the
number series on the long block shall change at the intersecting street or
thoroughfare so that houses or buildings facing each other have compatible
addresses.
   E.   Diagonal, Curving Streets: Diagonal streets which run forty five
degrees (45°) or less from a north/south line will be numbered by the north/
south grid, and those more than forty five degrees (45°) from the north/south
line will be numbered by the east/west grid. Curving streets will be assigned
numbers based upon the grid of their greatest length. For instance, if the
beginning is more south than west of the end, then the north/south grid will be
used.
   F.   Loop Streets, Thoroughfares And Cul-De-Sac Streets: On loop streets and
thoroughfares and cul-de-sac streets, address numbering shall begin at the
entrance nearest the initial point of intersection within the citywide grid
system and increase to the opposite end as if the street were in a straight
line. Block number changes will be made every three hundred thirty feet (330'),
with odd and even number remaining on the same side of the street as they
began.
   G.   Apartments:
      1.   Apartment buildings on thoroughfares shall be assigned individual
addresses. Apartments clustered about a central parking area immediately facing
a public street shall also be assigned separate addresses.
      2.   When apartments are arranged along a private street or thoroughfare,
addresses can be assigned from this private street or thoroughfare. A sign
showing the apartment complex name, with the street address below it, must be
posted at the entrance.
      3.   Each apartment must be identified on the exterior entrance by number
or building letter and number for multiple buildings. The numbers shall be in
sequence (i.e., 1, 2, 3, etc.). Apartments in lettered buildings shall have the
building letter as part of each apartment number, such as B-210. When units are
on multiple floors, ground floor numbers shall be in the 100 series (101, 102,
103), second floor numbers shall be in the 200 series (201, 202, 203), etc. If
a common hallway is used for several apartments, the external hallway entrance
to each apartment shall contain a list of the apartments served. When
addressing townhouses and other buildings containing units separately owned,
each address shall be placed on the principal external entryway to the unit.
      4.   The official address for each apartment shall be the building
address, as described in subsection G3 of this section, followed by the
apartment number (for example, "223 Greenway Dr., Apt. 3"). Addresses for units
in apartment buildings not on a public thoroughfare shall include the public
thoroughfare address and the building number with the apartment designation.
The official address for each apartment will be the public thoroughfare address
followed by the building letter, a dash and the apartment number (for example,
"223 Greenway Dr., Apt. B-111").
   H.   Mobile Home Parks:
      1.   When trailers are arranged along a private thoroughfare within
mobile home parks, each private thoroughfare within the mobile home park shall
be named and a sign, as required by this chapter, shall be erected on each
private street within the mobile home park.
      2.   Each mobile home on such a private thoroughfare shall then be
identified in numerical sequence as determined by calculation, as described in
this chapter. The number shall be placed in a conspicuous place on the part of
the trailer closest to the thoroughfare, and all mobile homes within the mobile
home park shall be marked in the same location of the trailer. Address numbers
shall be a minimum of three inches (3") high with block letters and shall be
visible from the street. All other provisions of this chapter on the
installation of identification numbers shall be applicable to mobile homes.
      3.   It shall be the requirement of the mobile home park owners, who are
registered with the city, to make sure that each private street within the
mobile home park is properly named and such name shall be approved in advance
by the planning commission or its designated representative, and it is further
the responsibility of the mobile home park operator to make sure that each
mobile home is properly addressed and the number posted as set out in this
chapter.
   I.   Commercial Or Office Buildings:
      1.   Commercial or office buildings on public thoroughfares or private
thoroughfares shall be assigned individual addresses. Commercial or office
buildings clustered about a central parking area immediately facing a public
thoroughfare shall also be assigned separate street addresses.
      2.   When a commercial building or office building complex is arranged
along a private driveway or around a private parking area, the complex shall be
addressed off the public or private thoroughfare serving the complex.
      3.   Each suite or unit in a commercial or office building must be
identified on the exterior entrance by number or building letter and number for
multiple buildings. The numbers shall be in sequence (i.e., 1, 2, 3, etc.).
Suites or units in lettered buildings shall have the building letter as part of
each suite or unit number, such as B-203. When units are on multiple floors,
ground floor numbers shall be in the 100 series (101, 102, 103), second floor
numbers shall be in the 200 series (201, 202, 203), etc. If a common hallway is
used for several suites or units, the external hallway entrance to each
commercial or office building shall contain a list of the suites or units
served.
      4.   The official address for each commercial or office suite or unit
shall be the building address followed by the suite or unit number (for
example, "223 Greenway Dr., Suite 3"). Addresses for suites or units in
commercial or office buildings not on a public thoroughfare shall include the
public thoroughfare address and the building number with the suite or unit
designation. The official address for each suite or unit will be the public
thoroughfare address followed by the building letter, a dash and the suite or
unit number (for example, "223 Greenway Dr., Suite B-2").
   J.   Content Of Identification: Each property identification number must
contain:
      1.   A frontage number component which is numerically sequenced and
assigned to a structure or parcel according to subsections A through H of this
section;
      2.   A direction component referencing the city grid quadrant and the
compass direction in which the frontage numbers run, abbreviated with the
single letter equivalent for its compass direction (N, E, S or W);
      3.   A thoroughfare name component consisting of either an alphabetic
name or a number name, but not both;
      4.   Thoroughfare type component, which modifies the name to distinguish
specific locational, functional and physical characteristics of the
thoroughfare;
      5.   A unit, suite, apartment or mobile home locator component if
required by subsections G through I of this section. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008,
eff. 3-13-2008; amd. 2014 Code)
9-2-7: DISPLAY OF PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION NUMBER:
When a property identification number has been designated by the planning
commission, the owner or occupant of such house or building shall cause a
painted, carved or cast duplicate of such number, at least three inches (3") in
height and varying in size according to the setback distance of the structure,
and of a shade contrasting with the background upon which the number is
mounted, to be located on the structure as provided in this chapter. Such
number shall be block numerals (not script) and shall be located in a
conspicuous position upon the portion of such structure which faces the
thoroughfare identified in the address certificate. The property identification
number shall be mounted in a permanent, stationary and durable manner,
unobstructed at all times by vines, screens or anything that would tend to hide
or obscure the number, and at a sufficient height that the number will be
clearly perceptible with the unaided eye from the centerline of the
thoroughfare upon which the structure is located. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008,
eff. 3-13-2008)
9-2-8: PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Building And Occupancy Permit:
      1.   No building permit shall be issued until such time as the applicant
has paid required fees and applied for and received a legal situs address from
the planning commission. The official address so issued must appear on the
building permit when issued.
      2.   No occupancy permit shall be issued until such time as the applicant
has paid required fees and applied for and received an official certificate of
property identification, and permanently affixed the official address to the
structure and substructure as required in this chapter. The planning commission
shall have the right to change property identification numbers without notice
and with or without cause prior to issuance of an occupancy permit.
   B.   Final Plat Approval: Property identification approval must be given by
the planning commission prior to final approval of a subdivision. The property
identification approval must appear on the final plat of a subdivision, PUD,
condominium or other proposed development prior to final approval and upon
amendment. The developer of a subdivision shall pay for and arrange
manufacturing and installation of all thoroughfare identification signs
required under this chapter or by the planning commission. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-
2008, eff. 3-13-2008)
9-2-9: STREET IDENTIFICATION CHANGE:
   A.   Upon application from seventy five percent (75%) of the owners of
structures located upon a thoroughfare for a change in thoroughfare name
identification, and upon payment of a minimum fee, the planning commission
shall review the application and make a determination as to the propriety of
the requested change. If the request is granted by the city council, the
balance of the associated costs for the name change shall be paid before the
thoroughfare designation shall be included in the official file of the city and
in the official property identification numbers (addresses) assigned to such
thoroughfare.
   B.   If, in the opinion of the city council, a requested change of
thoroughfare name identification is necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, the city council may,
at its discretion, waive payment of the fee and associated costs for such
change and for issuance of new property identification certificates. (Ord.
2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-13-2008)
9-2-10: SYSTEM OF STREET IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
It shall be the duty of the planning commission to establish a uniform system
for thoroughfare identification signs upon all streets of the city. (Ord.
2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-13-2008)
9-2-11: THOROUGHFARE IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
   A.   Cost Paid By Developer Or Property Owner: The developer or property
owner shall pay for thoroughfare identification signs, approved by the city,
and shall arrange for manufacture and installation of such thoroughfare
identification signs at the intersections of all thoroughfares and at such
other locations as may be determined to be necessary by the planning
commission.
   B.   Approval Required: It is unlawful to erect or maintain any thoroughfare
identification sign which has not been approved by the planning commission.
   C.   Requirements: All thoroughfare identification signs shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with the specifications approved by and
on file with the city. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-13-2008)
9-2-12: NONCONFORMING PROPERTIES:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to all thoroughfares, streets, structures,
street identification signs and address numbers, public and private, existing
within the city at the time of adoption hereof, as well as those thereafter
created or constructed.
   B.   For ease and convenience of the residents of the city, the owner of any
structure and address number which is not in compliance with this chapter at
the time of adoption hereof may retain such noncompliant structure and address
number so long as there is no change in the ownership of such structure. Upon a
change in ownership of any structure which is not in compliance with this
chapter at the time of adoption hereof, whether by sale, transfer, assignment,
gift, devise, inheritance or otherwise, the new owner shall bring the structure
and address number into full compliance with this chapter not less than ninety
(90) days after the change in ownership.
   C.   Those thoroughfares, streets and street identification signs which are
not in compliance with this chapter or which fail to comply with the
designations made by the planning commission pursuant to this chapter at the
time of adoption hereof shall be brought into full compliance by the owners not
later than thirty (30) days after notification. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff.
3-13-2008)
9-2-13: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The city and its agents shall in no way be liable for any negligence of any
owner in complying with this chapter. The city and its agents shall in no way
be liable for any claim, loss, liability, action or cause of action that arises
from or is caused by allowing noncompliance with this chapter pursuant to
section
9-2-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-13-2008)
9-2-14: ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATION:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the city staff to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-13-2008; amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   It is unlawful for any owner of a parcel of land upon which a structure
is located to fail to number such structure or units within the structure with
the number designated by the planning commission. It is unlawful for the owner
of any structure or substructure or for the owner or agent of any unoccupied
habitable structure located upon a thoroughfare within the city to fail to
number such structure or units within the structure with the designated number
in the manner set forth in this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to
number a structure or units within a structure in any manner other than that
prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-13-2008)
9-2-15: PENALTY:
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter, either by
failing to do those acts required herein, or by doing any act prohibited
herein, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2008.02, 3-13-2008, eff. 3-13-2008; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 3
FALLOUT SHELTERS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Defined
9-3-2: Exemption From Building Code Requirements
9-3-3: Administrative Application Of Building Code
9-3-4: Design
9-3-5: Construction
9-3-1: DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, a family fallout shelter is a structure
designed and constructed for emergency use only, to afford minimum protection
from nuclear radiation, commonly known as fallout, resulting from a nuclear
incident which recently has been or is likely to be of catastrophic
proportions. (1977 Code § 9-662)
9-3-2: EXEMPTION FROM BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS:
Due to the specialized purpose of emergency nature for which family fallout
shelters are designed, any such shelter which complies with the provisions of
this chapter are hereby exempt from the provisions of the building code, except
as otherwise provided herein. (1977 Code § 9-661)
9-3-3: ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATION OF BUILDING CODE:
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this chapter, the provisions
contained in the building code relating to administration, permits and
inspections shall be applicable to family fallout shelters. (1977 Code § 9-665)
9-3-4: DESIGN:
A family fallout shelter shall be of a design conforming to that recommended or
accepted by the federal department of defense, office of civil defense. (1977
Code § 9-663)
9-3-5: CONSTRUCTION:
A family fallout shelter shall, in all matters relating to construction and
structural stability, comply with not less than the equivalent of the
provisions relating to design loads and general building requirements specified
in the present version of the international building code and all building
codes identified in section
9-1-2 of this title and adopted by the city. (1977 Code § 9-664; amd. 2014
Code)
CHAPTER 4
FIRE CODE AND FIRE PREVENTION
SECTION:
9-4-1: Fire Code Adopted
9-4-2: Amendments To Code
9-4-3: Enforcement
9-4-4: New Material, Process Or Occupancy May Require Permit
9-4-5: Appeals
9-4-6: Penalty
9-4-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED 1 :
There is hereby adopted as the fire code by the city, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and protecting
property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the international
fire code (IFC), 2012 edition, except to the extent it is hereinafter modified
or amended by section
9-4-2 of this chapter, one copy of which has been and is now filed in the
office of the city recorder for use and inspection by the public. (1977 Code §
10-151; amd. 2014 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 9-1-2A8 of this title.
9-4-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Any amendments to the international fire code shall be set forth in this
section or as provided in subsection 9-1-2B of this title. (1977 Code § 10-157;
amd. 2014 Code)
9-4-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The international fire code shall be enforced by the state fire marshal (fire
marshal) and the Hurricane Valley fire district (fire district). (1977 Code §
10-152; amd. 2014 Code)
9-4-4: NEW MATERIAL, PROCESS OR OCCUPANCY MAY REQUIRE PERMIT:
The building inspector and the fire marshal and the fire district shall act as
a committee (fire committee) to determine and specify, after giving affected
persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or
occupancies, which shall require permits in addition to those now enumerated in
the fire code. The fire marshal and the fire district shall post such list in a
conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons. (1977 Code § 10-159; amd. 2014 Code)
9-4-5: APPEALS:
Whenever the fire committee shall disapprove an application, refuse to grant a
permit for which application has been received, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the international fire code do not apply or that the true intent
and meaning of the international fire code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire committee to the
city council within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision. (1977 Code
§ 10-158; amd. 2014 Code)
9-4-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Classification: Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of the international fire code or fail to comply therewith, or who
shall violate or fail to comply with any order thereunder, or who shall build
in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from
which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order
as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent
jurisdiction within the time fixed herein shall, severally for each and every
such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when
not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Enforced Removal: The application of the above penalty shall not be
held to prevent the enforced removal of the prohibited condition. (1977 Code §
10-160; amd. 2014 Code)
TITLE 10
LAND USE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Overview
10-1-2: Short Title
10-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
10-1-4: Interpretation
10-1-5: Coordination With Other Land Use Documents
10-1-6: Approvals Consistent With Title
10-1-7: Amendments
10-1-8: Notice Requirements
10-1-8-1: Applicant Notice; Waiver Of Requirements
10-1-8-2: Notice Of Intent To Prepare General Plan Or Comprehensive General
Plan Amendments
10-1-8-3: Notice Of Public Hearings And Public Meetings To Consider General
Plan Or Modifications
10-1-8-4: Notice Of Public Hearings And Public Meetings On Adoption Or
Modification Of Land Use Ordinance
10-1-8-5: Notice For Amendment To Subdivision; Notice For Vacation Of Or Change
To Street
10-1-8-6: Third Party Notice
10-1-8-7: Hearing And Notice For Proposal To Vacate Public Street, Right Of Way
Or Easement
10-1-8-8: Notice Challenge
10-1-8-9: Notice To City When Private Institution Of Higher Education Is
Constructing Student Housing
10-1-8-10: Canal Owner Or Operator; Notice To City
10-1-8-11: Notice For Amendment To Public Improvements In Subdivision Or
Development
10-1-1: OVERVIEW:
   A.   There are a number of activities related to the use, sale and
development of land that have been determined by federal and state law to be in
the public interest for local government to oversee and regulate in order to
bring about the safe, orderly creation and maintenance of communities. These
include such activities as subdividing land into lots for sale, building
structures, constructing roads, installing utilities, etc.
   B.   In order to effectively regulate these activities, communities are
empowered to establish review and permitting processes. This title contains the
review and permitting processes related to land development activities in the
city. In addition, other sections of this title that relate to land use, such
as signage and design standards, are also included in this title. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-1-2: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the TOQUERVILLE LAND MANAGEMENT TITLE. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purposes of this title, and any rules, regulations and specifications
hereafter adopted, are to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
through provisions designed:
   A.   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and to
preserve the outstanding natural, cultural or historical features, to ensure
appropriate development with regard to these features and to assure the proper
use and management of the natural beauty and resources of the city;
   B.   To guide future growth, provide for the harmonious and coordinated
development of the city (in conjunction with the city's general plan), and to
protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city and the value of
buildings and improvements upon the land;
   C.   To minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings, and to
prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population;
   D.   To provide for efficient layout and use of building lots, roads and
public services and utilities;
   E.   To provide for adequate light, air, view corridors and privacy; to
secure safety from fire, flood, landslides and other geologic hazards, and
other dangers;
   F.   To prevent the pollution or degradation of air, streams, ponds and
night sky; to ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the
water table; to minimize site disturbance and removal of native vegetation and
soil erosions; and to encourage and promote the conservation, wise use and
management of natural resources throughout the municipality in order to
preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and value of the
land;
   G.   To avoid scattered and premature subdivisions which would cause
insufficient public services and facilities, or necessitate an excessive
expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services and facilities;
   H.   To inform the public of the requirements and conditions necessary to
obtain approvals and permits to:
      1.   Change or create property boundaries (subdivide land);
      2.   Construct or modify buildings, signs, structures or utilities;
      3.   Alter the land or landscape;
      4.   Extract and process minerals on any property;
      5.   Create or modify zoning classifications for a property;
      6.   Modify the general plan. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Greater Restrictions Prevail: In their interpretation and application,
the provisions of this title shall be considered as minimum requirements. Where
the provisions of this title impose greater restrictions than any statute,
other regulation, ordinance or covenant, the provisions of this title shall
prevail. Where the provisions of any statute, other regulation, ordinance or
covenant impose greater restrictions than the provisions of this title, the
provisions of such statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant shall
prevail.
   B.   Definitions: Whenever any word or phrase used in this title is not
defined herein, but is defined in related sections of Utah Code Annotated or in
this code, such definition is incorporated herein and shall apply as though set
forth herein in full, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary
intention. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural, the term
"shall" is always mandatory and the term "may" is permissive.
   C.   Additional Conditions May Be Imposed: Any development or construction
activities shall require applications, fees, approvals, permits and compliance
pursuant to this title. To this end, all requirements, where possible, are
expressly delineated in this title or other applicable ordinances. However,
since it is impossible to cover every possibility and there are some aspects
which do not lend themselves to being easily articulated, this title allows the
planning commission and the city council to impose reasonable conditions upon a
developer in addition to those expressly set forth herein, so long as such
conditions comply with Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-508 and do not conflict with
any requirements set forth in this title or other applicable ordinances. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-1-5: COORDINATION WITH OTHER LAND USE DOCUMENTS:
This title, together with the city general plan, shall guide the use of all
land within the corporate boundaries of the city. The size and design of lots,
the nature of utilities, the design and improvement of streets, the type and
intensity of land use, and the provisions for any special facilities shall
conform to the land uses shown in the city master plan and the standards
established in this title. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-1-6: APPROVALS CONSISTENT WITH TITLE:
All departments, officials and public employees of the city who are vested with
the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall do so in conformance
with the provisions of this title, and shall issue no permit or license for
uses, buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the
provisions of this title, and any such permit or license, if issued in conflict
with the provisions of this title, shall be null and void. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-
2012)
10-1-7: AMENDMENTS:
The city council may, from time to time, in a manner consistent with the city
general plan, amend any provision of this title, but any such amendment shall
not be approved or final action taken until after public notice and public
hearing pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-205 and section
10-1-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-1-8: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
10-1-8-1: APPLICANT NOTICE; WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   For each land use application, the city shall:
      1.   Notify the applicant of the date, time and place of each public
hearing and public meeting to consider the application;
      2.   Provide to each applicant a copy of each staff report regarding the
applicant or the pending application at least three (3) business days before
the public hearing or public meeting; and
      3.   Notify the applicant of any final action on a pending application.
   B.   If the city fails to comply with the requirements of subsection A1 or
A2 of this section, or both, an applicant may waive the failure so that the
application may stay on the public hearing or public meeting agenda and be
considered as if the requirements had been met. (2014 Code)
10-1-8-2: NOTICE OF INTENT TO PREPARE GENERAL PLAN OR COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL
PLAN AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Before preparing a proposed general plan or a comprehensive general
plan amendment, the city shall provide ten (10) calendar days’ notice of its
intent to prepare a proposed general plan or a comprehensive general plan
amendment:
      1.   To each affected entity;
      2.   To the Utah Geospatial Resource Center created in Utah Code
Annotated section 63A-16-505; and
      3.   To the association of governments, established pursuant to an
interlocal agreement under Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 13, the
interlocal cooperation act, of which the city is a member.
   B.   Each notice under subsection A of this section shall:
      1.   Indicate that the city intends to prepare a general plan or a
comprehensive general plan amendment, as the case may be;
      2.   Describe or provide a map of the geographic area that will be
affected by the general plan or amendment;
      3.   Be sent by mail, e-mail or other effective means;
      4.   Invite the affected entities to provide information for the city to
consider in the process of preparing, adopting and implementing a general plan
or amendment concerning:
         a.   Impacts that the use of land proposed in the proposed general
plan or amendment may have; and
         b.   Uses of land within the city that the affected entity is
considering that may conflict with the proposed general plan or amendment; and
      5.   Include the address of the city’s website and the name and telephone
number of a person where more information can be obtained concerning the city’s
proposed general plan or amendment.
      6.   A municipality shall send the newly adopted general plan and
comprehensive general plan amendments to the relevant association of
governments within 45 days of the date of adoption. (2014 Code; amd. Ord.
2023.22, 9-20-2023)
10-1-8-3: NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS AND PUBLIC MEETINGS TO CONSIDER GENERAL
PLAN OR MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   The city shall provide:
      1.   Notice of the date, time and place of the first public hearing to
consider the original adoption or any modification of all or any portion of a
general plan; and
      2.   Notice of each public meeting on the subject.
   B.   Each notice of a public hearing under subsection A1 of this section
shall be at least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing and shall
be:
      1.   Published as a Class A notice under Utah Code Annotated Section 63G-
30-102, for at least 10 days; and
      2.   Mailed to each affected entity.
   C.   Each notice of a public meeting under subsection A2 of this section
shall be at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting and shall be
published for the municipality, as a Class A notice under Utah Code Annotated
Section 63G-30-102, for at least 24 hours. (2014 Code; amd. Ord. 2023.22, 9-20-
2023)
10-1-8-4: NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS AND PUBLIC MEETINGS ON ADOPTION OR
MODIFICATION OF LAND USE ORDINANCE:
   A.   The city shall give:
      1.   Notice of the date, time and place of the first public hearing to
consider the adoption or any modification of a land use ordinance; and
      2.   Notice of each public meeting on the subject.
   B.   Each notice of a public hearing under subsection A1 of this section
shall be:
      1.   Mailed to each affected entity at least ten (10) calendar days
before the public hearing;
      2.   Provided for the area directly affected by the land use ordinance
change, as a class B notice under Utah Code Annotated Section 63G-30-102, for
at least 10 calendar days before the day of the public hearing.
      3.   In addition to the notice requirements described in Subsections (A)
and (B), for any proposed modification to the text of a zoning code, the notice
posted in accordance with Subsection (B) shall:
         a.   Include a summary of the effect of the proposed modifications to
the text of the zoning code designed to be understood by a lay person; and
         b.   Be provided to any person upon written request.
   C.   Each notice of a public meeting under subsection A2 of this section
shall be provided for the municipality, as a Class A notice under Utah Code
Annotated Section 63G-30-102, for at least twenty four (24) hours before the
meeting.
   D.   If the city plans to hold a public hearing in accordance with Utah Code
Annotated section 10-9a-502 to adopt a zoning map or map amendment, the city
shall send a courtesy notice to each owner of private real property whose
property is located entirely or partially within the proposed map at least ten
(10) days prior to the scheduled day of the public hearing.
   E.   The notice shall:
      1.   Identify with specificity each owner of record of real property that
will be affected by the proposed zoning map or map amendments;
      2.   State the current zone in which the real property is located;
      3.   State the proposed new zone for the real property;
      4.   Provide information regarding or a reference to the proposed
regulations, prohibitions and permitted uses that the property will be subject
to if the zoning map or map amendment is adopted;
      5.   State that the owner of real property may, no later than ten (10)
days after the day of the first public hearing, file a written objection to the
inclusion of the owner’s property in the proposed zoning map or map amendment;
      6.   State the address where the property owner should file the protest;
      7.   Notify the property owner that each written objection filed with the
city will be provided to the city council; and
      8.   State the location, date and time of the public hearing described in
Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-502.
   F.   If the city mails notice to a property owner in accordance with
subsection (B)(2) of this section for a public hearing on a zoning map or map
amendment, the notice required in this subsection D may be included in or part
of the notice described in subsection (B)(2) of this section rather than sent
separately. (2014 Code; amd. Ord. 2023.22, 9-20-2023)
10-1-8-5: NOTICE FOR AMENDMENT TO SUBDIVISION; NOTICE FOR VACATION OF OR CHANGE
TO STREET:
   A.   For an amendment to a subdivision, the city shall provide notice of the
date, time and place of at least one public meeting, as provided in subsection
(A)(2) of this section.
   B.   At least ten (10) calendar days before the public meeting, the notice
required under subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be:
      1.   Mailed and addressed to the record owner of each parcel within
specified parameters of that property; or
      2.   Posted on the property proposed for subdivision, in a visible
location, with a sign of sufficient size, durability and print quality that is
reasonably calculated to give notice to passersby.
      3.   The city shall provide notice as required under section
10-1-8-7  of this chapter for a subdivision that involves a vacation,
alteration or amendment of a street. (2014 Code; amd. Ord. 2023.22, 9-20-2023)
10-1-8-6: THIRD PARTY NOTICE:
   A.   If city ordinance requires notice to adjacent property owners, the city
shall:
      1.   Mail notice to the record owner of each parcel within parameters
specified by city ordinance; or
      2.   Post notice on the property with a sign of sufficient size,
durability, print quality and location that is reasonably calculated to give
notice to passersby.
   B.   If the city mails notice to third party property owners under
subsection A of this section, it shall mail equivalent notice to property
owners within an adjacent jurisdiction. (2014 Code; amd. Ord. 2023.22, 9-20-
2023)
10-1-8-7: HEARING AND NOTICE FOR PROPOSAL TO VACATE PUBLIC STREET, RIGHT OF WAY
OR EASEMENT:
   A.   For any proposal to vacate some or all of a public street, right of way
or easement, the city council shall:
      1.   Hold a public hearing; and
      2.   Give notice of the date, place and time of the hearing, as provided
in subsection (B) of this section.
      3.   At least ten (10) days before the public hearing under subsection
(A)(1) of this section, the notice required under subsection (A)(2) of this
section shall be:
         a.   Mailed to the record owner of each parcel that is accessed by the
public street, right of way or easement;
         b.   Mailed to each affected entity; and
         c.   Posted on or near the street, right of way or easement as a class
A notice under Utah Code Annotated Section 63G-30-102, for at least 10 days.
(2014 Code; amd. Ord. 2023.22, 9-20-2023)
10-1-8-8: NOTICE CHALLENGE:
If notice given under authority of this section
10-1-8 is not challenged under Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-801 within
thirty (30) days after the meeting or action for which notice is given, the
notice is considered adequate and proper. (2014 Code)
10-1-8-9: NOTICE TO CITY WHEN PRIVATE INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IS
CONSTRUCTING STUDENT HOUSING:
   A.   Each private institution of higher education that intends to construct
student housing on property owned by the institution shall provide written
notice of the intended construction, as provided in subsection B of this
section, before any funds are committed to the construction, if any of the
proposed student housing buildings is within three hundred feet (300') of
privately owned residential property.
   B.   Each notice under subsection A of this section shall be provided to the
city council and the mayor.
   C.   At the request of the city, the institution and the city council shall
jointly hold a public hearing to provide information to the public and receive
input from the public about the proposed construction. (2014 Code)
10-1-8-10: CANAL OWNER OR OPERATOR; NOTICE TO CITY:
   A.   A canal company or a canal operator who owns or operates a canal in the
city shall provide the city:
      1.   A current mailing address and phone number;
      2.   A contact name; and
      3.   A general description of the location of each canal owned or
operated by the canal owner or canal operator.
   B.   If the information described in subsection A of this section changes
after a canal company or a canal operator has provided the information to the
city, the canal company or canal operator shall provide the correct information
within thirty (30) days of the day on which the information was changed. (2014
Code)
10-1-8-11: NOTICE FOR AMENDMENT TO PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS IN SUBDIVISION OR
DEVELOPMENT:
Prior to implementing an amendment to adopted specifications for public
improvements that apply to subdivision or development, the city shall give
thirty (30) days' mailed notice and an opportunity to comment to anyone who has
requested the notice in writing. (2014 Code)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: General Definitions
10-2-1: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are hereby adopted for the purposes of this title,
and the regulatory statements included therein are part of this title:
AB INITIO: From the beginning.
ABANDONMENT: A use, building or structure shall be deemed abandoned if said use
has not applied to the premises for any period of twelve (12) consecutive
months. The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the use of the
property by the owner, with the intention neither of transferring rights to the
property to another owner nor of resuming the use of the property.
ABUTTING: Land having a common property line or zoning district line or
separated only by a private street, alley or easement, having property or zone
district boundaries in common.
ACCESS: A way of approaching or entering a property. In zoning and subdivision
regulations, lots of record are usually required to have direct access to a
public street or highway, or to a private street meeting public standards. In
the context of land use controls, access includes ingress (the right to enter)
and egress (the right to leave).
ACCESSORY, ACCESSORY USE OR ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A use or structure subordinate
to the principal use or structure on the same lot or parcel of land and serving
a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building or use.
Where an accessory building has a wall or a portion of a wall not less than
four feet (4') in length in common with the main building, such accessory
building shall be considered a part of the main building.
ADJACENT PROPERTY: That property within three hundred feet (300') of any
property line or boundary of the lot in question.
AGENT OR OWNER: Any person who can show written proof that such person is
acting for the property owner.
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY OR BUSINESS: An industry or business involving
agricultural products in manufacturing, packaging, treatment, sales or storage,
including, but not limited to, food packaging or processing facilities and
similar uses as determined by the planning commission.
AGRICULTURE: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and
gardening, but not including the keeping or raising of domestic animals or
fowl, except household pets, and not including any agricultural industry or
business, such as fruit packing plants, vegetable or fruit stands or similar
uses.
AIR RIGHTS: The right to use the air space over the property of someone else,
typically, but not always, over railways and highways.
AIRPORT: A tract of level land designed or used as a place where aircraft can
take off and land, which is usually equipped with hard surfaced landing strips,
a control tower, hangars, accommodations for passengers and cargo, and
facilities for repair, fueling, etc.
ALLEY OR LANE: A public or private way affording only secondary means of access
to abutting property.
AMORTIZATION: A method of eliminating nonconforming uses by requiring the
termination of the nonconforming use after a specified period of time.
APARTMENT: A dwelling unit in a multi-family building.
APARTMENT BUILDING: A building or portion thereof arranged, designed for and/or
occupied as a nontransient residence which contains multi-family dwelling
units. This shall not be deemed to include motels, hotels or other buildings
used or intended to be used for the accommodation of transient automobile
travelers or other transient guests.
APPURTENANCE: Accessory equipment that is considered incidental to the
principal property, such as utility and water meters, connection equipment or
junction boxes.
ARCADE OR COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT VIDEO GAME CENTER: Any business establishment
containing greater than three (3) coin operated amusement, electronic or video
machines or games.
ASSESSMENT RATIO: The regulation between the assessed value of a property and
true market value.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of
engines, motor vehicles or trailers, collision service, including body, frame
or fender straightening or repair, overall painting or paint shop.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION OR FILLING STATION: A place where gasoline or any
other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is
offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor
vehicles, and where services performed may include tube and tire repair,
battery charging, storage of merchandise, lubricating of automobiles,
replacement of spark plugs, lights, fans and other small parts, but not
including washing services when conveyor, blower or steam cleaning devices are
involved, nor including major auto repair.
BASEMENT: A story whose floor is more than twelve inches (12") below the
adjoining ground, but where no more than one-half (1/2) of its floor to ceiling
height is above the adjoining ground. A basement shall not be considered a
story if no more than thirty inches (30") of said basement is exposed at any
point of grade.
BUFFER ZONE: A strip of land zoned to protect one type of land use from another
with which it is noncompatible. The term may also be used to describe any zone
that separates two (2) unlike zones.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof and columns or walls, used or intended to
be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
"Building" shall not include any form of vehicle, even though immobilized.
Where this title (or where special authority granted pursuant to this title)
requires that a use shall be entirely enclosed within a building, this
definition shall be qualified by adding "and enclosed on all sides".
BUILDING AREA: The total square footage of a lot covered by a building measured
on a horizontal plane at mean grade level, exclusive of uncovered porches,
terraces and steps.
BUILDING ENVELOPE: The net cubic space that remains for placing a structure on
a site after building line, setback, side yard, height and bulk regulations are
observed.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The linear width of that side of a building which contains
the main entrance for pedestrian ingress and egress. If more than one main
entrance exists, the side of a building that more nearly faces or is oriented
to the street of highest classification as portrayed on the official street map
shall be considered the building frontage. If all streets are of the same
classification, the building frontage is the linear width of the side of the
building with the smallest linear dimension.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard
roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any
segment of the building. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the
following, whichever yields a greater height of building:
   A.   The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface
within a five foot (5') horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the
building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet (10')
above lowest grade; or
   B.   An elevation ten feet (10') higher than the lowest grade when the
sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection A of this definition is more
than ten feet (10') above lowest grade.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the front line and the street lot line, and
at a distance therefore equal to the required depths of front and street side
yards, and extending across the full widths of these yards.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
building site on which it is situated. In any residential district, any
dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the building site on which
the same is located.
CABIN: A living space equipped with a sleeping area, kitchen area and full
bathroom facilities connected to a sewer system, with electricity and culinary
water available inside the cabin. The cabin must be constructed in compliance
with applicable building codes, be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square
feet but not more than four hundred (400) square feet. No more than ten percent
(10%) of the total sites in an RV Resort may be cabin sites.
CABIN SITE: An area within an RV Resort that contains a short-term rental cabin
as well as one paved/concrete automobile parking space within the site. Cabin
sites must be a minimum of one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet in size
and cabins must be separated from one another by at least the distance (or type
of firewall) required by the international fire code as adopted by the City.
CAMPGROUND: A public area designated by a public agency for camping, or a
private area licensed by the City for camping.
CAMPING: A temporary establishment of living facilities, such as tents or
recreational coaches, as regulated by this title.
CARETAKER: A person employed by the owner of a private, residential dwelling to
reside within the home or within a building accessory thereto and to primarily
provide maintenance, custodial, healthcare or security services. A person shall
not be deemed a caretaker within the meaning of this title who shall possess
any interest, whether legal or beneficial, in the dwelling, or who shall give
consideration, excluding caretaker services, to the owner of said dwelling for
the privilege of residing therein.
CARETAKER UNIT: A room or rooms within or annexed to a larger dwelling, used or
intended to house a "caretaker", as defined in this section, and certified to
be used as such by the owner or owners of the dwelling upon a form supplied by
the City and certifying that the caretaker unit is to be occupied only by a
"caretaker", as defined in this section.
CARPORT: A private garage not completely enclosed by walls or doors. For
purposes of this title, a carport shall be subject to all of the regulations
prescribed in this title for a private garage.
CARRYING CAPACITY: The level of land use that can be permanently accommodated
without an irreversible change in the quality of air, water, land or plant and
animal habitats.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead, and
dedicated for such purposes, including columbariums when operated in
conjunction with and within the boundaries of such premises.
CENTERLINE OF STREET: That line designated as such in any street in the city
engineer's records, or so designated by the city engineer.
CHURCH: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, maintained
and controlled by a duly recognized religious organization where persons
regularly assemble for worship.
CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL: A building in which a group of dentists, physicians
and allied professional assistants are associated for the conduct of their
profession. The clinic may include a dental and/or medical laboratory and
pharmacy, but it shall not include inpatient care or operating rooms for major
surgery.
CLUB, SOCIAL: Any organization, group or association supported by its members
where the primary purpose is to render a service to said members and their
guests.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A type of development that allows the reduction of lot
sized below the zoning ordinance's minimum requirements of the land thereby
gained is preserved as permanent open space for the community.
COMMISSION (Also Referred To As PLANNING COMMISSION): Planning commission
members perform all functions and duties as required by Utah Code Annotated
title 10, chapter 9a. In addition, they are charged with all duties as outlined
in section
10-3-1 of this title.
CONDEMNATION: The taking of private property by a government unit for public
use when the owner will not relinquish it through sale or other means. The
owner is recompensed by payment of "market value".
CONDITIONAL USE: The use of land that, because of its unique characteristics or
potential impact on the city, surrounding neighbors or adjacent land uses, may
not be compatible in some areas or may be compatible only if certain conditions
are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts. In order for a
conditional use to be considered, it must be listed as such in the applicable
zone.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A real estate plan or project whereby two (2) or more
units, whether contained in an existing or proposed building or buildings, are
separately offered or proposed to be offered for sale. "Condominium project"
shall also mean the property when the context so requires. The owner or
developer of any condominium project or "time period unit project", as defined
in this section, shall comply with the Utah condominium ownership act, Utah
Code Annotated title 57, chapter 8, hereby incorporated within and made a part
of this title by reference. Such owner or developer shall also comply with all
pertinent provisions of this title.
CONVERSION: Alteration of the use of an existing structure while retaining,
without substantial alteration, the exterior portion of the structure. A change
of the architectural style or scale of the structure shall be deemed to be a
substantial alteration.
CORRAL: An enclosed space, other than a building, less than one acre in area,
used for the confinement of farm animals.
COUNCIL: The Toquerville City council.
COUNTY: County of Washington, state of Utah.
COURT: An open, unoccupied and unobstructed space, other than a yard, on the
same lot with a building or group of buildings, and which is bounded on two (2)
sides by such building or buildings.
COVENANT: A private legal restriction on the use of land contained in the deed
to the property or otherwise formally recorded. Covenants held by homeowner
associations are not enforced by the municipality.
COVERAGE: The total area, expressed as a percentage of lot area, which is the
result of adding together the footprints of all buildings and structures on a
lot or parcel of land, as projected to the ground, exclusive of eaves, exterior
decks, landings and stairways; and all paved or graveled areas or areas of
ground covered by impervious materials on the same lot or parcel or site. In
determining such paved and impervious areas, the following shall be excluded:
   A.   Four hundred (400) square feet of any driveway, except for portions
thereof which serve as required parking space or which occupy a required side
yard; and
   B.   Sixty (60) square feet of walkway in the front yard on building sites
which are fifty feet (50') or more in width.
CUT: Land surface which is reshaped by man or machine through the removal of
soil, rock or other materials.
DAYCARE CENTER, CHILDCARE CENTER OR PRESCHOOL: Any premises used for the care
of four (4) or more children who are not related within the second degree to
the operator of said premises.
DELICATESSEN OR DELI: An establishment that sells precooked or prepared foods
which are typically kept refrigerated but otherwise ready for serving, such as
meats, cheeses, prepared salads and pastas. A "delicatessen" does not provide
dining facilities. A "restaurant" may be associated with a "delicatessen", but
is a distinctly different type of establishment.
DENSITY: The number of acres required for each residential dwelling which,
therefore, determines the number of residential dwellings permitted in a total
area of property.
DESIGN PERMIT REVIEW: Review of commercial, industrial and residential
structures, and some signs, to ensure project design and design consistency
with structures and the general environment of the surrounding area.
DEVELOPER: The person, persons, corporation, firm or partnership responsible
for the development of land, structures or the use of land.
DEVELOPMENT: The carrying out of any building activity or clearing of land as
an adjunct of construction.
DEVELOPMENT PARCEL: Any quantity of land capable of being described with such
definity that its location and boundaries may be established, which is
designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit
or which has been used or developed as a unit.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities (self- care, receptive or expressive
language, learning, mobility, self-direction, capacity for independent living
or economic self-sufficiency), including a person having a record of such an
impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment. Disability does not
include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any federally controlled
substance, as defined in section 102 of the controlled substances act, 21 USC
802. See Utah Code Annotated sections 57-21-2 and 62A-5-101.
DISABLED PERSON: A person who has a severe, chronic disability attributable to
a mental or physical impairment or to a combination of mental and physical
impairments which is likely to continue indefinitely and which results in a
substantial functional limitation in three (3) or more of the following areas
of major life activity: self-care, receptive and expressive language, learning,
mobility, self-direction, capacity for independent living or economic self-
sufficiency; and who requires a combination or sequence of special
interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other services that are
individually planned and coordinated to allow the person to function in, and
contribute to, a residential neighborhood.
DISTRICT OR ZONE: A portion of the territory of the city within which certain
uses of land and buildings are permitted or prohibited and within which certain
yards and other open spaces are required, and within which certain off street
parking and landscaped areas are required and certain uniform height
regulations are established for buildings and structures, all as set forth and
specified in this title.
DRIVE OR DRIVEWAY: A private roadway, the use of which is limited to persons
residing, employed or otherwise using or visiting the private property on which
the driveway is located, or to which the driveway extends.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for residential
occupancy, including single-family, two-family, multiple-family and apartment
structures; but shall not include boarding, rooming or lodging houses, hotels,
motels, tents, trailers, mobile home parks, motor courts or similar structures
designed or used primarily for transient residential uses.
DWELLING, APARTMENT: See definition of Apartment.
DWELLING, DORMITORY: A building or portion thereof containing up to ten (10)
rooms, arranged, designed for and/or occupied as nontransient sleeping quarters
for ten (10) or more individuals and having one principal entryway or entrance,
one principal kitchen facility and/or toilet facility, or other public room.
DWELLING GROUP: A group of two (2) or more detached dwellings located on a
parcel of land in one ownership.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling arranged, designed for and/or occupied by
three (3) or more families living independently of each other, and containing
three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached building arranged, designed for and/or used
for, or occupied by, not more than one family, and which building has not less
than one kitchen and one bathroom.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY OR DUPLEX: A dwelling arranged, designed for and/or
occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other, and containing
two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for living and sleeping
purposes, and having not less than one kitchen and one bathroom.
EASEMENT: A space on a lot or parcel of land explicitly reserved, permitted or
used for location of and/or access to utilities, drainage, driveways or other
rights of way.
EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT OR EFFICIENCY APARTMENT: A dwelling unit with an area
of less than five hundred (500) square feet which has living, kitchen and
sleeping areas essentially within one room, and which does not contain a
bedroom separated from the living areas by walls or structural partitions.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person who is sixty (60) years old or older.
EXCAVATION: Any disturbance to the ground, including, but not limited to,
clearing, grubbing, rock removal, cutting, tunneling, drilling or any other
activity which alters the natural ground.
FAMILY: An individual or group of two (2) or more persons occupying a dwelling
and related by blood, marriage, contract or adoption, or a group of not more
than three (3) persons who are not related, living together as a single
housekeeping unit.
FARM ANIMALS: Includes cows, horses, goats, pigs, chickens and domestic
animals.
FARMERS' MARKET: A public marketplace where fresh foods from a defined local
area (within the state of Utah) are sold by the people who have grown,
gathered, raised or caught them. Farmers may pay a fee to sell at the market.
FAST FOOD OR DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: A place of business which sells food products
or beverages, and which:
   A.   Delivers such food products or beverages to customers outside of the
building in which they are prepared by means of a service window, counter or
similar method or device for consumption off the premises;
   B.   Delivers such food products or beverages to customers within a building
which is designed in such a manner that a majority of the customers will remove
such food products or beverages from the building for consumption off the
premises; or
   C.   Serves such food products or beverages exclusively in disposable
containers, to facilitate consumption off the premises.
FENCE: A physical barrier to delineate, contain, screen or designate an area
designed for a specific use, such as an enclosure for a dwelling, utility,
storage area or landscaping.
FILL: The deposit of soil, rock or other materials placed by man.
FLAG LOT: A lot which:
   A.   Is created from a larger lot;
   B.   May allow for the construction of a single- family dwelling on property
that may otherwise be unable to accommodate such development;
   C.   Must meet all requirements of the zone in which the lot is located,
except as noted herein;
   D.   Does not have the required street frontage of the zone;
   E.   Has either a staff that is owned in fee simple interest or an
irrevocable easement from the lot to a dedicated street. This staff must be a
minimum twenty six feet (26') wide and comply with fire authority
specifications, from the street to the flag portion of the lot.
FOOTPRINT: The square footage of a building or structure on a lot or parcel of
land as projected to the ground, exclusive of eaves, exterior decks, landings
and stairways. "Footprint" includes garage, carport, covered porches and
covered decks, unless otherwise designated within the scope of any chapter of
this title.
FRANCHISE: A single unit of a larger business chain.
FRONTAGE: The linear measurement of the front lot line, or linear measurement
at setback as required by zone.
GALLERY: A building or hall, or portion thereof, in which artistic work is
displayed for exhibition or sale.
GARAGE, PARKING: A building used for the parking of more than five (5)
automobiles, whether at no cost or for a charge, for compensation or as an
accommodation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or a portion of a principal
building designed and/or used only for the shelter or storage of passenger
vehicles or trailers owned or operated by the families resident upon the
premises and in which no occupation or business for profit is conducted.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any premises, other than a private garage, used for the
storage, care, sale, hire, repair or refinishing of self-propelled vehicles or
trailers.
GENERAL PLAN: A document that the City adopts that sets forth general
guidelines for proposed future development of the land within the City.
"General plan" also includes what is also commonly referred to as a "master
plan".
GEOLOGIC HAZARD: A hazard inherent in the crust of the earth, or artificially
created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life, property or
improvement due to movement, failure or shifting of the earth.
GIFT SHOP OR CURIO SHOP: A retail store where novelty gifts, collectibles and
trinkets are characteristically offered for sale.
GRADE, EXISTING: The elevation of the surface of the ground, whether natural or
altered, that exists prior to the excavation or grading under consideration or
otherwise in question.
GRADE, FINISH: The elevation of the finished surface of the ground.
GRADE, NATURAL: The elevation of the surface of the ground which has been
created through the action of natural forces and has not resulted from manmade
cuts, fills, excavation, grading or similar earthmoving processes. The
topographic maps of the City shall be the primary, though not exclusive,
reference for determination of natural grade. Natural grade shall be determined
in every instance where necessary by the City Engineer.
GROSS AREA: The sum of all areas of several floors of the building, including
basements (unless excluded within the scope of any chapter in this title),
mezzanines, intermediate floored tiers and penthouses of headroom height,
measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of
common walls separating buildings, garages and covered carports.
GUEST: Any person or persons staying, for a time period not to exceed sixty
(60) days, within a dwelling unit without payment or compensation or
remuneration to the owners, tenants or full time inhabitants of said dwelling
unit.
GUESTHOUSE: Living quarters within an accessory building for use by guests of
the occupants of the premises. May have kitchen facilities, but shall not be
rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit, except as may otherwise
be provided within this title.
GUESTROOM: Any room or rooms used or intended to be used by a guest for
sleeping purposes.
HABITABLE SPACE: Space in a structure for living, working, retail, sleeping,
eating, cooking or the like. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls,
storage or utility space, and similar areas, are not considered habitable
space.
HELISTOP OR HELIPORT: A facility designed to accommodate helicopters for
landings and takeoffs. A heliport includes such services as refueling,
maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters.
HISTORIC BUILDING OR HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which the
Planning Commission finds to meet the following standards:
   A.   The building or structure is associated with events that have made a
significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history;
   B.   The building or structure is associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past;
   C.   The building or structure embodies distinctive characteristics of type,
period or method of construction, whether it represents the work of a master,
or possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
   D.   The building or structure has yielded, or may be likely to yield,
information important in prehistory or history.
HOME OCCUPATION: The conducting of any business, transaction or activity for
which consideration of any nature is received within any permitted zoning
district. Garage or yard type sales do not constitute a home occupation
provided they are held no more than four (4) times per calendar year and last
no more than three (3) consecutive days on each occasion.
HOSPITAL: An institution that provides major medical or surgical care and
treatment and overnight accommodations for the sick and the injured.
HOTEL: A transient lodging facility usually containing ten (10) or more
guestrooms and having one principal entryway or entrance, a lobby or other
public rooms.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house and kept for
company or pleasure and not for profit, such as dogs, cats and canaries, but
not including a sufficient number of dogs to constitute a commercial kennel.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL: Matter that is impenetrable by moisture. For the purposes
of this title, any finished surface which qualifies as "all weather surfacing",
according to specifications provided by the City Engineer, shall be deemed
impervious.
JUNKYARD OR AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: The use of any lot, portion of a lot or
tract of land for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap
metals or other scrap material, or for the dismantling, demolition or
abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof;
provided, that this definition shall be deemed not to include such uses which
are clearly accessory and incidental to any agricultural use permitted in the
district.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: A commercial establishment or other facility having four
(4) or more dogs for the purpose of boarding, breeding, keeping, buying,
selling, grooming, letting for hire or training for a fee and requiring a
conditional use permit.
KITCHEN: Any room and/or other place used or intended or designed to be used
for cooking or for the preparation of food.
LANDING STRIP: An aircraft runway without airport facilities.
LANDSCAPING: An expanse of natural scenery; or the addition of trees, plants,
lawns and other natural and decorative features to land.
LANE, PRIVATE: A thoroughfare upon land owned in fee simple or by way of an
easement, upon which a lot has the frontage required by this title, which lane
has been approved by the Planning Commission and City Council, as fulfilling
the frontage requirements of this title.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The City Council.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer specializing in the specifically
stated area (civil, geotechnical, etc.) of engineering and currently registered
in the State of Utah.
LOT: A parcel of land in single ownership occupied or intended to be occupied
by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings,
or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such
open spaces as required by this title, having frontage upon a street or upon a
right-of-way approved by the Planning Commission, or upon a right of way not
less than twenty feet (20') in width. Except as provided in this title, not
more than one dwelling may occupy one lot. Furthermore, a lot is a parcel of
land:
   A.   Identified with a number and designation on the final plat of a
subdivision recorded in the office of the county recorder of Washington County;
or
   B.   The dimensions or boundaries of which are defined by a record of survey
map recorded in the office of the county recorder of Washington County in
accordance with the law regulating the division of said land, or ownership.
LOT AREA: The total area within the boundaries of a lot or parcel of land.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection
or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same
street forming an interior angle of not more than one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines
measured in the main direction of the side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: For an interior lot, the lot line adjoining the street; for a
corner lot, the lot line adjoining either street, as elected by the lot owner.
LOT LINE, REAR: Ordinarily, that line of a lot which is opposite and most
distant from the front line of the lot. In the case of a triangular or gore
shaped lot, a line ten feet (10') in length within the parcel parallel to and
at a maximum distance from the front lot line. In cases where these definitions
are not applicable but a determination is necessary, the planning commission
shall designate the rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front or rear lot line. A side lot
line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line; a
side lot line separating a lot from a street is a street side lot line.
LOT LINES: The property lines bounding a lot or parcel of land.
LOT, RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land of not less than sixteen feet (16') in width
connecting a lot to a street for use as private access to that lot.
LOT WIDTH: The distance across a lot or parcel of property measured along a
line parallel to the front lot line, or parallel to a straight line connecting
the ends of an arc which constitutes the front lot line.
MAINTENANCE: Routine repair, replacement or refurbishing of existing materials
in order to preserve or keep property in proper condition, and painting,
repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair not involving
structural changes.
MANUFACTURED HOMES: A structure built after June 16, 1976, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical systems contained therein.
MARKET OR GROCERY STORE: A retail store which typically specializes in the sale
of food items.
MIXED USE: Residential uses combined with either or both commercial or office
uses.
MOBILE HOME: A structure built prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or
more sections, which is eight (8) body feet or more in width and thirty two
(32) body feet or more in length and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.
MODEL HOMES: A home allowed that may or may not be used as a sales office
established within a subdivision, for the purpose of showing newly developed
residences to the public for sale.
MODULAR HOME OR BUILDING: A structure built in accordance with the standards
set forth in the International Building Code adopted and in effect at the time
of construction which is composed of components substantially assembled in a
manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on
a permanent foundation.
MOTEL: A transient lodging facility usually containing one or more buildings.
Guestrooms usually have outside entrances.
MUNICIPALITY: Toquerville City.
NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas varying in width along streams, rivers, gullies
or washes which are natural drainage channels.
NIGHTLY RENTAL: The act of leasing a dwelling, or any part thereof, by a person
or entity to another for a consecutive period of thirty (30) calendar days or
less in exchange for direct or indirect remuneration.
NIGHTLY RENTAL DEVELOPMENT: A new development containing Dwellings or
commercial structures with Dwellings located therein where each and every
Dwelling in the entire development is allowed to be rented, under the Section
10-15C-13 of the Toquerville City Code on a basis of less than thirty (30)
consecutive days.
NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE: A building or structure or portion thereof, lawfully
existing at the time it was constructed, but because of subsequent changes in
regulations, no longer conforms with the regulations for the district in which
it is situated.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupied a building lot or parcel of
land at the time said use was initiated or created, but because of subsequent
changes in regulations, no longer conforms with the regulations for the
district in which it is situated, and which has been maintained continuously
since the time the zoning regulation covering the land changed.
NONPROFIT: A corporation lawfully registered under State law according to the
Utah Nonprofit Corporation Act and any future amendments thereto, or lawfully
registered under any corresponding State Corporations Act or Code and duly
recognized by the United States Internal Revenue Service as a nonprofit
corporation.
NURSING HOME, REST HOME OR CONVALESCENT HOME: An institution, other than a
hospital, for the care of human illness or infirmity in which care, rather than
diagnosis or treatment, constitutes the principal function.
OFF SITE CONSTRUCTION: Any construction related to a subdivision which is not
within the platted subdivision.
OFFICE: A building or room, or portion thereof, or other structure either
temporarily or permanently located, wherein a business or service for others is
transacted, but not including the storage or sale of merchandise on the
premises.
OPEN SPACE: The use of land which leaves soil generally undisturbed and upon
which natural vegetation, whether or not native to the area, occupies the major
visible aspect of the land.
PACKAGE AGENCY: An outlet authorized by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission to sell original package liquor or wine for consumption off the
premises.
PARCEL: See definition of lot.
PARKING LOT OR PARKING AREA: An open area, public or private, other than a
street or alley, used for the parking of more than four (4) automobiles,
whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation. Except as otherwise
provided by this title, required parking spaces shall not be provided within a
required front yard or side street side yard.
PARKING SPACE: A space within a public or private parking area, exclusive of
access or maneuvering areas, ramps or columns, to be used exclusively as
temporary parking or storage for one private motor vehicle.
PASTURE: A space, which may contain agricultural buildings or structures,
greater than or equal to one-fourth (1/4) acre in area and of at least one
hundred feet (100') in width, designed and used specifically for the
confinement and grazing of farm animals.
PEDESTRIAN CONVENIENCE: A noncommercial structure located in such a fashion as
to be convenient for the use and enjoyment of the public, typically located
along a sidewalk or other pedestrian pathway, such as a park bench, drinking
water fountain, lamppost, trash receptacle or other similar structure.
PERMANENT: Not expected to change in status, condition or place. Lasting or
meant to last indefinitely.
PERMITTED USE: A use of a lot or parcel of land permitted under the
restrictions and regulations of the district in which it is situated and, as
such, subject to such restrictions and regulations governing use, location,
materials and height of buildings, densities, open space and other such
regulations and restrictions as might apply within each specific district.
PERSON: An individual, association, firm, partnership, corporation or any
similar legal entity.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OR TOWNHOME DEVELOPMENT: A real estate plan or project
whereby two (2) or more dwellings or dwelling units, on separately owned lots,
are joined together in an owners' association which owns common property in the
planned project, and administers the project for the benefit of the owners and
residents.
PLANNING COMMISSION: Planning commission members perform all functions and
duties as required by Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 9a. In addition,
they are charged with all duties as outlined in section
10-3-1 of this title.
PRESERVATION: Retaining intact, in an unaltered condition.
PUBLIC: That which is under the ownership of the United States government, the
state of Utah or any agency or subdivision thereof, Washington County or
Toquerville City (or any department or agency thereof), or referring to the
general populace.
PUBLIC USE: A use operated exclusively by a public body, such use having the
purpose of serving the public health, safety or general welfare, and including
uses such as public schools, parks, playgrounds and other recreational
facilities, administrative and service facilities, and public utilities.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: A use operated by a private nonprofit, educational,
religious, recreational, charitable or philanthropic institution, such use
having the purpose primarily of serving the general public, such as churches,
private schools, universities and similar uses.
RECLAMATION: Restoring the quality and character of the land to a seemingly
natural state, accomplished through loosening and revitalization of the soil,
the cultivation of indigenous or naturalized plant species, and the dedication
of such land to resume existing in a natural manner.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL: The use of property for recreational facilities
operated as a business and open to the general public for a fee.
RECREATION, PRIVATE, NONCOMMERCIAL: A recreational facility operated by a
nonprofit organization and open only to bona fide members of such nonprofit
organization.
RECREATION, PUBLIC: Recreation facilities operated by a public agency and open
to the public with or without a fee.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES: Shall include conventional playgrounds, baseball
fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, racquetball and handball courts,
swimming pools, fitness centers, fitness courses, weight rooms or full scale
nine (9) or eighteen (18) hole golf courses.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV):
   A.   Dependent: An RV not containing sanitary facilities and/or devices for
connecting said facilities to a community waste disposal system. Dependent RV
sites are only allowed adjacent to tent sites. No more than ten percent (10%)
of the total sites in an RV Resort may be dependent RV sites.
   B.   Independent: A motor home, travel trailer or fifth wheel trailer
containing sanitary facilities and devices for connecting said facilities to a
community waste disposal system. This type of RV may also be referred to as a
self- contained recreational vehicle.
REPAIR: The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure or
building for the purpose of its maintenance.
RESIDENTIAL CREATIVITY CENTER: A building or buildings on the same parcel
providing nonprofit housing and work centers on a temporary basis of six (6)
months or less for persons engaged in humanities or fine arts projects.
RESTAURANT, CAFE OR COFFEE SHOP: An establishment which serves food or
beverages primarily to persons seated within a building, but may include patio
seating associated therewith.
RIGHT OF WAY: An easement or other legal right of passage over another person's
land.
ROADSIDE PRODUCE STAND: A temporary structure in place less than seventy two
(72) hours, designed or used for the display or sale of agricultural products
produced upon which such a stand is located.
RV RESORT: A parcel of land under the control of any person wherein two (2) or
more RV sites, along with amenities, facilities, and services designed to
provide guests with a higher quality experience than found in an RV park or
campground, are offered for short term rental to the public and complies with
the requirements of this Chapter. RV Resorts shall not consist of more than
eight (8) sites for RVs, cabins, and tents per gross usable acre.
RV SITE: An area within an RV Resort that may be rented to place an RV and
parking for the towing vehicle if not a self-propelled R V.
SR 17 HIGHWAY CORRIDOR: That portion of Utah State Road 17 and one hundred feet
(100') on either side of the highway right of way that travels through
Toquerville City.
SETBACK, YARD: The minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or
line of reference, such as a lot line to the nearest vertical wall or other
element of a "building" or "structure", as defined herein. A yard may be
considered as meeting the setback requirement without the requirement of
additional open space. A yard is a space on a lot or parcel to the front, rear
or side of a building or structure, unoccupied and unobstructed by any building
or structure or parking area from the finished grade upwards, except as
otherwise provided in this title.
SHOPPING MALL: A large building or complex of buildings containing various
shops, businesses and/or restaurants usually accessible by common passageways.
The term "shopping mall" shall not be construed to include a shady public walk
or a street lined with shops which may or may not be closed to vehicles.
SITE: A parcel or parcels of land, subdivided or unsubdivided, occupied or to
be occupied by a use, structure or building, or purpose directly associated
therewith and united by common ownership.
SITE PLAN: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete
dimensioning, all of the buildings, structures and uses and the exact manner of
development proposed for a specific parcel or parcels of land as required by
this title.
SLOPE: A vertical rise in feet measured over a horizontal distance, expressed
as a percentage, measured generally at right angles to contour lines.
STAFF OR CITY STAFF: May include any one or combination of the following: the
planning and zoning administrator, the city clerk, deputy city clerk, city
manager, public works/utility director/superintendent, building inspector, city
engineer, city attorney, city recorder and city treasurer.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface next above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space
between such floor and the ceiling above it.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, shed, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than
four feet (4') above the floor of such story.
STORY, MEZZANINE: A story which covers one-third (1/3) or less of the area of
the story directly underneath it. For the purposes of this title, a mezzanine
shall be deemed a full story.
STREET, PRIVATE: A thoroughfare within a subdivision which has been reserved by
dedication unto the subdivider or lot owners to be used as private access to
serve the lots platted within the subdivision and complying with the adopted
design standards of Toquerville City and maintained by the landowners within
the subdivision by assessments authorized by recorded covenant.
STREET, PUBLIC: A public thoroughfare or public right of way not less than
thirty five feet (35') in width which has been dedicated or deeded to the
public for public use and accepted by proper public authority, according to
law. This definition includes the terms "highways", "avenues", "boulevards",
"parkways" and "roads".
STREET, PUBLICLY APPROVED: A street in a subdivision where a dedication is
technically not complete, but approval by the city has been given to the
recording of the subdivision plat. This is the case in a subdivision in which
improvements are not completed but in which a developer has posted a bond to
ensure the completion of street improvements.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in, addition or alteration to a structure or
building involving structural members, such as walls, columns, beams or
girders, floor or ceiling joists, foundations, piles, retaining walls or
similar components.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
STRUCTURE, SUBGRADE: Any structure which:
   A.   Is located primarily below natural grade;
   B.   Does not extend more than two and one-half feet (21/2') at any point
above natural grade;
   C.   Is completely covered with a minimum of six inches (6") of soil capable
of supporting vegetation on its horizontal surface where required by the
landscaping provisions of the respective zone in which it is located; and
   D.   Is decoratively finished on any vertical surface not completely covered
with soil.
TAVERN: A business establishment as defined in Utah Code Annotated 32B-1-102,
as amended.
TEMPORARY: Lasting, used or enjoyed for a limited time.
TENT: A portable shelter for one or more individuals, consisting of synthetic
fabrics or natural skins attached to any type of framework, including tent
trailers (a.k.a. “pop-ups”). No more than ten percent (10%) of the total sites
in an RV Resort may be tent sites.
TENT SITE: An area within an RV Resort that may be rented to place one tent on
an improved, but not paved/concrete, tent pad. The site must also provide one
automobile parking space within the site that is paved or concrete. Tent sites
shall be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
TIME PERIOD UNIT: An annually recurring part or parts of a calendar year
specified in the condominium declaration or other document as a period for
which a physical unit is separately owned. Separate ownership is represented as
shares in a corporation, a partnership interest or any other individually owned
transferable property right or interest.
TIME PERIOD UNIT PROJECT: A real estate project devoted in whole or in part to
a "time period unit", as defined in this section.
TRANSIENT: Passing through from one place to another, transitory.
TRANSIENT LODGING FACILITY: Any establishment that receives payment in any form
of exchange for the use of any dwelling for thirty (30) days or less, including
any hotel, motel, a dwelling permitted and being used for nightly rental,
hostel or the like.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use which is mounted on or drawn
by another vehicle.
USE: The purpose for which a premises or building therein is designed, arranged
or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
UTILITIES: Services including, but not limited to, cable television, electric
power, effluent storage, effluent disposal, gas, security systems, sewer
collection, sewer treatment and telephone services provided by public, private
or government organizations.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL OR ANIMAL HOSPITAL: An establishment for the care and
treatment of animals, including household pets and livestock. All facilities
shall be within a completely enclosed building, except for exercising runs and
the parking of automobiles.
VISIBILITY TRIANGLE: A triangular shaped portion of land established at a
street intersection or driveway in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or
allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection or driveway.
VISUAL SIGNIFICANCE: A structure or site location which may appear obtrusive
and highly visible from a variety of locations throughout Toquerville City.
WHOLESALE: The sale of goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of
resale and not to consumers or users thereof.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of a lot or parcel, having
at no point a depth of less than the minimum required horizontal distance
between the front lot line, or its tangent, and the closest permissible
location of a vertical wall of a building or structure. Said distance shall be
measured by a line at right angles to the front lot line or its tangent.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of a lot or parcel, having
at no point a depth of less than the minimum required horizontal distance
between the rear lot line, or its tangent, and the closest permissible location
of a vertical wall of a building or structure. Said distance shall be measured
by a line at right angles to the rear lot line or its tangent.
YARD/SETBACK: A yard is a space on a lot or parcel to the front, rear or side
of a building or structure, unoccupied and unobstructed by any building or
structure or parking area from the finished grade upward, except as otherwise
provided in this title. A yard may be considered as meeting the setback
requirement without the requirement of additional open space. A setback is
defined as the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line
of reference such as a lot line to the nearest vertical wall or other element
of a "building" or "structure", as defined herein.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between a building or structure and the side lot line
extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard; the width of
which side yard shall be measured horizontally from, and at right angles to,
the nearest point on the side lot line toward the closest permissible location
of a vertical wall of a building or structure.
ZONE: See definition of district or zone.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The employee of the City authorized to administrate and
oversee all aspects of new development within the City including compliance
with all zoning and land use regulations set forth in this Title.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2017.01, 1-12-2017; Ord.
2017.03, 5-11-2017; Ord. 2018.06, 10-11-2018; Ord. 2018.08, 12-13-2018; Ord.
2019.03, 5-9-2019; Ord. 2022.03, 4-11-2022; Ord. 2022.05, 5-18-2022; Ord.
2023.06, 6-12-2023; Ord. 2023.12, 5-17-2023; Ord. 2024.07, 5-1-2024)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATIVE AND DECISION MAKING BODIES
SECTION:
10-3-1: Planning Commission
10-3-2: Appeal Authority
10-3-3: Exactions
10-3-1: PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Membership, Appointment And Quorum: The City Planning Commission
consists of five (5) members and two (2) alternate members. Members are
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Three
(3) members of the five (5) shall be sufficient to constitute a quorum. The
alternate member(s) shall attend all meetings. The members of the Planning
Commission shall be current residents of the City throughout the duration of
their service terms.
   B.   Alternate Members: The alternate members shall attend all meetings and
serve and vote in the absence of a member of the Planning Commission under
rules established by the commission.
   C.   Length Of Term: Members of the Planning Commission shall serve terms of
four (4) years. The terms shall be staggered so that only one (1) term shall
expire each year. Terms expire on December 31. With the advice and consent of
the City Council, the Mayor shall appoint an interim Planning Commissioner to
fill vacancies that might arise, and such appointments shall be to the end of
the vacating member’s term.
   D.   Absence Deemed Resignation: Any Planning Commission member who is
absent from two (2) consecutive or twenty-five percent (25%) of the regularly
scheduled Commission meetings without prior notice to the City Recorder and/or
Chairperson of the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have resigned from
the Commission.
   E.   Powers: The Planning Commission shall have all necessary powers
conferred on Planning Commissions pursuant to Utah Code Annotated title 10,
Chapter 9a, as amended.
   F.   Chairperson: The Chairperson shall be elected by the Planning
Commission, each calendar year at the first last meeting of the year, to take
effect January 1 of the following year, and shall be a full voting member of
the body.
   G.   Staff: In order to assist the Planning Commission in carrying out its
duties, the Planning Commission Chairperson may request the assistance of other
employees or agents of the City through an appropriate request made to the
Mayor.
   H.   Policies And Procedures: The Planning Commission shall adopt rules of
policy and procedure consistent with this Chapter and State law.
   I.   Compensation: The Chairperson and the members of the Planning
Commission shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2021.26, 12-15-2021; amd.
Ord. 2023.20, 8-16-2023; Ord. 2023.25, 11-15-2023; Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
10-3-2: APPEAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   Definitions:
   APPEAL AUTHORITY: Means the person appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of Council to hear appeals from person(s) who have been affected by
the implementation of the land use ordinances.
   LAND USE AUTHORITY: Means anyone who has the authority to interpret or
implement the City's land use ordinance and for purposes of this section shall
be the Toquerville City Council except for in those instances with the land use
ordinance the City Council has delegated a specific power to the Toquerville
Planning Commission or an appointed official of the City, in which cases that
body or person shall be the Land Use Authority.
   LAND USE ORDINANCE: Is defined in title 10, chapter 9a of the Utah Code and
for purposes of this section shall be title 10 of this Code.
   B.   Appointment: There is hereby created an Appeal Authority to be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. It is
the intent of the City that the appointed individual will not personally
benefit from decisions associated with the interpretation of the ordinances of
the City.
   C.   Term: The Appeal Authority shall serve for a term of two (2) years.
Notwithstanding the preceding, the term of office of the initial Appeal
Authority shall run from the date of appointment until December 31, 2020.
Thereafter all subsequent terms shall commence on January 1st of every other
year or until the Appeal Authority position is vacant on account of death,
resignation, removal or disqualification. In the event of early vacancy, the
position of Appeal Authority shall be filled in the same manner as an original
appointment for the expired term.
   D.   Removal: The appointed Appeal Authority may be removed for cause by the
City Council upon written charges, which shall be filed with the Mayor, and
after public hearing, if such public hearing is requested by the appointed
Appeal Authority.
   E.   Duties And Powers:
      1.   The Appeal Authority shall have the following powers and duties:
         a.   To act in a quasi-judicial manner;
         b.   Hear and decide requests for "variances" as that term is defined
in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-702;
         c.   Hear and decide appeals of the Land Use Authority's
administrative decisions applying the land use ordinance.
         d.   Serve as the final arbiter of issues involving the interpretation
or the application of land use ordinances.
         e.   Hear and decide appeals from a fee charged in accordance with
section 10-9a-510 of the Utah Code.
      2.   The Appeal Authority may not entertain an appeal of a matter in
which the Appeal Authority, or any participating member, had first acted as the
Land Use Authority.
   F.   Appeals To The Appeal Authority:
      1.   As a condition precedent to judicial review, each adversely affected
person may specifically challenge a Land Use Authority's decision, within
fifteen (15) days of the land use decision and pay the related fee as may be
set by the City Council, amended from time to time, and designated in the
City's uniform fee schedule.
      2.   The Appeal Authority shall determine the correctness of a decision
of the Land Use Authority in its interpretation and application of a land use
ordinance.
      3.   Only those decisions in which a Land Use Authority has applied a
land use ordinance to a particular application, person or parcel may be
appealed to the Appeal Authority.
      4.   All documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the
action appealed was made shall be presented to the City Clerk with the
application for hearing.
      5.   For every appeal, the applicant shall present to the Appeal
Authority every theory of relief that it can raise in District Court.
      6.   The Appeal Authority shall conduct each appeal and variance hearing
as described by this section.
      7.   The person or entity who filed the appeal has the burden of proving
that the Land Use Authority erred.
      8.   The Appeal Authority shall respect the due process rights of each of
the participants in providing them with proper notice, right to be heard at a
hearing and right to have legal counsel present and participate at said hearing
if he/she/it so desires.
      9.   After the hearing, the Appeal Authority may give a preliminary
decision, but shall issue a written decision within sixty (60) days after the
hearing or after an applicant has submitted their appeal or variance request
for decision and waiving their right to hearing in writing.
      10.   If an appeal of a land use decision is lodged with the City, the
City Council may waive the requirements of subsection F1 of this section, and
allow the applicant to make their appeal directly to the 5th District Court, in
and for Washington County, State of Utah.
   G.   Variances: Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of
the requirements of a land use ordinance as applied to a parcel or property
that he owns, leases, or in which he holds some other beneficial interest may
apply to the Appeal Authority for a variance from the terms of the ordinance.
      1.   The Appeal Authority may grant a variance only if:
         a.   The literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an
unreasonable hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the
general purpose of the land use ordinances;
         b.   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same zoning district;
         c.   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zoning
district;
         d.   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and
will not be contrary to the public interest; and
         e.   The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial
justice done.
      2.   In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection G1a of this section, the
Appeal Authority may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged
hardship:
         a.   Is located on or associated with the property for which the
variance is sought; and
         b.   Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from
conditions that are general to the neighborhood; or
         c.   The hardship is self-imposed or economic.
      3.   In determining whether or not there are special circumstances
attached to the property under subsection G1b of this section, the Appeal
Authority may find that special circumstances exist only if the special
circumstances:
         a.   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
         b.   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in
the same zoning district.
      4.   The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the
conditions justifying a variance have been met.
      5.   Variances run with the land.
      6.   The Appeal Authority may not grant a use variance.
      7.   In granting a variance, the Appeal Authority may impose additional
requirements on the applicant that will:
         a.   Mitigate any harmful effects of the variance; or
         b.   Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived
or modified.
   H.   Interpretation Of Land Use Ordinance: Any person alleging there was an
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Land
Use Authority in the administration or interpretation of the land use ordinance
may request an interpretation and decision from the Appeal Authority in
accordance with this subsection H.
      1.   The Appeal Authority will grant a waiver to the decisions of the
Land Use Authority only as follows:
         a.   If the decision or requirement by the Land Use Authority
conflicts with the intent or literal interpretation of the land use ordinances;
or
         b.   If the decision or requirement by the Land Use Authority
conflicts with State or local laws.
      2.   In some instances, the Appeal Authority may not fully understand the
intent of an ordinance or requirement placed upon any person(s) by the Land Use
Authority. Under these circumstances the Appeal Authority may obtain a decision
from the City Council prior to making a final decision (if applicable).
      3.   If the Appeal Authority requires an interpretation from the City
Council, the Appeal Authority shall make a final decision within ten (10) days
after that interpretation is given.
   I.   District Court Review Of Appeal Authority Decisions: Any person or
entity adversely affected by any decision of the Appeal Authority may petition
the District Court for a review of the decision.
      1.   In the petition for review, the petitioner may only allege that
there was an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Land Use Authority in the administration or interpretation of the land
use ordinance.
      2.   The petition is barred unless it is filed within thirty (30) days
after the Appeal Authority's decision becomes effective, which three (3) days
after the written decision is issued by the Appeal Authority and mailed via
first class mail to the applicant at the address designated in the application.
      3.   The Appeal Authority shall transmit to the reviewing court the
record of its proceedings including its minutes, findings, orders, and, if
available, a true and correct transcript of its proceedings. If the proceeding
was tape recorded, a transcript of that tape recording is a true and correct
transcript for purposes of this subsection.
      4.   Review of the Appeal Authority's decision shall be done by the court
in the manner and upon the standards provided by law.
      5.   The appellant has the burden of proving that the Appeal Authority
erred.
      6.   No person or entity may challenge in District Court a land use
decision of the City until that person or entity has exhausted their
administrative remedies as provided in this section or elsewhere in this title.
(Ord. 2018.05, 8-9-2018)
10-3-3: EXACTIONS:
   A.   Imposition: The City may impose an exaction or exactions on proposed
land use development if:
      1.   An essential nexus exists between a legitimate governmental interest
and each exaction; and
      2.   Each exaction is roughly proportionate, both in nature and extent,
to the impact of the proposed development.
   B.   Appeal: Any owner of private property whose interest in the property is
subject to an alleged physical or regulatory taking by the City, pursuant to a
final and authoritative decision or action of the City, may appeal the City
decision or action by filing a written notice of appeal and statement of the
grounds for the appeal in the City Recorder's Office within thirty (30) days
from the date of the City decision or action. The City Council or its designee
shall hear all evidence regarding the appeal and render a decision and findings
in writing within fourteen (14) days from the date the appeal was filed. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
CHAPTER 4
ANNEXATION CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Title
10-4-2: Statement Of Purpose
10-4-3: Content Of Plan; Requirements
10-4-4: Compliance With Local And State Law And Policy
10-4-5: Processing And Review Fees
10-4-6: Zoning/Density Of Annexed Property
10-4-7: General Findings And Conclusions Regarding Annexation
10-4-8: Annexed Property
10-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter, when adopted, shall be referred to as the TOQUERVILLE CITY
AMENDED ANNEXATION POLICY PLAN. (Ord. 2014.08, 12-11-2014)
10-4-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
This amended annexation policy plan (the "plan") is written to provide
Toquerville City (the "city") with a growth plan that shall guide the
development and expansion of municipal boundaries through annexation in a
manner that is consistent with the city's general plan, the city's land
management code, and the laws of the state. The purpose underlying the plan is
to protect and enhance the private property rights of property owners within
the municipal boundaries and in the unincorporated areas surrounding the city.
(Ord. 2014.08, 12-11-2014)
10-4-3: CONTENT OF PLAN; REQUIREMENTS:
Under Utah Code Annotated section 10-2-401.5(3), this plan must include an
expansion area map, criteria that shall guide future annexation decisions, and
justification for excluding certain areas from the proposed expansion area.
Each of these requirements is discussed below:
   A.   Expansion Area Map: As part of the ongoing effort to plan and prepare
for responsible growth within the municipal boundaries of the city, the city
has identified territory adjacent to its present boundaries that may be
petitioned for annexation to the city in the future. The areas proposed for
possible future annexation may or may not be bordered by other municipalities.
Areas petitioned for annexation must fall within the areas designated for
future annexation in this amended annexation policy plan, as shown in the
future expansion area map attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified
herein, and incorporated herein by this reference. All areas of possible future
annexation shall be delineated on the future expansion area map ("future
expansion areas").
   B.   Guiding Criteria: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-2-401.5,
the following criteria shall guide the city in deciding whether or not to grant
future annexation petitions:
      1.   Character Of The Community: The current and future character of the
city, as identified in the city's general plan, is mixed residential,
agricultural, recreational and commercial. It is anticipated that light
industry and more business will begin to move into the area with the approval
and to the benefit of the city. Areas to be annexed shall be compatible with
the needs of the city and its residents. Applicants for annexations shall show
the city that annexation of their property will assist in the retention of the
city's current and anticipated character. Even if property proposed for
annexation is located within a future expansion area, there is no guarantee
that the annexation petition will be approved or accepted by the city.
      2.   Need For Municipal Services In Developed And Undeveloped
Unincorporated Areas: The city favors annexation of developed and undeveloped
areas where there is a current need for municipal services or where there are
plans for future development that, when carried out, will create a need for
municipal services.
      3.   Plans For Extension Of Municipal Services:
         a.   When feasible, the city favors annexation where services can be
incorporated into the existing city utilities. The city also favors annexation
of property that may be developed to allow utility and transportation systems
to be incorporated into a comprehensive plan for the entire area, including any
master plans developed by the city as well as the city's general plan. The city
shall support the Ash Creek special service district in its efforts to supply
sewer services to the city and other areas within its service area. The city
does not favor the annexation of areas for which it does not have the
capability or intention of providing basic municipal services, such as
transportation, culinary and secondary water, wastewater (sewer) removal,
stormwater retention and removal, public safety services, parks and recreation
services, phone, audio and video services, electrical services, and natural gas
service.
         b.   In areas where municipal services are not presently extended,
service shall be extended on an as needed basis at the developer's expense. All
extensions of municipal services shall comply with all city ordinances and
policy criteria. An annexation agreement shall be prepared between the city and
future developers outlining specific requirements relating to water, sewer,
transportation, electricity, telecommunications, fiber optic, and other
specific improvements prior to annexation approval. Agreements will also be
made prior to annexing property that has already been developed and being
serviced by Ash Creek special service district and the Washington County water
conservancy district. An approved annexation petition shall allow developers of
the annexed property to connect to city facilities, provided all
infrastructures proposed to be connected meet city specifications and comply
with all applicable development and land use ordinances. When annexation is
approved, the newly annexed area shall receive the following available
services: fire protection; police protection; planning and zoning; maintenance
of dedicated city streets; and other municipal and utility services provided by
the city at the time of annexation.
      4.   Financing Of Municipal Services: The manner in which infrastructure
additions are developed will have a bearing on how they are financed. The
increased valuation of property and the subsequent increase in property and
sales tax revenues will help increase contributions to the city general fund.
This increase will help defray the added cost of providing services to the
annexed areas. The costs of capital improvements, such as utilities, streets,
curb, gutter and sidewalks, storm drain systems, and other improvements as
shall be deemed necessary in the annexed area shall be borne by the developer
as development within the areas occurs.
      5.   Estimate Of Tax Consequences To Residents Both Currently Within
Municipal Boundaries And In Expansion Area: All petitions for annexation shall
include an estimate of the tax consequences that the proposed annexation will
have on persons or entities that reside or are located within the city's
preannexation boundaries and on persons or entities who reside or are located
in the areas proposed to be annexed. The city shall not approve an annexation
if doing so will require an increase of the tax liability or impose double
taxation on any person or entity that resides or is located in the city's
preannexation boundaries, unless such person or entity also owns real property
or also is located in the area proposed to be annexed. As to persons or
entities that reside or are located in the areas proposed to be annexed, the
city may increase the tax liability or impose new tax liabilities on such
persons or entities: a) to defray the costs of providing such persons or
entities with municipal services; or b) pursuant to an agreement between such
persons or entities and the city.
      6.   Interests Of Affected Entities: The city is concerned about the
interests of "affected entities", as that term is defined in Utah Code
Annotated section 10-2-401, and shall ensure that applicants and its own staff
comply with notice requirements to said persons or entities. The city shall
consider all written comments from any such persons before approving any
annexation petition by ordinance.
      7.   Miscellaneous Considerations: The city, in considering the approval
or denial of an annexation petition, shall consider the following principals of
the municipal planning and urban/rural development:
         a.   Eliminating and/or not creating islands or peninsulas of
unincorporated territory;
         b.   Consolidating overlapping functions of government entities, such
as Ash Creek special service district and the Washington County water
conservancy district;
         c.   Promoting efficient delivery of services; and
         d.   Encouraging the equitable distribution of community resources and
obligations.
   C.   Justification For Excluding Areas Of Urban Development: There are areas
within one-half (1/2) mile of the city's current boundary that contain urban
development and that are excluded from the future expansion area. All of these
areas, however, are already incorporated into other municipalities and, for
that reason, have been excluded. (Ord. 2014.08, 12-11-2014; amd. 2014 Code)
10-4-4: COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL AND STATE LAW AND POLICY:
   A.   Compliance With City Municipal Code And Land Management Code: It is the
policy of the city to require development in annexed areas to comply with city
standards and regulatory laws. This requirement includes the city's land
management code, construction and design standards for public utilities and
other uniform codes adopted by the city by ordinance (such as the international
building code and international fire code) as amended from time to time.
   B.   Compliance With State Annexation Law: Any annexation petition must
comply with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 10-2-403.
   C.   Contiguousness: Areas to be annexed must be contiguous to the corporate
limits of the city at the time of submission of an annexation petition. Areas
to be annexed shall not be located within the corporate limits of another
incorporated city or be a part of a previously filed annexation petition that
has not been denied, accepted or approved.
   D.   Sensitive Lands: It is the policy of the city to avoid development of
wetlands, hillsides, critical environmental habitat areas, expansive soils, or
any other environmental conditions that threaten the integrity of the city
infrastructure unless, in the annexation agreement, the developer can show how
he/she/it will mitigate these issues in conformance with the city ordinances,
this code and federal and state regulations.
   E.   Motives For Annexation: The city shall not annex property for the sole
purpose of acquiring revenues or retarding another municipality's ability to
annex the same property. (Ord. 2014.08, 12-11-2014)
10-4-5: PROCESSING AND REVIEW FEES:
The city recorder, upon receipt of an annexation petition that complies with
the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 10-2-403, shall impose such
fees as established by the city council to recover the costs of processing such
petition. (Ord. 2014.08, 12-11-2014)
10-4-6: ZONING/DENSITY OF ANNEXED PROPERTY:
Upon successful completion of all annexation procedures set forth in section
10-4-2 of this chapter, and Utah Code Annotated section 10-2-401 et seq., the
annexed property shall possess the zoning designation of multiple use 20 (MU-
20). If the applicant for annexation desires to have a different zoning
designation instantly upon the city adoption of an ordinance granting the
requested annexation, they must follow the following procedure:
   A.   Identification Of Requested Zoning/Density: Applicants seeking a zoning
designation other than MU-20 must identify in its annexation petition the
target zoning designation he/she/it is seeking.
   B.   Compliance With Normal Procedures For Seeking Amendment To City Zone
District Map: Once an annexation petition has been accepted (thus triggering
all notice and contest periods, but before approval of an ordinance granting
annexation), the city shall follow all normal procedures required by chapter 8
of this title for the modification of the city zone district map. Although the
property to be annexed is not technically part of the incorporated area of the
city, said compliance shall include, but is not limited to:
      1.   Payment of all zone change application fees;
      2.   A public hearing and recommendation for approval or denial of
requested zoning designation by the planning commission; and
      3.   A public hearing and finding by the city council that the requested
zoning designation complies with the standards set forth in subsection 10-8-3B
of this title, meets with the spirit of the city's general plan and the
policies set forth in this plan.
   C.   Findings Warranting Differing Zoning Designation: After conducting a
public hearing, but prior to adopting any ordinance granting an annexation, the
city council shall make a finding that the requested zoning designation other
than MU-20 is acceptable or unacceptable, or any new modification acceptable to
the city council. Applicants shall retain all rights to withdraw their
annexation petition if they are unwilling to stipulate to the city council's
findings as to zoning designation. If the city council finds in favor of
granting a zoning designation other than MU-20, it shall expressly designate in
its ordinance granting the annexation which zoning designation the property
shall possess upon incorporation. (Ord. 2014.08, 12-11-2014)
10-4-7: GENERAL FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS REGARDING ANNEXATION:
The city, after public input and research, finds the following with regard to
annexation:
   A.   It is not anticipated that an annexation will cause any adverse
consequences to the residents currently living within the city or living within
the area annexed, except that there may be temporary and/or slight reductions
in general service available to current residents as a result of expansion of
services into the newly annexed territory.
   B.   It is anticipated that the residents in the newly annexed territory
will experience an increase in their Property Taxes due to the difference in
certified tax rates between the City and the County.
   C.   It is further anticipated that as the City receives the Property Tax
revenue from the newly annexed territory, the level of services for the entire
community will be increased.
   D.   It is further anticipated that property owners in the newly annexed
territory may experience reductions in fire and property insurance rates.
   E.   As the area continues to grow and becomes more populated, additional
development planning may occur. Incorporation and consideration of these plans
and development in compliance with the City's General Plans, public
infrastructure master plans, the City's Land Management Code and the City's
construction and design standards for public improvements, will allow a
comprehensive system of infrastructure to serve future growth and development
in the annexed areas. (Ord. 2014.08, 12-11-2014)
10-4-8: ANNEXED PROPERTY:
An ordinance of Toquerville City, Utah ratifying and restating Toquerville City
ordinance #2015-1 and Toquerville City ordinance #2016-11 annexing certain
property to be known as the wind song annexation located north by north east of
Anderson Junction, and incorporating the same within the corporate boundaries
of Toquerville City pursuant to the provisions of title 10, chapter 4
(annexation) of the Toquerville City Code, as amended; setting the zoning
classification of said property in conformance with the recommendations of the
Toquerville City Planning Commission; adopting the annexation plat map of said
property; and providing for an effective date.
(Ord. 2017.06, 6-8-2017, eff. 6-8-2017)
CHAPTER 5
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-5-1: Enforcement Officials
10-5-2: Completion Of Improvements Prior To Recordation Of Final Plat, Site
Plan Or The Issuance Of A Certificate Of Occupancy
10-5-3: Security For Completion
10-5-4: Penalty
10-5-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The Mayor, the Building Official and the Planning and Zoning Administrator are
designated as the persons to administer and enforce the provisions of this
title and all other land use regulations adopted by the City. The Mayor, when
deemed necessary, shall recommend legal action to enforce the provisions of
this title or other land use regulations. The failure of any persons to
properly interpret, apply or enforce any provision of the land management title
or other ordinance of the City shall not operate to waive or stop the City from
enforcing compliance with the City ordinances. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd.
2014 Code)
10-5-2: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS PRIOR TO RECORDATION OF FINAL PLAT, SITE
PLAN OR THE ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Policy: In order to protect residents and property owners of the City
from dangerous and undesirable conditions that result from unfinished public
improvements and site work, such as erosion or flooding, as well as a lack of
fire protection and emergency response facilities and access and pedestrian
access, it is the policy of the City that no certificate of occupancy will be
issued by the City unless and until all public improvements and site work for
the property upon which the building or dwelling is located has been completed
or in instances where the installation of said public improvements and site
work would be pointless, the owner has agreed in a written recorded covenant
that runs with the land, that when the installation of said public improvements
and site work is appropriate and warranted (as determined by the City) that the
owner will participate financially and otherwise in the City's installation of
said public improvements and site work.
   B.   Procedure: For the construction of a building or dwelling, the owner
(or its developer) shall provide to the City the following:
      1.   Application: A building permit application designating the name and
contact information for the owner of the property, the developer (if
different), the contractor (and license number), the size and dimensions of the
building (in square feet), the names and contact information of all anticipated
subcontractors preforming a material sub-trade.
      2.   Detailed Building Plans: A detailed set of building plans showing
all components of the building including foundation, framing, plumbing,
electrical, HVAC, roofing that have been engineered, reviewed and approved by a
licensed and bonded structural engineer.
      3.   Detailed Site Plan: A detailed site plan showing the location and
nature of drainage work, grade changes, retaining walls, buildings, permanent
structures, utility connections, service lines and meters shall be submitted to
the City's Building Department prior to issuance of building permit. The site
plan shall be reviewed and approved by a licensed and bonded civil engineer and
surveyor.
      4.   Fees (Impact And Connection): Payment of all impact and connection
fees as calculated by the City's staff in compliance with the City's uniform
fee schedule.
      5.   Other Information: All other information, reports, certificates,
proof of insurance or licensure as may be required by the City's Building
Department and chapter 6 of this title.
   C.   Construction According To Approved Plans: The City shall not issue a
certificate of occupancy for a building or dwelling unless all required public
improvements and site work have been constructed in accordance with the plans
approved by the City's Building Department, in its sole discretion, except as
specified in section
10-5-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017.14, 11-9-2017)
10-5-3: SECURITY FOR COMPLETION:
   A.   Approval Conditions: In the event that public improvements and site
work are not completed, inspected and City approved by the time a building or
dwelling is completed and ready for occupancy, the City may issue a certificate
of occupancy; provided, that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The building or buildings, or portions thereof to be occupied have
been constructed in accordance with the approved plans for those buildings, and
are in full compliance with applicable Building and Safety Codes, and are
completed to the extent that only public improvements and site work remains
unfinished;
      2.   The City Building Department determines that occupancy of the
buildings, or portions thereof, prior to completion of required public
improvements and site work is safe, and that access for emergency vehicles is
adequate with the site improvements unfinished; and
      3.   The owner/developer posts adequate security for the benefit of the
City and the public to ensure completion of the public improvements and site
work in full compliance with the approved building and site plans, the City's
standards and specifications for public improvements and all Building and
Safety Codes adopted by the City.
   B.   Form Of Security Arrangement: The security arrangement to be provided
to the City by the owner/developer in exchange for a deferral of the City's
requirement to install all necessary public improvements and site work prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or dwelling, may only
be one of the following types:
      1.   Cash On Deposit: A cashier's check or a money market certificate
made payable only to the City and deposited into one of the City's accounts
maintained with the State of Utah or a Federally insured financial institution.
The amount of the deposit shall be determined by the City and shall be equal to
one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the amount reasonably estimated by
the City Engineer as being necessary to complete all remaining public
improvements and site work shown on the approved building and site plans. In
the event that the owner/developer disputes the cost estimate of the City
Engineer, the owner/developer may prove lower construction cost by providing
binding contracts between the owner/developer and a licensed and insured
general contractor or subcontractor appropriate to perform the required work at
a stated, fixed price. These contracts must be supported by a full security
agreement, ensuring performance by the subcontractor or contractor. Bid
proposals are not satisfactory for this purpose. If the contracts submitted are
acceptable in form, the amount of security required shall be one hundred twenty
five percent (125%) of the total contract price of all such contracts
submitted, plus the estimated reasonable cost of performing any work not
covered by the contracts. Specifications in such contracts shall be
sufficiently clear to identify the work called for under the contract.
      2.   Security Escrow: A trust or escrow account maintained by: a) a State
or Federally chartered (and Federally insured) financial institution, b) a law
firm with a Utah IOLTA trust account, or c) an escrow company licensed in the
State of Utah, containing immediately available funds in the amount designated
in subsection B1 of this section. The trust or escrow account shall be subject
to a Cash on Deposit Control Agreement in a form acceptable to the City
Attorney which is executed by both the owner/developer, the City and the
financial institution, escrow company or law firm where the proceeds of the
account are being held in trust for the City.
      3.   Recorded Deferral Agreement: In lieu of any other type of security
arrangement, upon submittal of a deferral application, the City Council, upon
making a finding of unusual circumstances, such as the inability to determine
the proper grade and dimensions of necessary public improvements or the likely
construction of the public improvements and site work as part of a larger City
project or special assessment area ("SAA") project, may allow an owner or
developer to defer completion of required public improvements and site work
pursuant to written deferral agreement recorded in the official records on file
in the Office of the Recorder of Washington County, State of Utah. Said
deferral agreement must be signed by all owners of the affected property and at
a minimum shall require the owner to: a) covenant to pay for completion of the
public improvements and site work relating to their property at such time as
the City determines, in the City's sole discretion and in the manner the City
determines, including but not limited to, through a special assessment area
(SAA), and/or b) waive and release any objection to the creation of any SAA
that would fund the completion of the improvements. When recorded, the benefits
and the burdens of said deferral agreement shall attach to the entirety of the
property and shall be a covenant that runs with the land.
   C.   General Terms Applicable To All Security Arrangements: The terms of any
security arrangement, whether expressly incorporated therein or not, shall
include, but is not limited to:
      1.   An incorporation by reference of the City approved building plans
and site plan for the building or dwelling and all data required by section
10-6-2 of this title.
      2.   The covenant to complete the public improvements and site work
within a period of time not to exceed one year from the date the Certificate of
Occupancy is issued by the City.
      3.   In cash on deposit or security escrow situations, a stipulation that
the security proceeds may be reduced upon request of the owner/developer as the
public improvements and site work are installed. The amount of the reduction
shall be determined by the City. Such requests may be made only once every
thirty (30) days, and no reductions shall be authorized until such time as the
City Building Department or Public Works Department (as the case may be) has
inspected the public improvements and/or site work and found them to be in
compliance with City specifications and approved plans. All reductions shall be
granted only by the written authorization of the Mayor or his/her designee.
      4.   In cash on deposit or security escrow situations, a covenant that if
the security proceeds are inadequate to pay the cost of the completion of the
public improvements and site work according to City specifications for whatever
reason, including previous reductions, then the owner/developer shall be
responsible for the deficiency.
      5.   In cash on deposit or security escrow situations, if, after giving
the owner/developer a written demand for payment pursuant to a deferral
agreement or control agreement and the expiration of thirty (30) days, funds
are not received by, or transferred to, the City within thirty (30) days of the
demand, then the City's costs of obtaining the demanded amount, including
attorney's fees and costs or outside attorney fees and court costs, shall be
deducted from the security proceeds.
      6.   An acknowledgement that the cost of completing public improvements
and site work shall include reimbursement to the City's Public Works Department
and/or City Engineer and all other City departments for the costs of
administration of the completion of the improvements, including inspection
costs.
      7.   A covenant to hold the City harmless and defend it from any and all
liability that may arise as a result of the public which are installed until
such time as the City accepts the improvements.
      8.   A stipulation that the time period for the completion of the
required public improvements and site work may only be extended in the
following manner:
         a.   Upon approval of the City Council, the time period may be
extended an additional one year from the expiration date of the original
security agreement.
         b.   Said approval shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney's
Office and in compliance with all provisions of this section.
      9.   All public improvements and site work required under this title and
the City's standards and specifications for public improvements shall be
designed and installed by an engineer, contractor or subcontractors licensed by
the State of Utah.
   D.   Payment Of Interest: Any interest accruing while cash is on deposit
with the City or on deposit with a 3rd party such as a financial institution,
escrow company or law firm, shall, unless expended for completion of public
improvements and site work required, inure to the benefit of the City and not
the owner/developer. Accordingly, the City shall not be required to pay
interest to an owner/developer on any funds deposited as part of a security
arrangement.
   E.   Release Of Funds: The City shall relinquish and return funds held on
deposit with the City or under a security escrow with financial institution,
escrow company or law firm for the purpose of paying for public improvements
and site work once completed and accepted by the City. The City shall release
funds equal to the actual cost of performing the public improvements and site
work as the work progresses, minus ten percent (-10%). Upon satisfactory
completion of all required public improvements and site work, all funds shall
be immediately released to the owner/developer, except those funds required to
secure project during the one year warranty period.
   F.   Modification Of Plans: An owner/developer may request modifications to
plans covering public improvements and site work by submitting revised building
plans and site plans to the City Engineer for review and final action. If the
modification of the building plans and site plans increases the cost of
required site public improvements, additional security must be provided by the
owner/developer to cover the increased costs.
   G.   Phased Projects: Public improvements and site work applicable to each
phase of a phased project or development pursuant to chapter 19, article F of
this title shall be completed or security for completion provided as each phase
is constructed and either platted or occupied. Site improvements or other
phases of the project shall be completed or security offered as those phases
are completed. (Ord. 2017.14, 11-9-2017)
10-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation, as principal, agent, employee or otherwise,
violating, causing or permitting violation of the provisions of this title
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, as per
1-4-1 of this Code. In addition, the City may bring an action to enjoin the
continuation of the violation. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate violation and offense. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd.
2014 Code; Ord. 2024.06, 5-2-2024)
CHAPTER 6
SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Tables
10-6-2: Submittals
10-6-1: TABLES:
   A.   The following tables have been prepared to simplify the determination
of which permits and regulations apply to a given action, and the information
that is required to be submitted to obtain such permits and their associated
approvals. The tables are sequential and cumulative. Use them as follows:
      1.   Review the numbered list of activities in table 1 of this section
and determine which activity most closely resembles the action you propose to
undertake. Note the permits that are required for that activity.
      2.   Refer to table 2 of this section to determine the documents that
must be submitted with the various types of permits.
      3.   Refer to table 3 of this section to see the requirements/content of
each drawing, plan or other document that must be submitted.
   B.   These tables are necessarily simplified and abbreviated. Additional
information regarding key documents is presented below:
TABLE 1
Key:
X=Always required
Potential
Land Use  Required Permits/Approvals
Actions
          Master                         Planned                           Grading/                              Certificate Certificate Certificate        Record
          Plan      Rezoning Subdivision Unit        Lot   Replat Building Trenching Sign   Variance Conditional Of          Of          Of          Design With
          Amendment                      Development Split        Permit   Permit    Permit          Use         Occupancy   Completion  Dedication  Review County
                                                                                                                                                            Clerk
Potential
Land Use     Required Permits/Approvals
Actions
             Master                         Planned                           Grading/                              Certificate Certificate Certificate        Record
             Plan      Rezoning Subdivision Unit        Lot   Replat Building Trenching Sign   Variance Conditional Of          Of          Of          Design With
             Amendment                      Development Split        Permit   Permit    Permit          Use         Occupancy   Completion  Dedication  Review County
                                                                                                                                                               Clerk
Selling or                                                                                                                                       
conveying:
1. An
existing lot
in its
entirety                                                                                                                                        X
(with or
without an
existing
building)
2. 1 new lot
to be
created from                                        X                                          See note 4                                         X
larger
parcel
3. More than
1 new lot to See note  See note
be created   1         2        X           See note 3                                            See note 4                        See note 7        X
from larger
parcel
Constructing
a new
commercial
or multi-    See note  See note                                               See note
family       1         2                                         X        5                       See note 4  X                                 X      X
residential
building on
an existing
lot
Constructing
a new                                                                                                                                                   See
single-                                                        X                                          X                                 note    
family home                                                                                                                                             10
on an
existing lot
Modifying
the exterior
shape of an                                                    X                                                                           X       
existing
building
Replacing
all or parts                                                         See note           See
of an                                                          9                 note 6                                                     X       
existing
building
Remodeling
the interior
of an                                                          X                                                                                  
existing
building
Changing the
use of a
building
(such as an  See note  See note                                                   See            See note 4  X                                        
office to a  1         2                                                                note 6
store, store
to clinic,
etc.)
Constructing
a building
for use not  See note  X                                         X                               See note 4  X                                        
allowed by   1
current
zoning
Grading or
constructing                                                           X                                             X           See note 7         
a road or
driveway
Digging and/
or
installing
utilities
(water,                                                        X        X                                             X                             
sewer,
septic, gas,
electric,
cable TV)
Building a                                                           See note
retaining                                                      8                                                                           X       
wall
Install an
exterior                                                       X                                                                           X       
yard light
Putting up a                                                   See note          X                                                          X       
sign                                                                 8
Seeking to
do any of
the above
when it                                                                               X                                                           
requires a
departure
from the
regulations
Develop a
condominium                   See note 11                       X                                                                                  
project
 
Notes:
   1.   If the intended use requires rezoning that is not consistent with the
master plan.
   2.   If the proposed use is not consistent with existing zoning.
   3.   If greater flexibility is desired than permitted under standard
subdivision regulations.
   4.   If proposed use is permitted in the zone district as a condition upon
special review.
   5.   If grading and/or trenching are proposed.
   6.   If signage is proposed.
   7.   If the road is for public use.
   8.   If structural support will be required.
   9.   If cost of construction/remodeling work exceeds $1,000.00, or involves
electrical or plumbing.
   10.   An abbreviated review by building department staff for single-family
homes.
   11.   Only the sketch plan submittal is required.
TABLE 2
Key:
X=Always required
          Submittal Documents Required
                                                                   Detailed                                                                                                                              Final
Permits/  Notice       Applica-        Existing   Develop- Concept Site           Develop-  Preliminary  Final        Soils/  Covenants,             Verification  Public     Removal                    Variance/
Approvals Mailing Site tion And Title  Conditions ment     Site    Plan/    Final ment      Construction Construction Geology Conditions   Security  State         Offering   /       Hardship  Conditi- Special
          List1   Map  Fee      Report Map        Report   Plan    Prelim-  Plat  Agreement Plans        Plans        Report  And          Agreement Registration2 Statement3 Safety  Statement onal Use Exception
                                                                   inary                                                      Restrictions                                    Plan                       Approval
                                                                   Plat
            Submittal Documents Required
                                                                     Detailed                                                                                                                              Final
Permits/    Notice       Applica-        Existing   Develop- Concept Site           Develop-  Preliminary  Final        Soils/  Covenants,             Verification  Public     Removal                    Variance/
Approvals   Mailing Site tion And Title  Conditions ment     Site    Plan/    Final ment      Construction Construction Geology Conditions   Security  State         Offering   /       Hardship  Conditi- Special
            List1   Map  Fee      Report Map        Report   Plan    Prelim-  Plat  Agreement Plans        Plans        Report  And          Agreement Registration2 Statement3 Safety  Statement onal Use Exception
                                                                     inary                                                      Restrictions                                    Plan                       Approval
                                                                     Plat
Master plan X       X    X                                                                                                                                                                 
amendment
Zone
amendment
(amended    X       X    X                                                                                                                                                                 
zoning
district
and map)
Annexation  X           X        X      X                                                                                                                                                   
Subdivision
concept                X        X      X                  X                                                                                                                                 
plan
Subdivision
preliminary        X    X        X      X          X               X                                              X                                                                            
plan
Subdivision            X        X      X          X               X        X     X                                        X            X         X             X                                   
final plat
Replat                 X        X                X               X        X     X                                                    X                                                         
Building                                                                                                                                                                                          See note See note
permit                 X              X                         X                                  X                                                                               6        7
review
Grading and
trenching              X              X                  X                                                     X                                                                            
permit
Special     X           X              X                  X                                                                                                               X         X        X
exceptions
Variance    X           X              X                  X                                                                                                                                 
Conditional X           X              X          X               X             X         X                                                                                                    
use
Design                 X              X                                               See note 4   X                                                                                        
review
Certificate
of                                                                                                                             X                                                         
occupancy
Vacation of
easement or X           X                                                                                                        See note                                                  
right of                                                                                                                                     5
way
Condominium
permit -               X        X      X          X               X        X     X                     X            X       X            X         X             X          X                         
final plat
Demolition             X                                                                                                                                               X         X        X
permit
Single-
family                 X              X                         X                                  X                                                                                        
building
permit
 
Notes:
   1.   See section 10-1-8 of this title.
   2.   Utah Code Annotated title 57, chapter 11.
   3.   Utah Code Annotated section 57-11-7.
   4.   Only for enclosed structures.
   5.   If site improvements not completed at time of occupancy.
   6.   If use is conditional under applicable zoning district.
   7.   If any variance or special exception required for building/
construction.
TABLE 3
Key:
X=Always required
Required Submittal Document
Plan/         Notice  Detailed    Existing                 Conditional Preliminary  Final        Final                Removal/ Single-
Drawing  Site Mailing Site Plan/  Conditions Concept Final Use Site    Construction Construction Construction  Design Safety   Family
Contents Map  List    Preliminary Map        Plan    Plat  Plan        Plans        Plans        Plans         Review Plan     Building
                      Plat                                                                       (Residential)                 Permit
             Submittal Document
Required          Notice  Detailed    Existing                 Conditional Preliminary  Final        Final                Removal/ Single-
Plan/Drawing Site Mailing Site Plan/  Conditions Concept Final Use Site    Construction Construction Construction  Design Safety   Family
Contents     Map  List    Preliminary Map        Plan    Plat  Plan        Plans        Plans        Plans         Review Plan     Building
                          Plat                                                                       (Residential)                 Permit
Project name
and
subdivision, X           X           X          X       X     X           X            X            X             X      X        X
if
applicable
Applicant's
name,        X    X       X           X          X       X     X           X            X            X             X      X        X
address,
phone number
Preparer's
company
name,                   X           X          X       X     X           X            X            X             X              X
address,
phone number
Statement
from owner
(if not
applicant)              X           X          X       X     X           X            X            X             X              X
authorizing
applicant to
make
submittal
North arrow, X           X           X          X       X     X           X            X            X             X              X
scale
Legend (for
symbols used            X           X          X       X     X           X            X                         X               
on drawing)
Vicinity map
showing
project
location     X           X           X          X            X           X            X                                        
relative to
Toquerville
City
Site
boundaries   X           X           X          X       X     X           X            X            X                            
with
dimensions
Protection
area
boundaries
(wetlands,   X           X           X          X            X           X            X                                        
spring/well
protection
areas,
floodplains)
Existing                X           X          X            X           X            X                                        
topography
Slopes over
15%
highlighted             X           X                      X           X            X            X                            
with red
hatching
pattern
Existing                X           X                      X           X                                                    
vegetation
Existing
roads,
including
names,       X           X           X          a       X     X           X            X                                        
grades,
pavement
widths. Show
right of way
Existing
utilities,
by type,
including    X           X           X          b            X           X            X            X                           X
location and
dimension of
easements
Existing
emergency
access, fire            X           X                      X           X            X                                        
lanes, fire
hydrants
Footprint of
existing
structures,             X           X          X            X           X            X            X                   X        X
with uses
indicated
Existing
drainage                X           X          X                       X            X            X                            
system2
Proposed                X                                            X            X                                        
topography
Proposed
cut/fill                X                                            X            X            X                            
color coded
Proposed
vegetation,
general                 X                                 X           X            X                                        
landscape
plan
Proposed
vegetation,
detailed
landscape               X                                            X            X                                        
plan: type,
size,
spacing
Proposed
drainage
system,
include                 X                                 X           X            X            X                            
location and
dimensions
of easements
Proposed
utilities,
by type,
including
location and X           X                                 X           X            X            X                           X
dimensions
of easements
and location
of fire
hydrant
Proposed
roads -
names,
grades,                 X                            X     X           X            X                                        
pavement
widths and
right of way
Proposed
emergency
access, fire            X                                            X            X                                        
lanes, fire
hydrants
Typical
cross
sections of
roads,                                                              X            X                                        
curbs,
gutters,
sidewalks
Layout of
lots, with
lot sizes,
setbacks,                                           X                c            c                                        
buildable
areas and
lot numbers
shown
Footprint of
proposed
structures,             X                     X                       X            X                                       X
with uses
indicated
Calculations
of building
coverage,
units,                  X                                 X           X                                                    
bedrooms,
parking
spaces
Building
plans,
elevations,
and                                                                 X            X            X             X      X        X
sections,
with
dimensions1
Layout and
dimensions
of parking              X                            X     X           X            X                                        
lots, with
stalls shown
Proposed
locations
for gas                                                  X           X            X            X                            
tanks, LP
gas,
dumpsters
Proposed
locations,
and types,                                               X                       X                         X      X         
for signage
and lighting
Final plat                                          X                            X                                        
data
Phasing plan                                             X           X            X                                        
Name,
address,
phone number
of all
property
owners           X                                                                                                       
within 300'
from any
property
line of
project
property
Legal
description  X                                                                                                          X
of project
property
Proposed
removal
description                                                                                                    X         
with safety
features
 
Notes:
   1.   For residential building, the residential plan packet provides
additional detail and shall be completed as prerequisite to a building permit.
   a.   For concept plan the identification and general location of roadways is
all that is required.
   b.   For concept plan the identification and general location of existing
utilities is all that is required.
   2.   Include either existing natural drainage or existing manmade.
   a.   Subdivisions only.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2020.02, 1-9-2020)
10-6-2: SUBMITTALS:
   A.   Application And Fees:
      1.   The application form for each specific action may be obtained from
the city. All applications must include an accurate legal description of the
land included in the application, and a site plan of affected and immediately
adjacent properties.
      2.   Each application must be accompanied by the applicable fee payment.
A fee schedule for each type of application is maintained by the city and is
available at the city offices.
   B.   Title Report: A title report must be prepared by a title company or
other entity bonded to ensure the accuracy of the title information.
   C.   Vicinity Map: A map showing the project location relative to the city.
The map may be at any legible scale, and may be an inset on another plan or
drawing (e.g., existing conditions plan). It should show the city boundaries,
major roads (e.g., Highway 17) and minor roads that serve the property.
   D.   Development Report; Statement Of Intent:
      1.   The name and location of the property and applicant;
      2.   If the applicant is represented by an agent, a statement from the
applicant authorizing the agent to act;
      3.   The name and address of the person, firm or organization preparing
the application and a statement indicating the record owner's permission to
submit the application;
      4.   An explanation of the purpose of the proposed action and proposed
land use, including building descriptions, variations in building setbacks,
parking, height or other requirements that are being sought;
      5.   A development schedule indicating the approximate date the
development or stages of the development with expected completion dates;
      6.   Assessment of the availability and capacity of public infrastructure
(utilities, roads) to serve the proposed use;
      7.   Any special agreements, conveyances, restrictions or covenants,
which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the
development and any of its common areas.
   E.   Development Agreement: A document signed by the applicant prior to
approval of final plat or building permit that memorializes the obligations,
commitments and representations made by the proponent in review meetings, as
well as any conditions of approval. The development agreement may include or
substitute for a security agreement insofar as it contains commitments to site
improvements secured by a bond or other form of security. All minutes of public
review sessions are incorporated into the development agreement by reference.
   F.   Soil/Geology Report:
      1.   A detailed soil/geology report is required during the preliminary
consideration of all building permits and subdivision plats. It shall be based
upon adequate test borings, excavations and geologic evaluations prepared by a
geological/engineering firm specializing in soil mechanics and licensed by the
state. Excavations and/or borings shall be located on or near the proposed
building site. Reduced cost shall not be justification for more distant
convenient locations.
      2.   Additional soil/geologic investigation may be required if the report
indicates the presence of conditions that, if not corrected or adequately
addressed through design, could lead to structural damage or premature
deterioration or subsidence of the building or damage to surrounding
improvements, whether public or private, or damage to surrounding lots. Such
conditions may include, but not be limited to:
         a.   Expansive soils.
         b.   High water table.
         c.   Soluble mineral veins.
         d.   Slope instability.
         e.   Buried slides.
         f.   Buried stream channels.
         g.   Fault zones.
      3.   The investigation shall include visual appraisal of adjacent lots
for surface geologic/topographic conditions, which could threaten the proposed
building site. The soil/geologic report shall also:
         a.   Recommend corrective action or building design specifications
intended to prevent potential dangers found in the investigation;
         b.   State whether the site is buildable or unbuildable because of any
potentially threatening conditions which are not economically or technically
correctable or avoidable by currently known building practices and codes. (One
such example would be the existence of an active or inactive deeply buried
landslide.)
   G.   Covenants, Conditions And Restrictions: Covenants, conditions and
restrictions (CCRs) shall be required for all subdivisions. CCRs shall include
by reference the landscaping requirements outlined in this title and the
minimum design guidelines and standards as adopted by the city council by
resolution and may also include other conditions or restrictions as determined
by the subdivider. Two (2) copies of the CCRs shall be submitted with the final
plat.
   H.   Security Agreement: Prior to approval of final plat or occupancy
permit, as required under chapter 5, "Enforcement", of this title, the
applicant shall enter into a security agreement that memorializes the terms and
type of security (such as a bond, letter of credit or escrow account) to
guarantee the timely completion of site improvements that are the obligation of
the applicant.
   I.   Verification Of State Registration: Proof of Utah department of
commerce, division of real estate registration and full compliance with the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 57-11-1 et seq., as amended, the Utah
land sales practices act.
   J.   Public Offering Statement: A public offering statement shall be in full
compliance with Utah Code Annotated section 57-11-7.
   K.   Descriptions Of Key Plan/Drawing Contents (Section
10-6-1, Table 3 Of This Chapter):
      1.   Site Boundaries With Dimensions: Show on all plans the property
boundaries, accurately depicted on a sheet at least twenty four inches by
thirty six inches (24" x 36") with bearings and distances based on a recorded
plat. Include a copy of the recorded plat with other submittals.
      2.   Boundaries Of Protection Areas: Show official boundaries of wetlands
(as per U.S. army corps of engineers), floodplains (100-year, as per U.S. FEMA
maps, or engineering calculations), and spring and well protection areas (as
determined by the city engineer).
      3.   Existing And Proposed Topography: Show contours at not more than two
foot (2') intervals for areas of less than ten percent (10%) slope and not more
than five foot (5') intervals for areas over ten percent (10%) slope. Such
contours shall be based on county data when available. The closest city survey
monument shall be used and its location/elevation noted. Clearly designate the
following slope categories:
         a.   Zero to ten percent (10%) slopes;
         b.   Eleven (11) to twenty five percent (25%) slopes;
         c.   Twenty six (26) to thirty nine percent (39%) slopes;
         d.   Forty percent (40%) and greater slopes.
      4.   Existing Conditions (Vegetation, Roads, Utilities, Buildings, Etc.):
In addition to showing existing conditions on the property, also show
conditions immediately adjacent to the property, as well as the location of any
improvements that may be required to be constructed beyond the boundaries of
the subdivision.
      5.   Calculations Of Site Data: Include the following data, in table
form, on the proposed site plan:
         a.   Number of units;
         b.   Number of bedrooms;
         c.   Parking spaces required;
         d.   Parking spaces provided;
         e.   Ground coverage (calculate area).
      6.   Detailed Landscape Plan: Show all landscaped areas; include plans
for walls, patios, fences, trees and other vegetation.
      7.   Preliminary Construction Plans:
         a.   Site plans showing footprints of all structures and paved
surfaces;
         b.   Sections through the structure(s) and the site, with maximum
heights noted;
         c.   Preliminary elevations (exterior views of the building).
      8.   Final Construction Plans/Residential: See requirements on section
10-6-1, tables 2 and 3 of this chapter, together with requirements outlined
under subsection 10-18A-4A of this title. The review and approval of building
plans by the planning and zoning administrator and the city engineer shall be a
prerequisite to the issuance of any building permit.
      9.   Final Construction Plans/Commercial:
         a.   Site plans;
         b.   Exterior elevations showing vertical dimensions, exterior
finishing materials, roof slope and covering materials, and exterior grades;
         c.   Architectural renderings;
         d.   Samples of materials, color and textures (to demonstrate
compliance with the city design guidelines);
         e.   Complete/final building plans shall be reviewed by building
official and final approval shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any
building permit.
      10.   Final Plat Data:
         a.   Calculation and traverse sheets giving bearings, distances and
coordinates of the boundary of the subdivision and blocks and lots as shown on
the final plat;
         b.   Design data, assumptions and computation in accordance with sound
engineering practice, along with plan, section and profile sheets for all
public improvements;
         c.   Current title report;
         d.   Covenants, conditions and restrictions (if any);
         e.   Details of all exterior masonry or concrete walls, including
elevations, textures, color and materials;
         f.   The words "Street", "Avenue", "Road", "Place", "Drive", "Court",
or other designation of any street, shall be spelled out in full on the plat
and shall be subject to approval by the city council.
   L.   Additional Visual Information: The city, at its discretion, may require
applicants to provide other documents, studies and visual aids to assist with
comprehension of the residual impact upon the city of the proposed use or
development. Said additional information may include, but not be limited to,
three-dimensional imaging of proposed projects, additional photographs, digital
renderings and/or drawings to scale of buildings, structures from angles other
than those submitted or from perspectives, which include existing cityscapes,
buildings or natural features.
   M.   Additional Drainage/Floodplain Data: If the application relates to
property located within or near a floodway, floodplain, flow zone, erosion
boundary and/or meander zone, as those terms are defined by the federal
emergency management agency (FEMA) or any other federal or state agency, the
city, at its discretion, may require applicants to provide the city with
detailed drainage, erosion control and flood protection plans, as well as
detailed elevations showing the height of proposed building pads or other
structures above established or periodic drainage areas/ravines. (Ord. 2012.04,
1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 7
GENERAL PLAN APPLICABILITY
SECTION:
10-7-1: Purpose
10-7-2: General Plan Policies
10-7-3:    Zoning And Future Land Use Map
10-7-4:    Amendments
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
The city general plan is a general plan for the community; a general guide for
making land use decisions. It describes the community’s physical development
goals and where various land uses are desired. The general plan is published as
a separate document from the land management code and may be obtained from the
city recorder. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.01A, 1-17-2024)
10-7-2: GENERAL PLAN POLICIES:
   A.   The General Plan and the Zoning Ordinance shall conform to one another.
   B.   The General Plan will be comprehensively reviewed at least every 5
years or when major changes occur in the community.
   C.   The City Council and Planning Commission are committed to let zoning
and other development proposals be governed by the General Plan.
   D.   All zoning and land use decisions, including the development of
streets, parks, utilities, and the provision of public services, shall be
consistent with the General Plan, including its maps, goals, and policies.
   E.   All zoning and land use proposals in conflict with the General Plan
should not be supported.
   F.   Any proposed deviations from the General Plan require that the General
Plan be reviewed and amended in advance through a public hearing process. (Ord.
2024.01A, 1-17-2024)
10-7-3: ZONING AND FUTURE LAND USE MAP:
The Future Land Use Map depicts future desired zoning designations and may not
depict properties as they are currently zoned. Current zoning designations are
maintained at Toquerville City offices and on the City’s official zoning map.
(Ord. 2024.01A, 1-17-2024)
10-7-4: AMENDMENTS:
The current general plan was adopted after careful study, significant public
input, and several review hearings by both the planning commission and the city
council The general plan may be amended by the city council by following the
same procedure for the original adoption. Specifically, the steps are as
follows:
   A.   Review Process:
      1.   Application: Application is submitted to the planning commission.
      2.   Planning Commission Review: After appropriate public notice
consistent with section
10-1-8  of this title, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing and
they shall make a recommendation on the proposed amendment to the city council
      3.   City Council Review: After public notice consistent with section
10-1-8  of the title, the city council shall hold a public hearing. The city
council may adopt, amend or reject the proposed amendment.
   B.   Standards For Review: No general plan amendment shall be approved
unless the planning commission finds that the amendment meets the following
standards and conditions:
      1.   Meets a recognized and demonstrated need in the community;
      2.   Will not create an “island” or “peninsula” zoning district or
otherwise constitute “spot zoning”;
      3.   Will not have a material adverse effect on established uses on
contiguous properties;
      4.   Will not result in an over intensive use of the land or excessive
depletion of natural resources;
      5.   Will not have a material adverse effect on community capital
improvement programs;
      6.   Will not require a level of community facilities and services
greater than that which is available;
      7.   Will not result in undue traffic congestion and traffic hazards;
      8.   Will not cause significant air, odor, water, light or noise
pollution;
      9.   Will not otherwise be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare
of the present or future inhabitants of the city.
   C.   City Initiated Amendment: Any amendment or revision of the general plan
initiated by the city shall contain all of the mandatory elements required by
Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-403. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014
Code; Ord. 2024.01A, 1-17-2024)
CHAPTER 8
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
10-8-1: Zone Districts And Zone District Map
10-8-2: Use And/Or Modification Of Land And Buildings Consistent
10-8-3: Amendments To Zone District Map
10-8-4: Vested Rights; Pending Ordinances
10-8-5: Zoning Of Annexed Property
10-8-1: ZONE DISTRICTS AND ZONE DISTRICT MAP:
   A.   In order to carry out the purposes of this title, zone districts have
been established as described in this title and identified on a zone district
map that is made part of this title by reference. In the interpretation of the
map, the zone district boundary lines are intended to conform to the property
lines or along the centerlines of the public right of way, unless such boundary
lines are established by fixed dimension shown on the map. If zone district
lines diverge from lot lines, such lot lines shall be considered to be on the
property boundary.
   B.   Each zone district description in this title includes one or more of
the following categories of regulations:
      1.   Purpose;
         2.   Permitted uses;
      3.   Conditional uses; and
      4.   Physical requirements. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.15,
8-7-2024)
10-8-2: USE AND/OR MODIFICATION OF LAND AND BUILDINGS CONSISTENT:
Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted,
moved or maintained contrary to provisions of this title; and any use of land,
building or premises established, conducted or maintained contrary to
provisions of this title shall be, and the same hereby is, declared to be
unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney, upon request of the mayor or
city council, shall take such steps as necessary to cause removal of such
structures and/or uses. This shall not apply to nonconforming uses, preexisting
the adoption of this title that are properly maintained and not enlarged or
abandoned as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-511, as amended. The
remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2024.15, 8-7-2024)
10-8-3: AMENDMENTS TO ZONE DISTRICT MAP:
The zone district map may be amended as provided in this section. The city
council may establish a fee for zone change applications to cover the cost of
processing and review.
   A.   Review Process:
      1.   Planning Commission: The proposed amendment shall be submitted to
the planning commission with documentation as prescribed in chapter 6 of this
title. The planning commission may recommend approval, modification and
approval, or denial of the proposed zone amendment following the procedures
described by Utah Code Annotated and this title, and in accordance with the
criteria in this section.
      2.   City Council: Within a reasonable time after a proposed amendment is
submitted to the planning commission, the planning commission shall submit its
recommendations on proposed amendments to the city council for its
consideration. Failure of the planning commission to table or submit its
recommendations to the city council within a reasonable time shall be deemed a
recommendation of approval of the proposed amendment by the planning
commission.
      3.   Public Hearing: Upon receipt of a completed application, the
planning commission shall advertise and convene a public hearing pursuant to
section
10-1-8 of this title to receive public comment. Within a reasonable time after
the public hearing, the planning commission shall recommend approval, approval
with conditions, or denial of the proposed amendment to the city council.
   B.   Standards For Review: No zone district amendment shall be approved
unless the planning commission finds that the amendment meets the following
standards and conditions:
      1.   Addresses a recognized and demonstrated need in the community;
      2.   Will be compatible with the character of the neighborhood and
surrounding structures in use, scale, mass and circulation;
      3.   Will not result in an over intensive use of the land or excessive
depletion of natural resources;
      4.   Will not have a material adverse effect on community capital
improvement programs;
      5.   Will not require a level of community facilities and services
greater than that which is available;
      6.   Will not result in undue traffic congestion and traffic hazards;
      7.   Will not cause significant air, odor, water, light or noise
pollution;
      8.   Will not otherwise be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare
of the present or future inhabitants of the city; and
      9.   Will meet the requirements of the general plan.
   C.   Diversity Of Ownership And Minimum Area For Zone Designation: Neither
the size of a zone district nor the number of landowners within a zone district
shall be considered as evidence of the illegality of a zone district or a
proposed zone designation. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.15, 8-7-
2024)
10-8-4: VESTED RIGHTS; PENDING ORDINANCES:
Applicants of a proposed zone amendment shall obtain vested rights in any zone
amendment upon the occurrence of the events, and subject to the conditions set
forth in subsection 10-1-8 of this title. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord.
2024.15, 8-7-2024)
10-8-5: ZONING OF ANNEXED PROPERTY:
Upon successful completion of the requirements of the current annexation policy
plan adopted pursuant to UCA § 10-2-401.5, the annexed property shall possess
the zoning designation of Multiple Use 20 (MU-20) unless the applicant has
sought and obtained a different zoning designation through the procedures
outlined in the annexation policy plan. (Ord. 2024.15, 8-7-2024)
CHAPTER 9
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose
10-9-2: Allowed Use Table
10-9-3: Physical Restrictions
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of both the A-0.5 District and the A-1 District is to identify
and preserve appropriate lands for permanent agricultural use, and such
incidental uses normally and necessarily related to the primary agricultural
use. The Agricultural District's regulations are intended to maintain the
unique character of the City's agricultural areas and to ensure the survival of
agricultural uses and attendant open spaces. The minimum Lot sizes of the
Agricultural Districts dictate the types and intensities of uses that are
appropriate for each District with more intense agricultural and incidental
uses being prohibited on smaller agricultural Lots.
(Ord. 2023.10, 5-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2024.19, 9-18-2024)
10-9-2: ALLOWED USE TABLE:
Only the following uses set forth in the table below are allowed in the
Agricultural District. Any use not specified as permitted, conditional,
conditional with standards/permit is deemed prohibited.
 A-0.5 A-1
                                                                     A-0.5 A-1
Agricultural buildings & structures related to agricultural uses     P     P
Crop production                                                      P     P
Dwelling, single-family                                              P     P
Family food production                                               P     P
Home occupation (with current home occupation permit)                P     P
Keeping of livestock (in compliance with Title 5, Chapter 1)         P     P
Keeping of household pets (in compliance with Title 5,Chapter 1)     P     P
Public or quasi-public building for essential public services        P     P
Public utility uses                                                  P     P
Private cemeteries                                                   N/A   P
Residential facility for elderly persons                             C     C
Residential facility for 12ersons with a disability (see 10-17-2)    CS    CS
Roadside stands for sale of produce grown on premises                C     C
Riding stables                                                       C     C
Vertical storage silos                                               N/A   C
Other uses similar to the above and judged to be in harmony with the C     C
character intent of the zoning district
   Legend:
P = Permitted Us
C = Conditional
CS = Conditional w/ Standards or Permit
NA= Not Allowed
 
(Ord. 2023.10, 5-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2024.19, 9-18-2024)
10-9-3: PHYSICAL RESTRICTIONS A-0.5 DISTRICT:
Minimum Lot area   .5 acre
Minimum frontage   80 feet (measured at front setback)
Minimum setbacks   Front: 25 feet
                  Side: 10 feet
                  Rear: 10 feet (2 stories or less)
Setback exceptions Driveway, walkway
Maximum density    agricultural lot/parcel (no Dwellings)
Maximum height     35 feet
 
(Ord. 2023.10, 5-17-2023)
CHAPTER 10
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10A-1: Purpose
10-10A-2: Allowed Use Table
10-10A-3: Physical Restrictions
10-10A-3-1: R-1-12 District (12,000 Square Feet)
10-10A-3-2: R-1-15 District (15,000 Square Feet)
10-10A-3-3: R-1-20 District (20,000 Square Feet)
10-10A-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1 District is intended to provide sites for low density single-family
residential uses, together with such public facilities as may appropriately be
located in the same district. The R-1 District regulations are intended to
ensure adequate light, air, open space for each dwelling, commensurate with
single- family occupancy, and, to maintain the desirable residential qualities
of such sites by establishing appropriate site development standards. Certain
nonresidential uses may be permitted as conditional uses, and where approved,
are intended to blend harmoniously with the residential character of the
district. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.12, 7-17-2024)
10-10A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following uses set forth in the table below are allowed in Residential
Districts. Any use not specified as permitted, conditional, or conditional with
standards/permit is deemed prohibited.
USE                                                                                 
Accessory buildings and uses customarily and incidental to the permitted and       P
conditional uses allowed herein.
Home occupations (with current home occupation license).                           P
Household pets, as allowed under Title 5, Chapter 1, “Animal Control,” of this P
Code.
Rentals of single-family residences in excess of ninety (90) consecutive days.     P
Single-family dwellings (one per lot/parcel).                                      P
Tilling of the soil, raising crops, horticulture, and gardening.                   P
The keeping of chickens (hens only) per 5-1-4B.                                    P
Public or quasi-public building for essential public services.                     P
Public utility uses.                                                               P
Child daycare or nursery.                                                          C
Churches.                                                                          C
Model homes.                                                                       C
Private recreational grounds and facilities not open to the general public and to  C
which no admission charge is made.
Public or private schools.                                                         C
Residential facility for persons with a disability (see 10-17-2).                  CS
Single-family and multi-family dwellings located above commercial space.           C
The keeping of livestock in accordance with section 5-1-4.                         CS
Other uses similar to the permitted uses above and judged to be in harmony with    C
the character and intent of this zone.
   Legend:
P = Permitted Use, C = Conditional, CS = Conditional with Standards or Permit
 
Notes:
   1.   UCA § 10-9a-520. (Ord. 2024.12, 7-17-2024)
10-10A-3: PHYSICAL RESTRICTIONS:
10-10A-3-1: R-1-12 DISTRICT (12,000 SQUARE FEET):
Minimum lot area            12,000 square feet
                            80 feet (except corner lots 90 feet). Minimum
                            frontage may be reduced by 30% on a cul-de- sac
Minimum frontage            lot, as measured along the line that follows the
                            minimum front setback for the lot and as long as
                            the total lot area exceeds 12,000 square feet
                            Front: 25 feet
Minimum setbacks            Side: 10 feet
                            Rear: 10 feet
Setback exception           Driveway, walkway
Maximum height              35 feet (see definition of building height, section
                            10-2-1 of this title) (exception - church steeples)
Parking                     In accordance with section 10-21-13 of this title
Minimum road setback        25 feet from any dedicated street or highway
                            Up to 18 feet - permitted
Secondary structure height  18 feet to 35 feet - conditional
                            Above 35 feet - not allowed
                            Front: 25 feet
Secondary structure setback Side: 5 feet
                            Rear: 5 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3fe0e843d9167a706b41a7527aa7d0379b6627e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2313.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-20 12; amd. Ord. 2018.08, 12-13-2 018; Ord. 2024.1 2, 7-17-
20 24)
10-10A-3-2: R-1-15 DISTRICT (15,000 SQUARE FEET):
Minimum lot area            15,000 square feet
Minimum frontage            90 feet (except corner lots 100 feet) measured at
                            setback
                            Front: 25 feet
Minimum setbacks            Side: 10 feet
                            Rear: 15 feet
Setback exception           Driveway, walkway
Maximum height              35 feet (see definition of building height, section
                            10-2-1 of this title)
Parking                     In accordance with section 10-21-13 of this title
Minimum road setback        25 feet from any dedicated street or highway
                            Up to 18 feet
Secondary structure height  18 feet to 35 feet conditional
                            Above 35 feet not allowed
                            Front: 25 feet
Secondary structure setback Side: 5 feet
                            Rear: 5 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3fe0e843d9167a706b41a7527aa7d0379b6627e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2317.jpg]
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.12, 7-17-2024)
10-10A-3-3: R-1-20 DISTRICT (20,000 SQUARE FEET):
Minimum lot area            20,000 square feet
Minimum frontage            100 feet (except corner lots 110 feet) measured at
                            setback
                            Front: 25 feet
Minimum setbacks            Side: 10 feet
                            Rear: 20 feet
Setback exception           Driveway, walkway
Maximum height              35 feet (see definition of building height, section
                            10-2-1 of this title)
Parking                     In accordance with section 10-21-13 of this title
Minimum road setback        25 feet from any dedicated street or highway
                            Up to 18 feet
Secondary structure height  18 feet to 35 feet conditional
                            Above 35 feet not allowed
                            Front: 25 feet
Secondary structure setback Side: 5 feet
                            Rear: 5 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3fe0e843d9167a706b41a7527aa7d0379b6627e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2319.jpg]
(Ord. 201 2.04, 1-18 -2012; amd . Ord. 202 4.12, 7-17 -2024)
 
ARTICLE B. RM MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10B-1: Purpose
10-10B-2: Permitted Uses
10-10B-3: Conditional Uses
10-10B-4: Physical Restrictions
10-10B-4-1: RM-1 District
10-10B-4-2: RM-2 District
10-10B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this district is to permit well designed apartments, townhomes,
twin homes and condominiums at medium to high density that are appropriately
buffered from and compatible with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-
2012)
10-10B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Assisted living facility.
Building, accessory.
Dwelling, multiple-family.
Family child daycare.
Golf course.
Home occupations (with current home occupation permit).
Public or quasi-public uses for essential public services.
Public utility services.
Tilling of the soil, raising crops, horticulture and gardening for family food
production. (Ord. 2019.03, 5-9-2019; amd. Ord. 2021.14, 7-21-2021)
10-10B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Agricultural.
Church or place of worship.
Club or service organization.
Dwelling, single-family.
Manufactured home.
Personal care service.
Personal instruction service.
Protective service.
Residential facility for elderly persons.
Residential facility for persons with a disability 1 . This use shall require a
permit under section
10-17-2 of this title. (Ord. 2019.03, 5-9-2019; amd. Ord. 2021.14, 7-21-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-9a-520.
10-10B-4: PHYSICAL RESTRICTIONS:
10-10B-4-1: RM-1 DISTRICT:
Minimum lot size                    1 acre
Minimum lot width                   80 feet per project
                                    30 feet per unit
Maximum density                     6 units per acre
Maximum building height - main      35 feet
Maximum building height - accessory 20 feet
Maximum size - accessory            1,000 square feet
Building coverage                   50 percent of lot
Front setback                       25 feet
Rear setback                        10 feet
Interior side yard setback          10 feet
Street side yard setback            20 feet
 
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-10B-4-2: RM-2 DISTRICT:
Minimum lot size                    1 acre
Minimum lot width                   100 feet per project
                                    30 feet per unit
Maximum density                     10 units per acre
Maximum building height - main      35 feet
Maximum building height - accessory 20 feet
Maximum size - accessory            1,000 square feet
Building coverage                   50 percent of lot
Front setback                       25 feet
Rear setback                        10 feet
Interior side yard setback          10 feet
Street side yard setback            20 feet
 
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
CHAPTER 11
MULTIPLE USE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. MULTIPLE USE (MU-20) DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-11A-1: Purpose
10-11A-2: Allowed Use Table
10-11A-3: Physical Restrictions
10-11A-1: PURPOSE:
The Multiple Use District is established in areas of mountain, hillside,
canyon, desert and other open and generally underdeveloped lands where human
habitation should be limited in order to protect the indigenous natural beauty
of those areas and protect open space resources and to reduce unreasonable
requirements for public utility and service extensions and expenditures through
unnecessary disbursal and scattering of population; to encourage the use of
land, where appropriate, for grazing, agricultural, wildlife habitat and
recreation; and to minimize water pollution, soil erosion, danger from
brushland fires, damage to watersheds, and damage to grazing and livestock
habitat and to wildlife habitat and values; and to promote health, convenience,
order, prosperity and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2023.16, 6-21-2023)
10-11A-2: ALLOWED USE TABLE:
Only the following uses set forth in the table below are allowed in Multiple
Use Districts. Any use not specified as permitted, conditional, or conditional
with standards/permit is deemed prohibited.
USE MU-20
USE                                                                     MU-20
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to agricultural and P
grazing uses
Agricultural uses                                                       P
Home occupations (with current home occupation permit)                  P
Livestock grazing                                                       P
Single-family dwelling (one (1) per twenty (20) acres)                  P
Public or quasi-public uses for essential public services               P
Public utility uses                                                     P
Agricultural and related uses                                           C
Day-use private park or recreational grounds or facilities              C
RV resorts                                                              NA
Campgrounds                                                             NA
Radio, television, cellular transmitting/relay stations & towers        C
Residential facility for persons w/ a disability (see 10-17-2)          CS
Residential facility for elderly persons                                C
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above        C
Water parks                                                             NA
Golf course.                                                            C
Other uses similar to the above and judged to be in harmony with the    C
character intent of the zoning district
Legend:
P = Permitted Use, C = Conditional, CS = Conditional w/ Standards or Permit,
NA = Not Allowed
 
(Ord. 2023.16, 6-21-2023)
10-11A-3: PHYSICAL RESTRICTIONS:
Minimum lot area:          20 acres
Minimum frontage:          100 feet
Minimum setbacks:           
   Front:               25 feet
   Side:                10 feet
   Rear:                10 feet (2 stories or less)
Setback exceptions:        Established by conditional use permit
Building separation:       Established by conditional use permit
Maximum height:            35 feet
Maximum building coverage: Established by conditional use permit
Minimum landscaping:       Established by conditional use permit
Parking:                   Per TCC §
                           10-21-13, as modified by CUP
 
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2023.16, 6-21-2023)
CHAPTER 12
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. N-C NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-12A-1: Purpose
10-12A-2: Permitted Uses
10-12A-3: Conditional Uses
10-12A-4: Physical Restrictions
10-12A-1: PURPOSE:
The N-C district is intended to provide sites with a mixture of business and
commercial establishments, catering primarily to the needs of local residents
which in character and scale are necessary to meet their day to day needs. N-
C district regulations are intended to ensure light, air, open space and other
amenities appropriate to the permitted types of buildings and uses. The
district regulations, in conjunction with other city guidelines, prescribe site
development standards that are intended to maintain the unique and quaint
character of the city and to ensure an attractive and functional commercial
setting. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-12A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Bakery.
Banks.
Beverage service.
Childcare centers.
Grocery store.
Light hardware (no outside storage or sales of goods).
Other uses customarily incidental and accessory to permitted commercial uses
and necessary for the operation thereof.
Personal services (barber/beauty, self-service laundry, etc.).
Pharmacy/retailer (emphasizing local services, necessities, sundries, groceries
and convenience items).
Professional offices (medical, dental, real estate, finance, insurance, etc.).
Public and private educational institutions.
Public or quasi-public use for essential public services.
Public utility uses.
Restaurant/fast food establishment.
Theaters.
Variety store. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2021.16, 7-21-
2021)
10-12A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Commercial kennels.
Residential facility for elderly persons.
Residential facility for persons with a disability 1 . This use shall require a
permit under section
10-17-2 of this title.
Single-family and multi-family dwellings located above commercial space.
Other uses similar to the permitted uses above and judged to be in harmony with
the character and intent of this zone. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014
Code; amd. Ord. 2021.16, 7-21-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-9a-520.
10-12A-4: PHYSICAL RESTRICTIONS:
 
Minimum frontage             80 feet
Minimum setbacks             Front: 25 feet
                             Side and rear: 20 feet
Maximum height               35 feet (no more than 2 stories)
Minimum finished landscaping 15 percent of the total lot/parcel area
Parking and loading          In accordance with section
                             10-21-13 of this title
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3fe0e843d9167a706b41a7527aa7d0379b6627e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1415.gif]
 
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
ARTICLE B. H-C HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-12B-1: Purpose
10-12B-2: Allowed Use Table
10-12B-3: Physical Restrictions
10-12B-4: Special Regulations
10-12B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide commercial areas on major highways for
the location of travel, service and highway oriented commercial uses. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.16, 8-7-2024)
10-12B-2: ALLOWED USE TABLE:
Only the following uses set forth in the table below are allowed in the Highway
Commercial Zone.
USE                                                                          
Animal hospital                                                             P
Antique store                                                               P
Athletic and sporting goods store                                           P
Automobile parts sales (new parts only); provided, conducted within         P
completely enclosed building
Automobile rental (vehicles up to 26' in length)                            P
Automobile service, repair, conducted within an enclosed building           P
Bank or financial institution                                               P
Bus terminal                                                                P
Business equipment rental, services, and supplies                           P
Car wash                                                                    P
Catering establishment                                                      P
Cemetery                                                                    P
Child care center                                                           P
Church or place of worship                                                  P
Club or service organization                                                P
Commercial kennel                                                           C
Commercial nursery                                                          P
Convenience store                                                           P
Department store                                                            P
Drive-thru sales (pharmacy, dairy products, etc.)                           P
Drugstore                                                                   P
Farm implement sales (outdoor display)                                      P
Financial, medical, and professional services                               P
Furniture and large appliance sales                                         P
Garden supplies and plant material sales                                    P
Gasoline service station                                                    P
Golf course                                                                 P
Grocery store                                                               P
Hospital                                                                    P
Hostel                                                                      P
Hotel                                                                       P
Laundry or dry cleaning                                                     P
Media service                                                               P
Motel                                                                       P
Nursing home                                                                P
Office, general                                                             P
Office supply, office machine sales and service                             P
Operations center                                                           P
Paint or wallpaper store                                                    P
Park                                                                        P
Pawnshop                                                                    C
Personal care service                                                       P
Pet grooming                                                                P
Post office                                                                 P
Printing and copying                                                        P
Protective service                                                          P
Public or quasi-public uses for essential public services                   P
Public utility uses                                                         P
Reception center                                                            P
Recreation and entertainment                                                P
Restaurant or fast-food establishment                                       P
Retail, general                                                             P
Roadside stand for the sale of agricultural produce and related items       P
RV resort (as per 10-29)                                                    C
Shopping center                                                             P
Transportation service                                                      P
Other uses similar to the above and judged by the Planning Commission to be C
in harmony with the character intent of this zone
   Legend:
   P = Permitted Use, C = Conditional, CS = Conditional w/Standards or Permit
 
(Ord. 2024.16, 8-7-2024)
10-12B-3: PHYSICAL RESTRICTIONS:
The restrictions below shall be considered minimum, and more restrictive
standards may be prescribed as conditions of a conditional use permit for any
use:
 
Minimum frontage             80 feet
Minimum setbacks             Front: 25 feet
                             Side and rear: 20 feet
Maximum height               45 feet
Minimum finished landscaping 15 percent of the total lot/parcel area
Parking and loading          In accordance with section 10-21-13 of this title
                             All outdoor storage, vehicles, machinery and
                             equipment shall be screened and/or out of public
Screening                    view as seen from state highways or interstate
                             freeways and any roadway fronting or driveway
                             providing access to the property on which it is
                             stored
                             All fuel storage tanks shall be completely buried
                             beneath the surface of the ground or bermed and
                             shall comply with all applicable state and federal
                             regulations. All gasoline pumps, lubrication or
Gasoline and oil storage     similar devices, and other service facilities,
                             shall not be located within minimum setbacks. All
                             servicing of vehicles, except for the sale of gas
                             and oil services customarily provided in
                             connection therewith, shall be conducted
                             completely within a structure
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3fe0e843d9167a706b41a7527aa7d0379b6627e9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2323.jpg]
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.16, 8-7-2024)
10-12B-4: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Increased Height: Notwithstanding the height limitation shown in
section 10-12B-3 of this Article, a greater building height may be allowed in
the Highway Commercial zone pursuant to a conditional use permit.
   B.   Setbacks Abutting A Residential Zone: When abutting a residential zone,
the minimum setback shall be required plus one additional foot for every foot
of building height over thirty feet (30').
   C.   Protection Of Residential Zones: Where any commercial zone adjoins any
residential, as part of the required setbacks, there shall be provided and
maintained along such property line a six-foot (6') solid masonry wall and a
ten-foot (10') landscape buffer to protect the adjoining residential or
agricultural property. The landscape buffer shall include the strategic
planting of trees and shrubs to provide adequate screening. All landscaping
shall comply with
10-21-5 of the Toquerville City Code.
(Ord. 2024.16, 8-7-2024)
ARTICLE C. PC PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-12C-1: Purpose
10-12C-2: Allowed Use Table
10-12C-3: General Requirements
10-12C-4: Content of Written Text/Site Plan
10-12C-5: Physical Restrictions
10-12C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the PC Zone is to provide areas where a combination of
destination-oriented businesses, retail commercial, entertainment and related
uses may be established, maintained and protected to serve both residents and
nonresidents of the City. Typical uses include large scale, master planned
commercial centers with outlying commercial pads, big box stores and offices.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2023.23, 11-1-2023)
10-12C-2: ALLOWED USE TABLE:
Only the following uses set forth in the table below are allowed in Planned
Commercial Districts. Any use not specified as permitted, conditional, or
conditional with standards/permit is deemed prohibited.
USE  
USE                                                                   
Agricultural sales and service                                       P
Animal hospital                                                      P
Bank                                                                 P
Business equipment rental, sales, service                            P
Car wash                                                             P
Child daycare                                                        P
Church or place of worship                                           P
Club or service organization                                         P
Convalescent care facility                                           P
Convenience store                                                    P
Cultural service                                                     P
Golf course                                                          P
Hospital                                                             P
Hotel                                                                P
Laundromat                                                           P
Post Office                                                          P
Public or quasi-public uses for essential public services            P
Public utility uses                                                  P
Reception center                                                     P
Restaurant/fast food establishment                                   P
Shopping center                                                      P
Vehicle, sales and service                                           P
Auditorium                                                           C
Bus terminal                                                         C
Commercial kennel                                                    C
Motel                                                                C
Pawnshop                                                             C
RV Resort (see                                                       CS
10-29)
Residential treatment facility                                       C
Residential facility for persons with a disability. (see             CS
10-17-2)
Tattoo Parlor                                                        C
Tavern                                                               C
Wholesale and warehousing                                            C
Other uses similar to the above and judged to be in harmony with the C
character intent of the zoning district
   Legend:
P = Permitted Use, C = Conditional, CS = Conditional w/Standards or
Permit, NA = Not Allowed
 
(Ord. 2023.23, 11-1-2023)
10-12C-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Planned commercial districts shall comply with the following at the time of the
initial zone change application.
   A.   Planned Commercial Initial Zone Change Application Requirements: Each
zone change application submitted pursuant to this Article shall include the
following:
      1.   A detailed narrative of the proposed development of the entire
property.
      2.   A detailed list of proposed land uses and proposed densities.
      3.   A detailed site plan showing the location of the roads, development
areas, open spaces, and phasing plan (if any).
   B.   Any zone change shall be approved by the adoption of an ordinance by
the city council, which ordinance shall not be effective until the recording of
a final plat or approval of a final site plan. In no event shall the effective
date of any zone change ordinance extend beyond one (1) year of the date of
adoption.
   C.   Preliminary Plat or Detailed Site Plan: For all planned commercial
projects that are proposed to be subdivided, the applicant shall prepare and
submit a preliminary plat or detailed site plan at the same time as the zone
change application for the planned commercial zone. To be considered for
concurrent review, the application must contain all preliminary plat
requirements set forth in
Chapter 19, Article C, Section 3  of this title, the submittal requirements set
forth in
Chapter 6, Section 1  of this Title, and the requirements set forth in
Section 4 of this Chapter , as amended.
   D.   Commercial Design Standards: All planned commercial projects shall
comply with the general commercial design standards set forth in
Chapter 21, article A , of this title and the City’s current standards and
specifications. (Ord. 2023.23, 11-1-2023)
10-12C-4: CONTENT OF WRITTEN TEXT/SITE PLAN:
   A.   Use of Land: The applicant shall prepare a site plan and written text
that show and clearly explain the projected use of land including percentages
of land devoted to various types of land use, such as building coverage,
parking area, landscaped area, etc.
   B.   Buildings: The text shall indicate the type, character, and proposed
height of all buildings. The plot plan, elevation, and perspective drawings
shall be prepared by a licensed professional in the state of Utah to help the
Planning Commission and City Council better understand the proposal.
   C.   Phasing Plan: A phasing plan, if the development is proposed to be
developed in phases, shall be submitted.
   D.   Topography: Topography at contour intervals of two feet (2') shall be
submitted unless waived by the planning staff.
   E.   Landscape Plan: A landscape plan showing the general location of lawn
area, shrubs, trees, and fencing shall be submitted. The landscape plan shall
comply with
Chapter 21, article A, section 5  of this title.
   F.   Utilities Underground: All utilities, existing and proposed, shall be
shown. All proposed utilities shall be underground unless otherwise approved.
Transformer equipment shall be screened from the streets and adjacent
properties.
   G.   Refuse Storage Areas: Refuse storage areas shall be screened so that
materials stored within these areas shall not be visible from access streets,
freeways, and adjacent properties. Storage or refuse areas shall not be located
within required building setbacks nor within utility easements.
   H.   Lighting Plan: The plans submitted shall include a general lighting
plan indicating the location of lights to be installed on-site.
   I.   Turning Spaces: Safe and convenient turning space shall be provided for
cars, sewer vehicles, refuse collection vehicles, fire-fighting equipment, etc.
   J.   Traffic Conditions: The effect of the development on traffic conditions
on abutting streets shall be shown. A preliminary traffic impact study shall be
required as deemed necessary by city staff.
   K.   Layout: The layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions
of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives, and walkways.
   L.   Truck Facilities: The location, arrangement, and dimensions of truck
loading and unloading facilities.
   M.   Off-Street Parking: The arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking
facilities.
   N.   Surfacing, Lighting of Parking Facilities: The surfacing and lighting
of off-street parking facilities.
   O.   Circulation Pattern: The circulation patterns within the boundaries of
the development.
   P.   Planning Objectives: The text material shall set forth planning
objectives to be accomplished through the development of the project and show
that the requested PC zoning is in conformance with the City general plan and
complies with the requested zoning designation.
   Q.   Improvements: Location, grades, widths, and type of all improvements
proposed for all streets.
   R.   Line Locations: A plan showing the location of all water, sewer, and
drainage lines in and through the project.
   S.   Deed Restrictions; Covenants: Copies of any deed restrictions,
restrictive covenants, bylaws, architectural controls, or other requirements
that may be appurtenant to the proposed development.
   T.   Signage: The size, location, design, and nature of signs, if any, and
the intensity and direction of area flood lighting shall be detailed in the
text materials.
   U.   Grading and Drainage Plan: A grading and drainage plan, accompanied by
a drainage report, shall be submitted with the site development plan.
   V.   Geotechnical Report: A geotechnical report identifying any possible
flood, slope, faulting, soils or other related hazards on the site shall be
submitted with the application.
   W.   Proposed Use Not Detrimental: It shall be shown that under the
circumstances of the particular case, the proposed use will not be detrimental
to the health, safety, or general welfare of the persons residing in the
vicinity of the planned commercial development or that any impacts are
sufficiently mitigated. (Ord. 2023.23, 11-1-2023)
10-12C-5: PHYSICAL RESTRICTIONS:
 
Minimum lot area               5 acres
Maximum height - main building 35 feet (up to 50 ft with conditional use)
Maximum height - accessory     20 feet
Front yard setback             25 feet
Rear yard setback              10 feet (20 feet for multi-story buildings or
                               buildings over 20 feet in height)
Interior side yard setback     10 feet
Street side yard setback       20 feet
(Ord. 2023.23, 11-1-2023)
CHAPTER 13
BUSINESS, MANUFACTURING ZONES
ARTICLE A. BMP BUSINESS AND MANUFACTURING ZONE
SECTION:
10-13A-1: Purpose
10-13A-2: Allowed Use Table
10-13A-3: Physical Restrictions
10-13A-4: Special Regulations
10-13A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the BMP Zone is to provide aesthetically attractive planned
developments having a mix of office, research and development, light
manufacturing and limited retail uses. (Ord. 2017.07, 6-8-2017; amd. Ord.
2024.20, 10-16-2024)
10-13A-2: ALLOWED USE TABLE:
Only the following uses set forth in the table below are allowed in the
Business Manufacturing Zone.
Use
Use
Agricultural Industry                                                       C
Animal hospital                                                             P
Athletic club                                                               P
Bank or financial institution                                               P
Bus terminal                                                                C
Business equipment, sales, rental, supplies                                 P
Car wash                                                                    P
Church or place of worship                                                  P
Clean indoor manufacturing facility                                         P
Club or service organization                                                P
Commercial kennel                                                           C
Construction sales and service                                              P
Convalescent care facility                                                  C
Convenience store                                                           P
Cultural services                                                           P
Daycare center                                                              P
Funeral home                                                                P
Garden center                                                               P
Gasoline service station                                                    P
General manufacturing (light and clean manufacturing)                       P
Hospital                                                                    P
Hotel                                                                       P
Laundry and dry cleaning                                                    P
Medical Office                                                              P
Office, general                                                             P
Operations center                                                           P
Pawnshop                                                                    C
Pest control and extermination                                              P
Post office                                                                 P
Public or quasi-public uses for essential public services                   P
Public utility uses                                                         P
Reception center                                                            C
Recreation and entertainment                                                C
Rehabilitation facility                                                     C
Research facility                                                           C
Residential facility for persons with a disability (see                     CS
10-17-2 )
Residential facility for troubled youth                                     C
Restaurant                                                                  P
Service retail                                                              P
The extraction industry uses, as defined in Chapter 15, Article D, of this  CS
Title.
Other uses similar to the above and judged by the Planning Commission to be C
in harmony with the character intent of this zone.
Legend:
P = Permitted Use, C = Conditional, CS = Conditional w/Standards or Permit
 
(Ord. 2024.20, 10-16-2024)
10-13A-3: PHYSICAL RESTRICTIONS:
Minimum frontage               80 feet (unless otherwise approved by
                               Conditional Use Permit)
Minimum lot area               .5 acre
Maximum height - main building 35 feet
Maximum height - accessory     20 feet
Front yard setback             25 feet
Rear yard setback              10 feet
Interior side yard setback     10 feet
Street side yard setback       20 feet
 
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.20, 10-16-2024)
10-13A-4: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Increased Height: Notwithstanding the height limitations shown in
section
10-13A-4  of this chapter a greater building height may be allowed in a
business or industrial zone persuant to a conditional use permit.
   B.   Setbacks Abutting A Residential Zone: When abutting a residential zone,
the minimum setback shall be required plus one (1) additional foot for every
foot of building height over thirty (30) feet.
   C.   Protection Of Residential Zones: Where any business and manufacturing
zone adjoins any residential zone, as part of the required setbacks, there
shall be provided and maintained along such property line a six (6) foot solid
masonry wall and a ten (10) foot landscape buffer to protect the adjoining
residential or agricultural property. The landscape buffer shall include the
strategic planting of trees and shrubs to provide adequate screening. All
landscaping shall comply with section
10-21-5  of the Toquerville City Code.
   D.   Processing Within An Enclosed Building: All processing and/or assembly
of goods shall be conducted completely within an enclosed building, unless
otherwise specified in this section.
   E.   Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage of materials or finished or
semifinished goods shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any
residential zone boundary. (Ord. 2026.04, 6-9-2016; amd. Ord. 2024.20, 10-16-
2024)
10-13A-5: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Increased Height: Notwithstanding the height limitations shown in
section
10-13A-4 of this article a greater building height may be allowed in a business
or industrial zone pursuant to a conditional use permit to a maximum height of
one hundred feet (100'). Provided, however, that within one hundred feet (100')
of the boundary of an adjoining agricultural, residential, or commercial zone,
no building shall exceed the greater of:
      1.   The height limit established by such zone; or
      2.   The height limit permitted by a conditional use permit for a
building on an abutting lot within such zone.
   B.   Processing Within An Enclosed Building: All processing and/or assembly
of goods shall be conducted completely within an enclosed building, unless
otherwise specified in this section.
   C.   Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage of materials, or finished or
semifinished goods shall be located at least one hundred feet (100') from any
residential zone boundary. (Ord. 2016.04, 6-9-2016)
CHAPTER 14
INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A. M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-14A-1: Purpose
10-14A-2: Permitted Uses
10-14A-3: Physical Restrictions
10-14A-4: Special Regulations
10-14A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the M-1 Zone is to provide areas for uses involving processing
and assembly of manufactured goods, warehousing and material storage. Uses
which generate excessive noise, vibration, odor, dust and fumes are not allowed
in this zone. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-14A-2: ALLOWED USE TABLE:
Only the following uses set forth in the table below are allowed in the Light
Industrial Zone.
USE  
USE                                                                          
Agricultural processing                                                     C
Agricultural sales and service                                              P
Agriculture                                                                 C
Auditorium                                                                  C
Bus terminal                                                                C
Club or service organization                                                P
Commercial kennel                                                           C
Construction sales and service                                              P
Convalescent care facility                                                  C
Convenience store                                                           P
Freight terminal                                                            P
Funeral home                                                                P
Garden center                                                               P
Gas and fuel, storage, and sales                                            P
Hotel                                                                       P
Media service                                                               P
Medical or dental laboratory                                                P
Office, general                                                             P
Operations center                                                           P
Parking garage, public                                                      C
Pest control and extermination                                              P
Post office                                                                 P
Printing and copying                                                        P
Protective service                                                          P
Public or quasi-public uses for essential public services                   P
Public utility uses                                                         P
Restaurant, or fast-food establishment                                      P
RV and boat storage                                                         C
Self-storage facilities                                                     C
The extraction industry uses, as defined in Chapter 15, Article D, of this  CS
Title
Vehicle repair and service                                                  P
Other uses similar to the above and judged by the Planning Commission to be C
in harmony with the character intent of this zone
   Legend:
P = Permitted use, C = Conditional, CS = Conditional w/Standards or Permit
 
(Ord. 2024.14, 8-7-2024; amd. Ord. 2024.21, 10-16-2024)
0-14A-3: PHYSICAL RESTRICTIONS:
 
Minimum frontage               80 feet (unless otherwise approved by
                               Conditional Use Permit)
Minimum lot area               No requirement
Maximum height - main building 50 feet
Front yard setback             30 feet
Interior side yard setback     10 feet
Street side yard setback       30 feet
Rear yard setback              10 feet
 
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.14, 8-7-2024)
10-14A-4: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Increased Height: Notwithstanding the height limitations shown in
section
10-13A-4  of this chapter a greater building height may be allowed in a
business or industrial zone pursuant to a conditional use permit.
   B.   Setbacks Abutting A Residential Zone: When abutting a residential zone,
the minimum setback shall be required plus one (1) additional foot for every
foot of building height over thirty (30) feet.
   C.   Protection Of Residential Zones: Where any business manufacturing zone
adjoins any residential or agricultural zone, as part of the required setbacks,
there shall be provided and maintained along such property line a six (6) foot
solid masonry wall and a ten (10) foot landscape buffer to protect the
adjoining residential or agricultural property. The landscape buffer shall
include the strategic planting of trees and shrubs to provide adequate
screening. All landscaping shall comply with
10-21-5  of the Toquerville City Code. (Ord. 2024.14, 8-7-2024)
CHAPTER 15
OVERLAY ZONES
ARTICLE A. HDO HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
10-15A-1: Purpose
10-15A-2: Definitions
10-15A-3: Administration
10-15A-4: Applicability
10-15A-5: Overlay Zone And Boundaries
10-15A-6: Historic Commission
10-15A-7: Design Guidelines
10-15A-8: Sign Regulations
10-15A-9: Demolition Of Buildings Not Designated As Landmark Sites
10-15A-10: Review And Permit Procedure
10-15A-1: PURPOSE:
The historic district encompasses a portion of the originally settled townsite
of the city. Lot sizes in this area are characteristic of the late nineteenth
century and do not conform to current standards. The HDO zone is intended to
preserve buildings and related structures of historic and architectural
significance and to allow improvements to existing structures or new
construction without eroding the scale and historic character of the district.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the meaning set out below for the purposes of
this article:
COMMISSION: The historic commission of Toquerville City.
COUNCIL: The city council of Toquerville City.
EXTERIOR DESIGN PROPOSAL: A. Any rehabilitation, reconstruction or addition to
the exterior of a significant historic building.
   B.   Any demolition or relocation of a significant historic building.
   C.   Any new construction within the historic district, except for minor
additions to nonhistoric buildings.
   D.   Any sign proposed to be placed or modified within the district.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: Land within the city's historic district overlay zone.
LANDMARK SITE: A building, site or structure designated as a landmark site by
the city.
MINOR ADDITION: An addition to a nonhistoric building of six hundred (600)
square feet or less.
SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC BUILDING: A building, site or structure that is: a)
designated as a landmark site; b) a building within the historic district built
as a residence prior to 1950; c) within the historic district determined by the
commission to be historically important due to its age or architecture; or d)
other buildings, outside the historic district, designated as having a
historical significance to Toquerville City. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15A-3: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The planning commission may, upon written recommendation of the
historic commission, recommend to the city council, rules, regulations and
guidelines to implement and administer the purposes and intent of this article.
   B.   Until at least three (3) members of the historic commission are
appointed, the planning commission shall serve as the historic commission.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15A-4: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of this title regarding such things as fees, enforcement,
permits, violations and all other similar items, including penalties, shall
apply. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15A-5: OVERLAY ZONE AND BOUNDARIES:
   A.   A historic district zone is established, which shall be an overlay zone
over the existing zoning districts shown on the official city zoning map. In
cases of conflict between this article and other provisions of this title, this
article shall apply.
   B.   The historic district is all lots that front Toquerville Boulevard
(also known as SR 17) from Ash Creek Bridge on the north to the southern
boundary of the Old Neagle Winery on the south. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15A-6: HISTORIC COMMISSION:
The city establishes a historic commission with the following provisions:
   A.   Membership: The commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed
by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, for a four (4)
year term, except in making the initial appointment, the mayor and council
shall appoint two (2) members for a term of three (3) years and three (3)
members for a term of four (4) years. Each member shall have a demonstrated
interest, competence or knowledge in historic preservation.
   B.   Meetings: The historic commission shall meet at least four (4) times
each year, except that the historic commission may assemble as required to
fulfill its duties and conduct meetings in accordance with the open meeting
laws of the state. Upon appointment of the initial historic commission, it
shall meet and elect one of its members as chairperson. The historic commission
shall then provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and
special meetings of the historic commission as deemed advisable and necessary.
   C.   Vacancies; Removal: Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of
any member whose term is vacant. Any member may be removed for cause by the
appointing authority.
   D.   Compensation: The members of the historic commission shall serve
without compensation, however, they shall be entitled to be reimbursed for any
actual expenses they incur during the performance of their duties.
   E.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The historic commission shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, a
survey of the historic, architectural and archaeological resources within the
city. The survey shall be compatible with the Utah inventory of historic
archaeological sites. Survey and inventory documents shall be maintained and
shall be open to the public. The survey shall be updated every ten (10) years.
      2.   The historic commission shall review and comment to the state
historic preservation officer on all proposed national registry nominations for
properties within the city boundaries. Nominations shall be evaluated by
professions in the specific discipline.
      3.   The historic commission shall act in an advisory role to other
departments of government regarding the identification and protection of local
historic and archaeological resources and work toward the continuing education
of citizens regarding historic preservation and community history.
      4.   The historic commission shall support all state laws relating to
historic preservation.
      5.   The historic commission shall act as the historic district design
review committee with respect to new construction, exterior design proposals,
demolition or relocation of a significant historic building, or any
construction or modification of a sign within the historic district. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15A-7: DESIGN GUIDELINES:
The city council may, upon written recommendation of the historic commission,
prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and guidelines to administer and carry out
the intent of this article:
   A.   Objectives: The design guidelines which follow are set forth as a guide
for those engaged in development and/or rehabilitation of properties in the
historic district. They are specified to ensure the creation of an environment,
blending the existing and new developments into a harmoniously functioning
area.
      1.   Considerations: Buildings within the historic district should be
considered as integral parts of the overall design and developed with
appropriate consideration for both proposed and existing buildings with respect
to height, mass, siting, location, materials, orientation, signs, lighting and
use.
      2.   Signs: All signs within the historic district shall be part of an
overall design scheme and shall conform to the sign standards contained in
section
10-15A-8 of this article.
      3.   Underground Utility Lines: All utility lines shall be installed
underground whenever feasible.
   B.   Rehabilitation Guidelines: Rehabilitation of significant historic
buildings shall comply with the guidelines set forth herein and, in addition,
all applicable statutes, codes and ordinances, as amended from time to time,
relating to the use, maintenance, construction and occupancy of the property.
      1.   Standards: All improvements shall be generally in accord with the
general and specific standards for historic preservation as prepared by the
historic commission and in harmony with the architectural character of the
neighborhood.
      2.   New Additions: Whenever possible, new additions or adaptive reuse to
structures shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or changes
were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
structure would not be impaired.
      3.   Parking, Access: Off street parking, loading facilities and
pedestrian access shall be designed so as not to create conflicting movement.
All other areas, other than driveways, parking areas, walks and terraces, shall
be appropriately landscaped and provided with appropriate trees and shrubbery.
      4.   Ancillary Structures: Ancillary structures, such as garages, storage
sheds and the like, where practical, shall be improved in a manner suggested by
the historic commission to meet code requirements and be aesthetically
pleasing.
      5.   Restoration: Restoration of all exterior facades, including the side
and rear facade, shall be in keeping with the objectives herein. Roofline,
windows and exterior facing materials shall all be considered. Adjoining
buildings in separate or the same ownership shall be rehabilitated so as to
carry out a unified concept.
      6.   Materials: Materials, techniques and colors must conform to and
harmonize with original materials and techniques. To this end, the emphasis
should be, where practical, on correct period sash, doors, cornices, wall
materials and signs and the removal of present day anachronisms, such as
defacing or out of scale contemporary features. The general requirements shall
apply particularly to visible surfaces on the exterior. New work adjoining old
must be carefully blended to minimize separation, unless, in the opinion of
qualified architectural experts, it is better to make the adjoining areas
obvious and thereby emphasize the qualities of the original work.
      7.   Repairing Details: When repairing or replacing masonry details,
decorations or parapet walls, care should be taken to prevent an obvious and
unsightly patch. Materials, joints, etc., should match the original as closely
as possible in composition, color and texture.
      8.   Fake Details: Fake historic details, decorations and other additions
should be avoided.
      9.   Reanchoring: Sagging details, decorations, cornices, string courses,
lintels, arches, pilasters and parapet walls should be firmly reanchored.
      10.   Deteriorated Details: Deteriorated building details should be
repaired rather than replaced. In the event replacement is necessary, the new
material should match the original material in composition, design, color and
texture.
      11.   Paint: Heavy or numerous coats of paint, or paint in wrong color
that obscures architectural decoration and detail should be removed before
repainting.
      12.   Hardware: Hardware and lighting fixtures, where practical, shall be
selected with care to conform to authentic work of the period, and to match
remaining originals where such exist.
      13.   Compatible Design: If the original or significant detail no longer
exists or is too deteriorated to save, it is recommended that a contemporary
design be undertaken which is compatible with the rest of the building in
scale, design, materials, color and texture.
      14.   Materials:
         a.   Original building wall material should not be covered with any
form of inappropriate siding.
         b.   Masonry facing shall be cleaned and painted as necessary.
Sandblasting is prohibited unless approved by the historic commission. All
repainting, when necessary, shall be done by specification as set forth in
brief 2, U.S. department of the interior.
         c.   Recommended materials for rehabilitation of masonry buildings
include traditional bond pattern, such as running bond, not stack bond. Clay
facing tile may be used if the face size of the tile is that of standard brick
and if the bond pattern is typical of contributing buildings in the area.
         d.   The use of imitation stone veneer or brick using stucco, plastic
or plywood/fiber panels is not acceptable, unless documented through historic
or pictorial evidence.
         e.   Asphalt or wood shingled awnings and diagonal sided panels are
not acceptable.
         f.   Vinyl or aluminum panels imitating clapboard or wood siding are
not acceptable.
         g.   Glazing shall be clear, nonreflective and untinted, though the
use of double glazed insulating glass or materials such as acrylic or high
impact polycarbonate panels is permissible.
         h.   Wall surfaces that have not been painted should remain unpainted.
      15.   Color:
         a.   Color for all rehabilitation work should blend with the existing
palette. If any new brick is used, it should be similar in texture and color to
that of the original brick. Stucco for exterior walls should be similar in tone
to muted pastels typical of historic pioneer stucco buildings.
         b.   White or off white may be used on decorative elements, such as
lintels, sills and cornices. Bright colors are not appropriate for major
architectural elements, such as building walls. However, when used sparingly in
fine lines, such as on the wood trim of a storefront, a brighter color than
that of the building face can enhance a particular color scheme.
         c.   Metallic finishes generally are not acceptable, except when used
in such treatments as painted gold or bronze toned lettering on storefront
glass.
         d.   Colors for wood or for metal windows, doors and storefronts
should accent the color used for exterior walls. Too many colors should be
avoided. A simple color scheme of a few colors is generally preferable.
      16.   Mechanical Equipment:
         a.   Radio, television, telephone and/or telecommunication equipment,
such as antennas of satellite dishes and ancillary systems, cables, junction
boxes and the like, shall be placed behind or within suitable visual barriers
in such a way so as not to be visible from the street.
         b.   Heating and air conditioning equipment, including cooling units,
blowers, exhaust fans, ducts and/or ancillary systems, support units, brackets,
wiring, junction boxes and the like, shall be properly screened or installed
behind or within suitable visual barriers.
   C.   New Construction: The guidelines in this subsection are to be used by
those planning new construction within the historic district boundaries. Their
purpose is to reinforce and enhance the historic architectural character of the
neighborhood by encouraging compatible new construction:
      1.   Considerations: The historic commission will consider design
concepts other than those recommended in these guidelines though approval of
alternative approaches is not guaranteed. However, in order for a design to be
considered for exceptional review, it must not include the use of elements that
are designated as inappropriate in the guidelines.
      2.   Siting: The ground floor of a new structure should relate to the
pedestrian's human scale and continue to display the siting of neighborhood
structures.
      3.   Scale:
         a.   One of the many criteria that must be considered when designing
new buildings is the scale of the new building and its relationship to the
scale of the neighborhood.
         b.   It is important that the elements within the building's facade
also be appropriately scaled. The scale of those elements should recall those
of neighboring structures.
      4.   Width Of Building: The apparent widths of the front facades of new
buildings should correspond to typical widths of the buildings on the same
block. A long facade should be broken into separate elements to suggest facade
widths or bays similar to those of neighboring buildings.
      5.   Windows: Original windows in older buildings are predominantly the
wood double hung type. A sash pattern of one over one, that is, one undivided
framed pane above a similar pane, is the most common type. In new construction,
one over one type is recommended. However, the pattern of a one over one window
may be achieved by the use of fixed glass, with three (3) conditions: a) that
the window frame replicates the proportions of a typical double hung window
sash; b) that no unpainted clear aluminum is used for the frame; c) that the
window frame is of similar cross sectional size to that of the double hung
windows typical of the neighborhood. Other configurations will be evaluated for
streetscape compatibility on a case by case basis.
      6.   Ornamentation:
         a.   The ornamental details used in new construction should be
compatible and in scale with those used in the historic district.
         b.   When used, cornices, roof types, gables, dormers, turrets,
corbelled parapets, string courses, lintels, arches, pilasters and column
styles which are sympathetic with adjacent buildings will have a unifying
effect and will be considered appropriate. Duplication, where noted, is not
necessary and is to be avoided.
      7.   Color: Color schemes will be considered in the design review in
terms of their appropriateness as part of the building facade.
         a.   Develop a color scheme for the entire building that coordinates
all facade elements. Choose a base color that will link the entire building
together, including signs, ornamentation, awnings and entrances if applicable.
         b.   Muted colors are preferred for background colors of most
buildings. A darker background color will allow use of lighter colors for trim
where the highlights will show up better.
         c.   Use bright colors for accents only, such as signs, ornamentation
and entrances. In most cases, only one or two (2) accent colors should be used
in addition to the base color.
         d.   Finish wood surfaces. The rustic bare wood look is not part of
the heritage of the historic district. Painted surfaces are most appropriate.
Stains will be accepted in combination with materials that give a wall a
finished appearance. Rustic finishes will not be approved.
         e.   Leave natural masonry surfaces unpainted where feasible. For
other parts of the building that do require painting, select colors that will
complement those of the natural materials. If an existing building is already
painted, consider applying new colors that simulate the original brick look.
         f.   Select neutral or muted colors for roofs. Brown and gray were the
dominant colors in the past because of the materials used. Wood shingles and
sheet metal traditions remain today and should be respected. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-
18-2012)
10-15A-8: SIGN REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Signs: Permitted signs include low profile monument type
signs (1 per parcel of property or complex), provided they are wood carved,
sandblasted or engraved metal and do not exceed four feet (4') in height and
are not more than sixteen (16) square feet in area for individual business, or
twenty four (24) square feet for multiple businesses. Uplighting is permitted
with four feet (4') of sign. All other signs must comply with subsection 10-22-
7A8 of this title.
   B.   Prohibited Signs:
      1.   Roof signs, or any sign projecting above the roofline.
      2.   Off premises signs.
      3.   Flashing signs, including any sign or device in which the artificial
light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity or color at all
times when in use.
      4.   Signs made of cardboard, paper, canvas or similar impermanent
material.
      5.   Bubble shaped awnings and awnings with a shiny or wet look.
      6.   Other prohibited signs identified in the City sign ordinance.
   C.   Additional Provisions:
      1.   Painted signs should be in subdued earth tone colors only. Day-glo
or fluorescent signs are not permitted.
      2.   Electric signs, including neon, are permitted.
      3.   The lettering style should be simple and in keeping with the
architectural character of the neighborhood. The amount of information on a
sign should be kept to a minimum. A variation in lettering styles is
permissible, but should be kept to a minimum.
      4.   All permanent signs shall be integrated into the architectural
design of the building on which they are placed and into the overall sign
layout of the project in character and quality. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd.
2014 Code)
   D.   Request For Permit Or Appeal: Requests for a permit to place a sign in
the Historic District must be submitted to the Historic Commission for their
approval. The applicant for a permit may make an appeal of such decision to the
Appeal Authority. The decision of the Appeal Authority will be final. (Ord.
2018.07, 12-13-2018)
10-15A-9: DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS NOT DESIGNATED AS LANDMARK SITES:
   A.   Application; Considerations: When an application is made for a
demolition permit affecting a historic building which is not designated as a
landmark site, the Historic Commission shall:
      1.   Review the condition of the building to determine the impact of the
demolition to the neighborhood and the technical feasibility for preserving the
structure;
      2.   Inform the property owner of economic incentives available to
rehabilitate historic resources;
      3.   Encourage the property owner not to demolish the building until an
attempt can be made to locate suitable tenants to make the building
economically viable, or find a purchaser who is willing to acquire and
rehabilitate the structure;
      4.   Review proposed new construction within the neighborhood;
      5.   The application shall also describe the reason for demolition and
any development proposed for the demolition site, including renderings of the
proposed new structure.
   B.   Requirements For Approval: Demolition permits for historic buildings
not designated a landmark site shall not be approved until the Historic
Commission has had a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, to review
the proposed new construction, and make recommendations regarding compliance
with the Historic District design standards. Granting of the permit shall be
determined after review of Historic Commission recommendations by the planning
commission and recommendations to the City Council. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15A-10: REVIEW AND PERMIT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Review Of Regulations: The developer is to secure a copy of this
article to review the regulations regarding development in the Historic
District.
   B.   Consideration By Historic Commission: When a request for a building
permit is made to the City based upon an exterior design proposal, the Historic
Commission shall review, at a minimum, the site plan, exterior design of the
buildings, architectural treatment, landscaping, design of signs and other
items related to design objectives, to determine whether proposed construction
substantially complies with Historic District design standards and make a
report to the Planning Commission prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   C.   Exterior Design Proposal Review: The Historic Commission shall review
the exterior design proposals for significant historic buildings within the
district. Exterior proposals shall include:
      1.   Any rehabilitation, reconstruction or addition to the exterior of a
significant historic building.
      2.   Any demolition or relocation of a significant historic building.
      3.   Any new construction within the Historic District, except for minor
additions to existing nonhistoric buildings.
      4.   Any sign proposed to be placed or modified with the Historic
District.
   D.   Planning Commission Approval Required: All exterior design proposals
shall be subject to Planning Commission approval after recommendation from the
Historic Commission. No building permit shall be issued in the Historic
District without this approval.
   E.   Continuing Review: The Historic Commission and City staff shall
exercise continuing review of a project as it progresses from conceptual stage
through construction and completion to ensure compliance with the Historic
District design standards and Planning Commission approvals. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-
18-2012)
   F.   Denial; Request For Exemption, Appeal: In the event of a denial of a
permit by the Planning Commission, an applicant may request an exemption as
provided in subsection G of this section, or may appeal to the Appeal Authority
for approval. On appeal to the Appeal Authority, its decision shall be final.
(Ord. 2018.07, 12-13-2018)
   G.   Exemption: A property owner may be exempted from the restrictions
imposed by this article on significant historic buildings by applying for an
exemption. The applicant shall state the reasons why: 1) the building is no
longer suitable for the present purposes; and 2) the applicant cannot earn a
reasonable return from use or rental of the building if altered, reconstructed
or demolished with the limitations and guidelines adopted under this article.
Determination of whether a building is appropriate for exclusion from the
application of this article shall be made by the Planning Commission upon
recommendation by the Historic Commission. If an applicant desires to appeal
denial of an exemption or the Historic Commission desires to appeal the
granting of an exemption, the applicant or Historic Commission may request
consideration by the City Council, and its decision, after public hearing,
shall be final. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
ARTICLE B. PDO PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
RESERVED
(Rep. by Ord. 2021.10, 6-16-2021)
ARTICLE C. MPDO MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
10-15C-1: Purpose And Intent
10-15C-2: Interpretation
10-15C-3: Coordination With Other Land Use Documents
10-15C-4: Vested Rights
10-15C-5: Requirements And Standards
10-15C-6: Density
10-15C-7: Approval Process
10-15C-8: Conceptual Approval
10-15C-9: Preliminary Approval
10-15C-10: Final Approval
10-15C-11: Adherence To Approved Plan; Modifications
10-15C-12: Expiration Of Master Planned Approval
10-15C-13: Nightly Rental Development Minimum Requirements
10-15C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   A master planned development overlay zone is intended to provide an
alternative to the conventional zoning and land development approaches to
encourage the most creative and innovative development of land. This overlay
zone may allow the standards of this article to be applied to all areas of the
city. It is the intent of this article to assure that the character of the
underlying zones and surrounding districts is maintained in harmony with the
city general plan and to satisfy the requirements of applicable design
guidelines and design standards and specifications for construction.
   B.   It is further the intent of this article to:
      1.   Promote economical and efficient use of the land.
      2.   Promote the clustering of dwelling units.
      3.   Enhance and blend development with the unique natural character of
the city.
      4.   Promote creative architecture that blends with the character of the
land.
      5.   Provide a harmonious variety of housing types.
      6.   Encourage a higher level of project amenities.
      7.   Preserve the unique scenic qualities of open space. (Ord. 2012.04,
1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.09, 6-16-2021)
10-15C-2: INTERPRETATION:
By its nature and purpose, the master planned development overlay zone is
intended to provide flexible land development approaches and regulations.
Insofar as the application of the regulations and concepts contained herein
conflict with the strict construction requirements and provisions of this
article and/or other provisions of this title, or other land use ordinances,
the provisions of the regulations provided under this article shall control.
For example, the application of clustering, in the setback and building
separation provisions in this article, may conflict with the setback and
building separation provisions of the underlying zone as specified in this
title. However, uses, including both permitted and conditional uses, specified
for each zoning district in this title shall not be modified by the application
of the regulations in this article. It is not the intent of the MPDO to replace
the simple, conventional, or phased subdivisions as described in section 10-19.
The MPDO is intended for subdivision with such size, geographic challenges or
complexity that could not be facilitated in a subdivision specified in section
10-19. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.09, 6-16-2021)
10-15C-3: COORDINATION WITH OTHER LAND USE DOCUMENTS:
This article, together with chapter 19 of this title, the city general plan,
this title and the zoning map, and applicable city design guidelines, shall
guide the use and development of all land within the corporate boundaries of
the city. However, in order to accomplish the purpose and intent of this
article, conflicts and regulations provided in other city ordinances as they
apply to land use and development, shall be construed in such a way as to allow
the more flexible approach of the master planned development overlay zone.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.09, 6-16-2021)
10-15C-4: VESTED RIGHTS:
There shall be no vested right to bonus incentives or other flexible design
treatments, including clustering, merely by virtue of filing an application
under this article. The planning commission and city council have discretion to
approve or deny any amenities proposed for the purposes of calculating density
based on the desirability of the proposed amenity and its consistency with
overall purposes and intent of this article and uses in design of the applicant
project and surrounding properties. Application under this article shall be
treated as an application for a subdivision approval under chapter 19, article
D of this title, for purposes of vesting the application of this title,
regulations and standards to any given application. At any time in the review
process under this article, a developer may elect to opt out and have the
application reviewed as a traditional subdivision application under chapter 19,
article D of this title. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.09, 6-16-
2021)
10-15C-5: REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Conformance With General Plan: The land uses and design of the proposed
MPDO shall be consistent with the city general plan.
   B.   Minimum Qualifications:
      1.   A master planned development overlay zone shall be required for
developments in excess of a minor partition of a parcel one hundred (100) acres
in size or greater, characterized by slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%).
      2.   On parcels less than one hundred (100) acres, an MPDO may be
authorized if one or more of the following conditions exist:
         a.   Unusual physical features of the property or the surrounding area
prohibit development under the standard provisions of this title while
preserving a physical or terrain feature, or view corridor of importance to the
neighborhood.
         b.   The property cannot be feasibly developed under the standard
provisions of this title, particularly in the case of small undeveloped parcels
surrounded or partially surrounded by developed property.
         c.   The development under the MPDO regulations is more creative,
unique and desirable to the community.
         d.   The property/parcel proposed for development is under unified
title with one unified description.
   C.   Uses In Master Planned Development Overlay Zone:
      1.   Any use or combination of uses may be allowed in an MPDO, provided
such uses are consistent with the city general plan and underlying zone
regulations.
      2.   Mixed uses, including limited neighborhood commercial and multi-
family residential, may be allowed within one project. However, the development
shall be a harmonious variety of building types within one project and in
keeping with the objectives of this article.
   D.   Development Standards: The MPDO shall be designed and developed in a
manner consistent to chapter 19, articles D and E of this title, the design
standards and specifications for construction, capital facilities plan and
general design guidelines and approved by the planning commission.
   E.   Lot Sizes: The minimum lot and siting requirements of the zoning
district in which the MPDO lies shall not dictate the strict guidelines for
development within the MPDO, but shall serve to inform the developer of the
importance of developing a project that will be in harmony with the character
of the surrounding neighborhood. An MPDO shall not be subject to the lot width
and lot area requirements of the underlying zone. The lot width and size will
be shown on the approved site plan as approved by the planning commission.
Notwithstanding the preceding, if a perimeter of a proposed MPDO is adjacent to
an established residential area or approved plat that is zoned R-1-20 or
larger, the MPDO conceptual and final plan shall indicate perimeter lots with
residential density no less than R-1-20 zoning density unless the applicant can
provide evidence that this would make it impossible to develop the ERU’s
established in their base density. If the applicant desires density bonuses
thru the MPDO process, the applicant should designate, at a minimum, a buffer
of adjacent lots of at least the size requirements of the R-1-20 zone or
alternative transition buffers such as parks or open space.
   F.   Single Housing Type Not Inconsistent With Intent: An MPDO which only
involves one type of housing, such as all detached or all attached units, shall
not be inconsistent with the stated purposes and objectives of this article and
shall not be the sole basis for denial.
   G.   Architectural Style, Appearance:
      1.   While there should be some flexibility for individuality, homes
within a development should be of similar character and style to promote
harmony within the project.
      2.   The exterior color and materials of all buildings, structures, walls
and fences shall comply with general design guidelines and approved by the
planning commission.
      3.   Architectural style of buildings shall not solely be a basis for
denial of the plan. However, the overall appearance and compatibility of
individual buildings to other site elements or to surrounding development will
be primary consideration during the MPDO review.
   H.   Street Utilities, Services And Public Facilities: The uniqueness of
each proposal for an MPDO may allow specifications and standards for streets,
utilities and services to be subject to minor modifications. The plans and
specifications and profiles of all streets, utilities and services shall be
reviewed by the city staff and the city engineer prior to final approval.
Approval of infrastructure plans is required before final approval for an MPDO
may be granted.
   I.   Open Space, Parks, Park Strips, Medians, Trails And Others:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of open space is to provide areas within
developed parcels of land that are restricted from development and reserved for
uses such as parks, trails, floodway areas, landscaping and topographic
features worthy of protection. Open space does not include streets, driveways,
parking areas or setback areas. It is the intent of open space requirements to
promote a more clustered development land use and encourage the preservation of
undeveloped land for a healthier environment.
      2.   General Requirements: The following general requirements pertaining
to open space shall be incorporated into the development design and implemented
by the developer in compliance with city design standards and specifications
and other applicable city design guidelines:
         a.   Where parks, trails and other open space are mastered, planned by
the city, proposed by the developer, or required on a parcel or parcels, the
developer shall incorporate said open space into the design concept plan for
the project and submit the concept plan with suggested improvements, funding
and maintenance mechanisms for approval.
         b.   Trails, parkways, and common areas shall be dedicated to the city
or retained as private property, at the discretion of the city. On all trails,
parkways and other common area retained as private, the developer shall grant
an easement to the city and other agencies for access or maintenance on and
over the area. Such easements shall not necessarily give the general public
access.
         c.   All open space not specifically dedicated to the city, or
accepted for ownership or maintenance by the city, shall be perpetually owned
by and maintained by the owners or their agents through a special taxing
district or homeowners' association with the power to collect fees for
maintenance.
         d.   Open space shall be clearly designated on the preliminary and
final development plans as to the use and improvements, and may include the
following:
            (1)   Dedicated park sites.
            (2)   A dedicated right of way for bike paths, ATV trails,
equestrian and hiking trails.
            (3)   Private park and recreation sites.
            (4)   Streetscape areas.
            (5)   Floodway and wash areas.
            (6)   Perimeter landscaping.
            (7)   Detention basins, when appropriately improved to accommodate
recreation activities.
            (8)   Natural geographic and topographic features, such as rock
formations, washes, wetlands, lava rock and unique vegetation.
         e.   Open space may be left in its natural state, if natural features
are worthy of preservation. Natural features shall be protected during
construction, kept free of litter and at no time are allowed to constitute a
threat to health, safety, fire or flood.
         f.   Adequate guarantees must be provided by the applicant to ensure
that open space will be permanent. Guarantees may include deeds for easements,
transfers by deed or irrevocable covenants incorporated into conditions,
covenants and restrictions.
         g.   All or part of the common space may be reserved for use in common
by the residents of the subdivision.
      3.   Open Space Design: The following design requirements pertaining to
parks, park strips, medians, trails and open space shall be incorporated into
the development design and implemented by the developer in compliance with the
city design guidelines:
         a.   All parks approved for public use shall abut at least one public
street.
         b.   Parks and open spaces shall be planned, where appropriate, in
conjunction with flood detention.
         c.   Park strips and medians along collector streets adjoining the
project shall be landscaped by the developer according to the city standards
and specifications and design guidelines.
         d.   Buffers are required along all public streets that form the
perimeter of a subdivision and all public streets within the subdivision where
homes will not front that street. The minimum area for buffer strips, as
required by this title, shall be in force.
         e.   Open space buffers may be required to separate the subdivision
from other subdivisions or projects where conflicting uses or congested uses
may occur.
      4.   Open Space Minimum Requirement: There shall be a minimum amount of
area dedicated or reserved as open space as set forth below:
Land Use Minimum Open Space
Land Use                               Minimum Open Space
Single-family residential              15%
(lots less than 8,000 square feet)
Single-family residential              12.5%
(lots 8,001 - 10,000 square feet)
Single-family residential              10%
(lots 10,001 - 12,500 square feet)
Single-family residential              7.5%
(lots 12,501 - 25,000 square feet)
Single-family residential              5%
(lots 25,001 - 40,000 square feet)
Single-family residential              0%
(lots greater than 40,000 square feet)
Multi-family residential               20%
Nonresidential uses                    20%
 
If the development includes a mixture of land uses, the percentage of open
space required shall be the average based on the collective percentage of each
land use as to the total acreage.
   J.   Additional Standards: Additional standards and conditions may be
attached to the master planned development overlay zone, which may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Use limitation.
      2.   Screen planting.
      3.   Paving, location of drives and parking areas.
      4.   Storm drainage and stormwater detention.
      5.   Sidewalk design.
      6.   Construction criteria.
      7.   Shape of lots.
      8.   Grouping and use of buildings.
      9.   Maintenance of grounds.
      10.   Signage.
      11.   Adequacy of vehicular and pedestrian circulation and access.
   K.   Waiving Of Construction Standards And Design Criteria: This article is
intended to provide an alternative to the conventional use of land and provide
for flexibility in design standards. Construction standards and design criteria
may be reviewed on a case by case basis for the use of approved alternatives.
   L.   Affordable Housing: Each MPDO project shall address the placement of
community residential setting facilities, group homes and affordable housing in
a manner consistent with state law, the federal fair housing act and the city
affordable housing plan.
   M.   Professional Design Team:
      1.   The developer of all proposed MPDO developments shall certify that
the talents of the following professionals shall be utilized in the planning
and construction for the development:
         a.   An architect licensed in the state.
         b.   A landscape architect licensed in the state.
         c.   A registered civil engineer licensed in the state.
         d.   A land surveyor licensed in the state.
         e.   An attorney licensed and authorized to practice law in the state.
      2.   One of these professional consultants chosen by the applicant shall
be designated to be responsible for conferring with the city staff. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.09, 6-16-2021)
10-15C-6: DENSITY:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   Master planned developments may provide for a variety of housing
types allowed in any one of the basic residential zoning districts. In
addition, the number of dwelling units allowed may be flexible relative to the
number of units per acre that would be permitted by the zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the site.
      2.   In determining the densities in the MPDO, the planning commission
and city council shall consider increased efficiency in the provision of public
facilities and services based, in part, upon:
         a.   The location, amount and proposed use of common open space;
         b.   The location, design and type of dwelling units;
         c.   The physical characteristics of the site;
         d.   Particular distinctiveness and excellence in arrangement, design
and landscaping;
         e.   Other upgrades provided by the developer that are determined to
be significant for the community.
   B.   Density Bonus: An applicant for a master planned development may be
eligible for a density bonus based on additional amenities and creative land
use. An applicant may include one or more of the following amenities in the
design of the project and be considered for a density bonus. Each amenity is
assigned a percentage increase in the total project density for providing that
amenity. The bonus increase listed is the maximum allowed, and the planning
commission may approve less than the maximum allowed. The sum total of all
bonuses allowed may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the base total density:
   Table A.3.
Amenity Base Requirement or Level of Service (LOS) Max Bonus Requirements
Amenity      Base Requirement or Level of Service (LOS)        Max   Requirements
                                                               Bonus
             As provided in
             10-15C-5 (4)
             Land Use             Min. Open Space
             Single-family            15%
             residential (lots
             less than 8,000
             sq. ft.)
             Single-family             12.5%            As provided
             residential (lots                                       in
             8,001 - 10,000                                          10-15C-6. Any
             sq. ft.)                                                undeveloped
             Single-family            10%                open space
             residential (lots                                       dedicated to
             10,001 - 12,500                                         the Public
             sq. ft.)                                                except for
                                                                     Parks,
                                                                     Trails, Bike
                                                                     Paths,
                                                                     Irrevocable
                                                                     reservation
                                                                     of property
                                                                     for public
                                                                     use, or
Open Space   Single-family             7.5%        up to Active
             residential (lots                                 5%    recreation
             12,501 - 25,000                                         facilities
             sq. ft.)                                                that are
             Single-family            5%                 separately
             residential (lots                                       being used
             25,001 - 40,000                                         for
             sq. ft.)                                                additional
             Single-family            0%                 bonuses. Each
             residential (lots                                       2% increase
             greater than                                            above the
             40,000 sq. ft.)                                         minimum base
             Multi-family            20%                 requirement/
             residential                                             LOS will
             Nonresidential            20%               achieve 1%
             uses                                                    density
                                                                     bonus.








                                                                     For each 1%
                                                                     of additional
                                                                     acreage or
                                                                     features
             Current LOS is 9.2 acres/1,000 population.              i.e.:
             Minimum LOS pavilion with tables seating for 50,        splashpad,
Parks        restrooms, drinking fountain, playground,         up to tennis/
             trashcans. All parks must be open to full public  10%   pickleball
             use to qualify for density bonus.                       courts. Must
                                                                     include the
                                                                     amenities to
                                                                     meet current
                                                                     LOS
                                                                     requirements.
                                                                     As proposed
Irrevocable                                                          by the
Reservation                                                    up to Developer on
of Property  As proposed by Developer                          10%   a case by
for Public                                                           case basis
Use                                                                  and approved
                                                                     by the City.
Trails:
Pedestrian,
bike or
other trails
that re-                                                             1% bonus for
separate                                                             each 1% above
from                                                                 current LOS.
vehicular    Minimum LOS:                                      up to As identified
traffic both As identified in the Toquerville City Trails      10%   in the
inside and   Master Plan.                                            Toquerville
outside the                                                          City Trails
development.                                                         Master Plan.
Street
sidewalks
will not be
considered
as trails.
                                                                     Would be
                                                                     determined on
Active                                                               a case by
recreation                                                           case basis as
facilities                                                           proposed by
provide for                                                          the Developer
the public                                                           and approved
such as                                                              by the City.
playgrounds  Minimum LOS:                                            Consideration
equipped     Tennis/Pickleball courts (must have exterior      up to for
with a full  fencing, gates, lighting, hard surface courts,    10%   percentage of
complement   etc.)                                                   populations
of                                                                   served and
playground                                                           long- term
equipment,                                                           benefit to
Tennis/Pick                                                          the city and
leball                                                               its residents
courts, etc.                                                         will
                                                                     determine the
                                                                     1- 10%
                                                                     achieved.
Notes:
1.   Each amenity is assigned a percentage increase in the total project density
for providing that amenity.
2.   Density bonuses will only be allowed for amenities open to full public use.
3.   The density bonus increase listed in Table A.3. is the maximum allowed. The
City Council may approve less than the maximum allowed.
4.   The sum total of all bonuses allowed may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of
the base total density.
5.   Density bonuses will only be allowed for master planned development projects
whose base underlying zoning requires 20,000 sq. ft. lots (R-1-20) or larger.
 
   C.   Density Calculations: Density Calculations (ERU's) will be based on the
use and size of the structure built within a project and used to encourage, a
variety of unit configurations as set forth in Table C.1. below:
   Table C.1.
Configuration/Use Notes ERU's
Configuration/ Notes                                                                 ERU's
Use
Residential    A detached single home shall be calculated for each 5,000 sq. ft.     1.0
               Each additional 5,000 sq. ft. shall count as 1 ERU.
               Attached unit not to exceed 1000 square feet including bathroom
Hotel /Motel   areas, but not including corridors outside the room, and not to       0.25
               exceed 1 bathroom.
Apartments     Attached units not to exceed 1,000 square feet and not to exceed 1 ½ 0.50
Condominiums   bathrooms
Apartments or
attached       Attached units not to exceed 1,500 square feet and not exceed 2       0.75
single- family bathrooms
dwellings
Commercial &   For each 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, or for each part of a
Industrial,    5,000 square feet interval. Not to exceed 1 set of commercial         0.50
not including  bathrooms.
dwellings
Residential Notes: All bathrooms, halls, closets, storage and utility rooms within a unit
will be included in the calculation of square footages.
Hotel/Motel Notes: Exterior hallways, common circulation and use areas, such as lobbies,
elevators, storage areas, breakfast lobbies, conference rooms, banquet rooms, pools, spas,
recreation facilities and other similar areas, will not be included in square feet
calculation.
 
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.09, 6-16-2021; Ord. 2021.27, 12-15-
2021)
10-15C-7: APPROVAL PROCESS:
There shall be a three (3) stage review process for all master planned
developments, consisting of a conceptual conference and approval, a preliminary
site plan approval and a final site plan approval. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012;
amd. Ord. 2021.09, 6-16-2021)
10-15C-8: CONCEPTUAL APPROVAL:
   A.   Preapplication: The applicant is encouraged to meet with the
appropriate city staff prior to making application for MPDO approval to discuss
the development concept, the review and approval process, and the submittal
requirements.
   B.   Information Required: The developer shall provide the following
information, together with ten (10) copies, at the preapplication conference:
      1.   Written Statement: A written statement providing:
         a.   Proposed name of the MPDO development.
         b.   Location and legal description.
         c.   Name and address of owners.
         d.   Current title policy on property.
         e.   Name and address and qualifications of design team.
         f.   Type and number of residential and nonresidential uses.
         g.   Buildings/facilities involved with these uses.
         h.   Tentative operation and maintenance data (landscaping, etc.).
         i.   Existing and proposed utilities.
         j.   Existing and proposed public and/or private streets.
         k.   Location of nearest commercial shopping centers.
         l.   General timetable for development.
         m.   Density per net acre.
      2.   Schematic Drawings: Schematic drawings at a minimum scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') showing:
         a.   Existing natural features, such as watercourses, rock
outcroppings, wetlands, wood areas and greenways.
         b.   Location of existing utilities and drainageways.
         c.   Location and names of all prior platted streets, parks and
utility rights of way.
         d.   General location of existing and/or proposed buildings and
structures and their uses, parking, open space and ownership pattern.
         e.   A traffic flow map showing circulation patterns within and
adjacent to the proposed development, including trails, sidewalks, streets,
parking lots, loading areas, etc. A traffic study, done by a registered
professional, may be required.
      3.   Staff Response: Staff shall provide written comments to the
applicant on the information provided at the preapplication conference.
      4.   Recommendation Of Planning Commission: After receiving a completed
application and after reviewing the comments made by city staff, the planning
commission will recommend approval, approval with modifications or denial of
the proposed conceptual plan for the MPDO application to the city council.
      5.   City Council Decision: After reviewing the planning commission
recommendation, the city council will approve, approve with modifications or
deny the conceptual plan for the proposed master planned development overlay
zone. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.09, 6-16-2021)
10-15C-9: PRELIMINARY APPROVAL:
   A.   Application: Following approval of the conceptual plan by the city
council, the applicant shall make application to the planning commission for a
master planned development preliminary site plan/preliminary plat approval.
Following the application submittal, the planning commission shall hold a
public hearing, or any continuance thereof, on the proposed master planned
development. Following the public hearing, the planning commission will
recommend to the city council approval, approval with modifications or denial
of the adoption of master planned development overlay district.
   B.   Information Required: The following information shall be provided at
the application stage as an addition to any information required as part of the
preapplication review:
      1.   A written statement providing:
         a.   Written consent to the final development and program of all
persons owning any interest in the real property within the MPDO.
         b.   A time schedule showing construction commencement, rate of
development and approximate completion date for each phase of construction.
         c.   The stages of development of private and public facilities.
         d.   Drafts of proposed covenants and all other documents providing
for the maintenance of any public open spaces and recreational areas not
dedicated to the city, including agreements by property owners' associations,
dedicatory deeds or reservations of public open space.
         e.   Draft of the proposed development agreement.
      2.   Maps and drawings at a minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred
feet (1" = 100') showing the precise location of the following:
         a.   Existing contours (due to steep slopes, a 3-D model may be
required).
         b.   Contours after development.
         c.   Location and size of proposed storm drainage system, sewer,
water, power, natural gas, phone and cable television utilities.
         d.   A street system and lot design with appropriate dimensions. A
subdivision plat if the land is to be subdivided shall comply with this
requirement.
         e.   Location and dimensions of pedestrian walkways, paths and trails
within the site and connecting to surrounding neighborhood, including horse and
bike trails.
         f.   Location, arrangement, number and dimensions of off street
parking and bike parking as required.
         g.   Location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading zones.
         h.   Location of existing and/or proposed buildings and structures and
their uses, open space and dedicated or reserved properties.
         i.   Preliminary architectural plan depicting the general height, bulk
and type of construction and their approximate location on lots.
         j.   Preliminary landscaping plan, including trees, screen planting,
walls, fences, etc.
         k.   Location, character and types of signs.
         l.   Preliminary set of construction plans for civil improvements in
multiples of ten (10) copies, showing the design of roadways, water lines,
sewer lines, gas lines, power and phone lines, along with roadway cross
sections and construction details. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.09,
6-16-2021)
10-15C-10: FINAL APPROVAL:
   A.   Determination Of Consistency: At the time of request for final
approval, the planning commission shall determine whether the proposal is
consistent with the conditions and requirements set forth by the city. This
determination will include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Completed and approved development agreement.
      2.   Completed and approved civil improvement construction plans (plans
bearing the signatures of all required utilities, the city engineer and the
planning and zoning administrator).
      3.   Final plat/final site plan drawing for the initial phase of the
development.
      4.   Other conditions imposed by the planning commission or city council.
   B.   Planning Commission Public Hearing; Recommendation: After review and
determination, the planning commission will hold a public hearing on the final
approval for all MPDO zones and, after such public hearing, will make a
recommendation to the city council for approval, approval with changes, or
denial of the proposed MPDO zone.
   C.   City Council Review: After receiving the recommendation from the
planning commission, the city council may or may not hold a public hearing on
the proposed MPDO zone, but will review the proposed MPDO zone for compliance
with the criteria of this article. Any MPDO approved by the city council shall
be adopted by ordinance as an amendment to the city official zoning map.
   D.   Ordinance Content: The ordinance shall include schedules for
development, conditions of approval, requirements for modifications to the
approved plan and an expiration date. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord.
2021.09, 6-16-2021)
10-15C-11: ADHERENCE TO APPROVED PLAN; MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   All persons and parties, their successors, heirs or assigns, who own,
have or will have, by virtue of purchase, inheritance or assignment, any
interest in the real property within an approved master planned development,
shall be bound by the conditions of the master planned development conditions.
Failure to comply with such conditions shall be grounds for a repeal or
revision of the master planned development.
   B.   The approved final plan and stage developments schedule shall restrict
the nature, location and design of all land uses.
   C.   Minor changes in the approved final plan, including extension or
revision of the stage development schedule, may be approved by the planning
commission, if such changes are consistent with the purposes and general
character of the plan.
   D.   All other modifications shall be processed in the same manner as the
original application and shall be subject to the same procedural requirements.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.09, 6-16-2021)
10-15C-12: EXPIRATION OF MASTER PLANNED APPROVAL:
Within two (2) years of ordinance adoption, if substantial construction or
development of the master planned development has not occurred in accordance
with the approved final development plan and program, the planning commission
shall initiate a review of master planned development overlay zone at a public
hearing to determine whether or not its continuation in whole or part is in the
public interest, and if found not to be, shall recommend to the city council
that the master planned development adoption ordinance be repealed. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.09, 6-16-2021)
10-15C-13: NIGHTLY RENTAL DEVELOPMENT MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Maximum number of Dwellings equal to 6% of the total ERU’s for the
whole MPDO development.
   B.   Primary Access to a Night Rental Development is directly from a major
arterial road as identified in the approved Final MPDO Plan.
   C.   Written consent from one hundred percent (100%) of the property owners
within the Nightly Rental Development, at the time ofapproving a final plat for
said Development.
   D.   All final plats for a Nightly Rental Development shall include a note
indicating that Dwellings may be rented on a short-term basis (less than 30
consecutive days).
   E.   The Nightly Rental Development shall have clearly defined boundaries
either through landscaping or other forms of screening which still promotes
walkability and access to areas outside of said Development.
   F.   At a minimum, Nightly Rental Developments shall provide usable
amenities in a central location, as follows:
      1.   One thousand (1,000) square feet of recreation or playground area
for the first five (5) Dwellings;
      2.   An additional two hundred (200) square feet for each Dwelling over
five (5) Dwellings;
      3.   The average width and length of each usable recreation or playground
area shall not be less than twenty feet (20);
      4.   All of the required area shall be usable common space accessible to
the entire Nightly Rental Development;
      5.   All required amenities shall be fully constructed prior to
construction of fifty percent (50%) of the total project units, or in
accordance with an executed development agreement with terms acceptable to the
City;
      6.   The number of amenities required depends on the size of the Nightly
Rental Development. All amenities shall be provided in accordance with the
following:
 
Dwellings Amenities
30-60     1
51 -121   2
121-200   3
201 - 300 4
 
      7.   The type of amenities required depends on the nature, size, and
density of the Nightly Rental Development. If multiple amenities are required,
the type shall vary and shall not entitle the development to additional density
bonuses.
      8.   The following is a table of acceptable recreation and enrichment
amenities within a Nightly Rental Development:
Amenities Notes
Amenities                                     Notes
Pool                                          400 sq ft minimum
Health and/or Fitness Facility                Indoor
Secured & Programmed Children Play Area        
In Ground Hot Tub                              
Community Garden                               
Perimeter Trail                                
Sport Court                                    
Keyed Bicycle Storage                         Indoor
Community Library                              
Office or Meeting/Social (Kitchen) Facilities Indoor
Social Area                                   Outdoor, 400 sq ft minimum
 
   G.   All required amenities shall be fully constructed prior to fifty
percent (50%) of the Dwellings in the Nightly Rental Development receiving a
certificate of occupancy.
   H.   In addition to amenities, a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the lot
area shall be maintained in landscaped area, and at least fifty percent (50%)
of the front setback area shall be maintained as landscaped area.
   I.   There shall be at least the following number of personnel for each
Nightly Rental Development to administer the Nightly Rental Development on a 24
hour a day, 7 day a week basis:
      1.   An onsite manager 24 hours per day with rights to access a Dwelling
at any time.
      2.   In addition to an onsite manager, at least one handyman stationed
within 30 minutes ‘ drive of the Nightly Rental Development that is available
24/7.
   J.   The Nightly Rental Development shall have an Owners Association and
governing documents containing recorded restrictive covenants which:
      1.   Expressly authorizes and discloses the ability to rent a Dwelling on
the basis of thirty consecutive (30) days or less.
      2.   Includes all the requirements of Subsections A-L, herein.
      3.   Requires each owner of a Dwelling utilizing the same as a Nightly
Rental to have all marketing, maintenance, cleaning and renting of their
Dwelling to be performed by a singular third party property management company
separate and distinct from a property management company that may manage the
Owners Association for the Nightly Rental Development.
      4.   Designates that the property management company performing the
marketing, maintenance, cleaning and renting of Dwellings on a basis of less
than thirty (30) consecutive days for owners must be selected by the
affirmative vote of the Owners Association as required by its governing
documents.
   K.   Dwellings within a Nightly Rental Development may not possess more than
4 bedrooms and shall provide off-street parking for at least 4 vehicles.
   L.   Dwellings within a Nightly Rental Development, ifrented on a basis of
less than 30 consecutive days, shall have a maximum occupancy of no more than
ten (10) persons.
   M.   Prohibit the parking of any vehicles, trailers or watercraft on streets
within the Nightly Rental Development.
   N.   The property management company providing the consolidated services of
marketing, maintenance, cleaning and renting ofDwellings on a basis of less
than thirty (30) consecutive days for owners shall maintain a license as may be
required by the Toquerville City Code to operate and manage a Nightly Rental
Development.
   O.   The developer of an MPDO shall make an election in their approved Final
MPDO Plan whether or not they will have one or more nightly rental developments
in their commercial planning areas or if they will simply allow nightly rentals
to occur on a disbursed basis in compliance with Section
10-17-3 of this Code. If a developer opts for one or more Nightly Rental
Developments, the culinary water connections within that MPDO shall not be
considered “Eligible Culinary Connections “ and shall not be used in
determining the maximum number of nightly rental business licenses within
Toquerville City limits. (Ord. 2023.12, 5-17-2023)
ARTICLE D. EI EXTRACTION INDUSTRIES OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
10-15D-1: Title
10-15D-2: Scope; Application
10-15D-3: Purpose And Intent
10-15D-4: Zoning Districts
10-15D-5: Use Regulations
10-15D-6: Site Development Plan
10-15D-7: Reclamation Plan
10-15D-8: Security For Completion
10-15D-9: Progress Report; Notice
10-15D-10: Standards For Operation
10-15D-11: Approval Process
10-15D-1: TITLE:
This article shall be entitled the EXTRACTION INDUSTRIES OVERLAY ZONE
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15D-2: SCOPE; APPLICATION:
   A.   This extraction industries overlay zone will provide for the excavation
of clay, soil, granite, flagstone, slate, shale, limestone, sand or gravel, and
other similar extraction of natural resources from the land by excavating,
stripping, leveling or other compatible extraction processes; and further allow
for and regulate the processing of extracted materials on or off site within
the city for commercial purposes.
   B.   All permitted extraction uses are considered conditional uses subject
to the restrictions herein, and all other conditional use procedures specified
in any other applicable city ordinances. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15D-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The general purpose of the extraction industries overlay zone is to
provide for the operation of extraction industries in the city, while being
careful to regulate the operation of such industries in such a way as to
minimize the adverse impacts created by the operation of such industrial uses,
particularly on properties in close proximity to residential zoning districts
and to provide regulatory standards and procedures to ensure the reclamation of
the extraction industry sites upon completion of the extraction processes.
   B.   Standards for development contained herein are intended specifically to
accomplish the following purposes:
      1.   To minimize the adverse effects of development and operation of
extraction industries on neighboring properties.
      2.   To preserve and/or reclaim visual and aesthetic qualities of
properties in which the extraction industries will operate, which are vital to
the aesthetic quality of the city and quality of life of its residents.
      3.   To ensure adequate security is posted to ensure the successful and
timely reclamation of properties in which extraction industries operate at the
conclusion of such development and operation. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15D-4: ZONING DISTRICTS:
The extraction industry overlay zone shall be applied and permitted only in the
BMP Business Manufacturing Zone and the M-1 Light Industrial Zone as
established in chapter 13, article A and chapter 14, article A of this title.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.13, 8-7-2024)
10-15D-5: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Conditional Uses: All uses in this overlay zone shall be considered
conditional and may include the following, subject to appropriate conditions
approved by the city council based on recommendations of the planning
commission:
Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate to a
permitted use.
Agricultural activities.
Sand, gravel, rock, and clay and similar natural resource extraction mining,
and quarry activities.
Any combination of the above uses and MU-20 zone permitted uses that are
determined by the planning commission to be compatible and in harmony with the
intent of this zone, according to the designated and approved site development
plan.
   B.   Extraction/Excavation Permit:
      1.   An extraction/excavation conditional use permit is required for any
extractive or mining operation permitted under this article. The permit is
issued to the owner and operator of the property by the city council. The
permit shall delineate the land area to which it is applicable. The permit
shall also make specific reference to the requirements and specifications of
the approved site development plan and the reclamation plan, and may include
any conditions the city council deems reasonable and necessary to accomplish
the purposes of this article. This permit will be renewed on an annual basis
following the submission to and review of the annual progress report by the
planning commission. The city staff will conduct all necessary inspections to
assist the planning commission with its annual review and evaluation process.
      2.   The applicant for an extraction/excavation permit shall prepare a
site development plan and reclamation plan and application in accordance with
the provisions of this article. The application shall also provide the
following information as part of the permit:
         a.   Name and address of the property owner (applicant);
         b.   Legal description of the property to be subject to the permit;
         c.   Current land use and applicable zoning;
         d.   Company name and address of the firm retained to undertake the
extraction operation, if different from the property owner (applicant); and
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
         e.   The applicant shall submit the application fee, which shall be
established by the city council. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-15D-6: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   All applications for an extraction conditional use shall be
accompanied by a site development plan with written text for the entire
property proposed to be developed. All drawings required below shall be
prepared by a professional engineer, licensed in the state.
      2.   The planning commission shall review the information, data and
proposals contained in the plan requirements provided under subsection B of
this section for the purpose of identifying any adverse effects and impacts
created by the development and operation of the proposed use; and to further
evaluate the plans and proposals to mitigate, eliminate or repair the adverse
effects and impacts.
   B.   Plan Requirements:
      1.   General site plan. This includes all property included in the
project showing any buildings, parking areas and roadways.
      2.   Excavation map. This should be a topographic map, at a scale of one
inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'), to a maximum contour interval of four
feet (4'). This map should include a general depiction of the area at least
five hundred feet (500') beyond the proposed excavation and showing the
location of the operations and proposed haul roads. This map should identify
the phases of the excavation, the planned depth and the location of stockpiles,
mine tailings, milling and processing systems, and cross sections of the
excavation site in areas of greatest material displacement. The number of
required cross sections shall be dependent upon the size and topography of the
excavation site.
      3.   Development schedule. A text summary of the estimated development
schedule and time frame shall be submitted. This text should outline the
estimated operational life of the project, and should summarize phased
extraction plans and corresponding phased reclamation and estimated time frames
for each phase. Any such phased extraction shall require posting of adequate
security for completion of the required reclamation, before any subsequent
phase of extraction shall begin.
      4.   Roadway plan. This should address the anticipated impact on existing
streets, reflecting the trip generation rate, along with the planned
development of new streets, including all proposed haul roads and the access
for such roads to any state roads. Detail should be provided on the type and
number of heavy equipment to be used, assuming full time operation and hauling
at forty (40) hours per week and the individual gross vehicular weight. Show
travel impact, etc., on any existing city streets, including amount of traffic
and proposed mitigation of haul stress on improved city roadways. Additional
improvements to, or replacement of, surfaces and subsurfaces may be required as
a condition of approval.
      5.   Existing facilities plan. This shows the location of all utility
lines and facilities, if any, including, but not limited to, water, sewer,
power, cable television, natural gas and telephone within the project. This
plan shall indicate the point of connection with municipal service lines.
      6.   Nuisance mitigation plan. This shall outline measures to control and
limit dust, noise, vibration, smoke and odor created on the site and any
related activities both during actual extraction operations and during idle
time. This plan should reflect the requirement that all access and haul roads
on the site shall be maintained in a dust free condition by impervious
surfacing or some other treatment approved by the city.
      7.   Drainage plan. This shall show all natural and modified surface and
subsurface drainage systems and the plans to provide erosion protection to the
site during operations. This plan shall include provisions for the mitigation
of erosion damage on site and within five hundred feet (500') of the project
boundary. Additionally, the plan shall disclose the anticipated rate on a daily
basis of water consumption, wastewater discharge, drainage volumes, and source
of disposal of water to be used in the operation, and shall demonstrate
compliance with all applicable state, federal and county water conservancy
district regulations governing wastewater discharge.
      8.   Soils geology report.
         a.   This shall be prepared by a geologist and/or geotechnical
engineer specializing in soil mechanics and licensed by the state. It shall be
based upon geological evaluations, test borings and excavations in a number and
at locations that the author of the report shall demonstrate are sufficient to
accurately identify and analyze soil types and geologic features within the
planned extraction area. Reduced costs shall not be justification for more
distant or convenient locations for excavations and borings. Additional soil/
geologic investigations may be required if the report indicates the presence of
conditions that, if not corrected or adequately addressed through design, could
lead to unacceptable damage, erosion or soil movement during excavation
operations or resulting from roadway construction on the parcel or contiguous
lots and parcels. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, expansive
soils, high water table, soluble mineral veins, slope instability, buried
slides, buried stream channels, fault zones.
         b.   The investigation shall include visual appraisal of adjacent
lots/parcels for surface geologic/topographic conditions, which could threaten
the proposed extraction site, or could be threatened or degraded by the
proposed extraction.
         c.   The soil/geologic report shall also include the following:
            (1)   Slope stability analysis. Conclusions and recommendations
concerning the effects of material removal, introduction of water, ground
shaking and erosion on slope stability, and recommendation for the protection
and preservation of remaining slopes and hillsides after extraction is
completed;
            (2)   The location and yield of springs and seepage sites, if any,
within the project;
            (3)   The development of a complete soils profile identifying the
soils to the depth or level of estimated excavation that will constitute the
exposed surface soils at the completion of the extraction excavation operation;
and
            (4)   Recommendation for corrective action or design specifications
intended to prevent potential dangers identified in the soils investigation,
particularly with regard to the mitigation of any impacts on contiguous
property.
      9.   Reclamation plan. A reclamation plan as outlined in section
10-15D-7 of this article shall be submitted.
      10.   Other reports. Other reports as deemed necessary by the planning
commission for a requested use to assure the health and safety on the project,
and the health, safety and welfare of neighboring residents, or general public,
may be required from the applicant by written specification. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-
18-2012)
10-15D-7: RECLAMATION PLAN:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   All applications for extraction use sites must include a reclamation
plan showing how the site will be reclaimed upon completion of extraction
activities to allow for the productive and compatible reuse of the site. All
drawings required in this section shall be prepared by a professional engineer,
licensed in the state. The plan will be designed to eliminate waste heaps,
prevent shallow stagnant bodies of water, small unusable remnants of land,
erosion and barren slopes normally associated with open pit operations. The
plan shall provide a timetable for all reclamation processes. This may be
modified by the planning commission when remaining pits are to be used to
provide stormwater detention facilities, in accordance with approved stormwater
retention plans.
      2.   The planning commission shall apply the same review and analysis to
the reclamation plan requirements as set forth under this article.
   B.   Reclamation Plan Requirements: The reclamation plan shall include in
text with appropriate maps and drawings, the following:
      1.   Reclamation timetable.
         a.   The reclamation of excavation sites shall be carried out
simultaneously with the excavation of the mineral resource or may be reclaimed
in phases as approved by the planning commission and city council. Excavation
shall be planned so as to progressively develop the proposed final landforms by
grading and stockpiling overburden materials in areas designated for future
landforms according to the approved reclamation plan. Such areas are to be
seeded and planted immediately after final reclamation grading is completed or
within appropriate planting seasons, but in any case, the grading and planting
shall be completed within one year of completion of the phased extraction under
the approved plan, unless a subdivision preliminary plan has been approved
which includes an alternative landscaping plan and timetable which is approved
by the planning commission and city council.
         b.   If extraction or reclamation is proposed to be phased, no
extraction shall begin in subsequent phases until extraction is completed in
any prior phase and appropriate reclamation security has been posted for any
such subsequent phase.
         c.   Any approved phased extraction and reclamation shall be
incorporated into the extraction/excavation permit and shall be subject to
review each year. Failure to comply with reclamation timetables and conditions
may result in suspension of the extraction/excavation conditional use permit
pending completion of such remediation conditions as may be imposed by the
planning commission based on annual review.
      2.   Topographic map. This shall reflect the phases of reclamation and
the final site reclamation, including the approximate final finished grade of
the site and all slopes. The map will be prepared on a scale of one inch equals
two hundred feet (1" = 200'), with a maximum contour interval of two feet (2').
This map should represent the site and all property within five hundred feet
(500') of the project boundary.
      3.   Grading plan. This shall show the areas to be reclaimed and the
proposed finished grade and the method by which the rehabilitation is to be
accomplished; all restoration material used in the final grading of the site
shall be free from refuse or toxic contaminants and shall be compacted as much
as is practicable. Final soil depths and types shall be appropriate for the
future use, as identified in the development plan.
      4.   Revegetation plan. This plan shall include specifications, including
the plant type, size, quantities, locations, installation of topsoil,
specifications for plant applications, mulching and type of irrigation to be
used.
      5.   Drainage/hydrology plan. This shall show the hydrological
characteristics of the site after reclamation, including the creation or
modification of floodplain, erosion characteristics, drainage patterns and
wetlands.
   C.   Building And Equipment Removal: Following the completion of excavation
and processing activities, all buildings, equipment and utilities used in the
administration and management of the operations shall be removed. This removal
shall be completed within the first ninety (90) days following the completion
of mining operations.
   D.   Plan Modification: Plan modifications may be submitted any time during
the reclamation process. The modifications must be submitted to the planning
commission with adequate documentation supporting the request. If the planning
commission approves the modification, then the amended reclamation plan will
govern the final process. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15D-8: SECURITY FOR COMPLETION:
   A.   Amount Of Security: The amount of security to be posted by the
developer shall be equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
amount reasonably estimated by the city engineer as being necessary to complete
the reclamation and site improvements, if any, as shown on the approved
development and reclamation plans. If reclamation is approved in phases, the
amount of security may be posted by phase, however, the developer shall not
begin extraction/excavation in subsequent phases until the full amount of the
security for any such approved, subsequent phase has been posted.
   B.   Security Agreement; Terms: Before issuing or renewing an extraction/
excavation permit, the permittee shall execute a security agreement and provide
acceptable security in a form approved by the city attorney as provided below.
The security agreement prepared by city attorney shall include, without
limitation, the following terms and conditions:
      1.   Incorporation by reference of the final site development plan and
all data required by this article; and the approved reclamation plan with any
conditions which is used to compute the cost of the reclamation by the city
engineer.
      2.   Completion of the reclamation within a period of time not to exceed
one year from the date of completion of the phased extraction. The time period
for the completion of the required reclamation/improvements may only be
extended in the following manner:
         a.   Upon approval of the planning commission, the time period may be
extended for good cause an additional one year from the expiration date of the
original security agreement;
         b.   Said approval shall be in a written form, signed by the mayor as
chief administrative officer and the planning commission chairperson.
      3.   The reclamation shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city
engineer and according to city specifications as established under this article
and/or other applicable city ordinances, and accepted by the city.
      4.   The release of security shall be under the exclusive control of the
city. The security proceeds may be released only upon written approval of the
mayor.
      5.   The security proceeds may be reduced upon request of the developer
as the improvements/reclamation are completed. The amount of reduction shall be
approved by the mayor and city council on advice from the planning commission
and city engineer, following inspection of the work by the city engineer. Such
requests may be made only once every thirty (30) days, and no reductions shall
be authorized until such time as the public works department and/or city
engineer has inspected the reclamation/improvements and found them to be in
compliance with city specifications. All reductions shall be granted only by
the written authorization signed by the mayor.
      6.   If the security proceeds become inadequate to pay the actual cost of
the completion of the reclamation/improvements according to city specifications
for whatever reason, including previous reductions, then the owner/developer
and/or permittee shall be responsible for the deficiency and no further permits
of any type shall be issued until the reclamation/improvements are completed or
a new security agreement has been approved and executed to ensure completion of
the remaining reclamation/improvements.
      7.   If, upon written demand of the city after expiration of the security
time period, the security proceeds are not transferred to the city within
thirty (30) days of the demand, then the city costs of obtaining the proceeds,
including the city attorney fees and costs or any outside attorney fees and
court costs paid by applicant may be deducted from the security proceeds.
      8.   Upon receipt of the security proceeds after the expiration of the
reclamation time period, the costs of completion shall include reimbursement to
the city for the costs of administration of the completion of the improvements,
including inspection costs, and other applicable costs and fees, including
attorney fees incurred by the city in the enforcement of the security agreement
and reclamation plan.
      9.   The owner/developer and permittee shall hold the city harmless from
any and all liability that may arise as a result of the improvements which are
installed until such time as the city accepts the improvements.
      10.   All reclamation/improvements required under this article shall be
installed by a contractor or subcontractor licensed by the state.
   C.   Form Of Security: The required security shall be one of the types
provided under subsection 10-5-3B of this title.
   D.   Payment Of Interest: Any interest accruing on escrowed funds shall,
unless expended for completion of site improvements required, inure to the
benefit of the developer and not to the City. The City shall not be required to
pay interest to the developer on any funds escrowed for this purpose.
   E.   Release Of Funds/Retainage: The City shall relinquish funds held or
security posted for the purpose of securing the payment for reclamation and
site improvement work performed according to the development plans as that work
is completed. The City shall release funds equal to the actual cost of
performing the work as the work progresses, minus ten percent (-10%). The ten
percent (10%) retainage shall be held for one growing season following
completion of the reclamation work to ensure successful reclamation. Upon
satisfactory completion of all required reclamation and site improvement work
and successful germination and survival of reclamation revegetation, all funds
shall be released to the developer.
   F.   Modification Of Plans/Increased Security: If any approved modification
of the reclamation plans, as provided herein, increases the cost of required
site improvements, additional security must be provided by the developer to
cover the increased costs.
   G.   Phased Projects: Site improvements and reclamation work applicable to
each phase of a phased project shall be completed or security for completion
provided prior to commencing work on any subsequent phase. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-
2012)
10-15D-9: PROGRESS REPORT; NOTICE:
The permittee conducting excavation operations shall file an operations and
progress report with the City at the end of each calendar year. This report
shall summarize the year's extraction activities pursuant to the approved
development and reclamation plans. This progress report shall include a current
site plan, indicating the current extent of operations, reclamation completed
and updates on significant issues raised either by the permittee or the City.
The progress report shall include calculations by a licensed land surveyor or
engineer indicating the volume of material excavated during the calendar year.
At completion of any reclamation phase as provided in the reclamation plan, the
permittee shall give written notice to the City and request inspection by the
City Engineer. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-15D-10: STANDARDS FOR OPERATION:
   A.   Setbacks:
      1.   No part of an excavation operation or access road, parking area,
office building or crushing, screening, washing, mixing or other type of
processing operation shall be permitted closer than three hundred feet (300')
to a residential zone boundary or a subdivision; or within one hundred feet
(100') of a public highway right-of-way, except for accessory access roads.
      2.   The Planning Commission shall be authorized to consider
modifications to the setback minimums set forth in subsection A1 of this
section, when the character of the terrain, the ownership of land, location of
surrounding development or other special conditions would justify such
modification. However, in no case shall the required distances for any
excavation or accessory structure be less than one hundred feet (100') from a
residential zone.
   B.   Fencing: Areas of excavation with serious or hazardous conditions shall
be reasonably fenced. Fences shall not be placed closer than ten feet (10')
from the edge of any cut slope.
   C.   Grading/Excavation:
      1.   All grading shall comply with standard engineering specifications
for slope stabilization in accordance with the latest approved reclamation
plans, IBC, appendix J, "excavation and grading", and all other applicable City
ordinances. Slopes shall be maintained in a manner that will prevent erosion
damage on adjacent properties.
      2.   Grading shall comply with approved grading plans for the excavation
and reclamation activities.
   D.   Groundwater Contamination:
      1.   Extractive operations, drainage, materials storage and use, site
access, access to roadways that cross waterways, fueling procedures,
reclamation activities and postreclamation uses shall be strictly controlled so
as to minimize any possible contamination of the groundwater or surface water.
      2.   Standards adopted by the City, in groundwater protection ordinances,
or by the Washington County Health Department, Washington County water
conservancy district and/or the state, and federal regulations, shall be used
to determine the specific controls, programs, safeguards, restrictions and
monitoring required for a specific site. The most restrictive standards shall
apply.
      3.   The washing of sand and gravel or other extracted materials shall be
done so as to prevent the discharge of wastewater directly into adjacent
natural watercourses or onto any public or private roads or any private
property without the consent of the property owner.
   E.   Hours Of Operation:
      1.   Excavation operations shall not begin before seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M., and shall not continue after the hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. No
operations shall take place on Sunday or legal holidays.
      2.   Operations that are isolated from other nonobjecting property owners
and have access to major transportation routes with little disturbance to
residential neighborhoods, may have modified hours of operation as approved by
the planning commission.
   F.   Landscaping; Screening Accessory Uses:
      1.   Approved reclamation landscaping plans shall be prepared to screen
the accessory uses of resource extraction and processing activities from public
streets and abutting properties.
      2.   All planting shall conform with the approved reclamation landscape
plan and specifications and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing
condition.
      3.   The planning commission may consider the use of topsoil berms as a
screening device. Topsoil berms, when authorized as a screening device, shall
be maintained in such a way so as to minimize erosion and dust. The planning
commission may require berms that are expected to remain in place for more than
a year to be landscaped in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the
planning commission.
      4.   Landscaping should be situated at the perimeters of the site
adjacent to uses determined by the planning commission to be incompatible with
the excavation operation.
   G.   Nuisance Abatement:
      1.   All equipment on and off site, utilized in the extraction and/or
processing operations, shall be operated and maintained so as to minimize the
noise and vibration from the site.
      2.   Access and haul roads on the site shall be maintained in a dust free
condition by surfacing or other treatment (approved by the city).
      3.   Soil berms, landscaping and other techniques should be used to
accomplish the objective of reducing the impact of nuisances created by the
project on adjacent property. The permittee shall employ all reasonable means
to reduce and mitigate the creation of nuisances, such as dust, noise, smoke,
lights and odor.
      4.   The permittee shall continue dust control procedures as deemed
necessary by the planning commission during periods of nonoperation as well.
   H.   Related Manufacturing Operations: The manufacture of concrete building
blocks or other similar products, the production or manufacture of lime
products, the production of ready mixed concrete and concrete products, the
production of asphalt mixes and any similar production or manufacturing
processes that might be related to the excavation operation shall not be
permitted, except as otherwise provided for in this title. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-
2012)
10-15D-11: APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Application; Fee: The applicant shall submit an application and fee
along with the site development plan and reclamation plan at least twenty (20)
working days prior to the regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. The
applicant shall submit seven (7) copies of the application materials.
   B.   Review: The planning staff shall contact interested department
personnel of city and other public agencies for review purposes. The planning
staff shall furnish to the applicant any comments regarding the site
development plan and reclamation plan which may assist the applicant in their
preparation of the project presentation for the planning commission.
   C.   Planning Commission Review: The completed application shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for review pursuant to the conditional
permit review process under chapter 20 of this title.
   D.   Recommendation To City Council: The Planning Commission may recommend
that the City Council approve, modify or deny any application for an
extraction/excavation permit conditional use permit pursuant to the
requirements of this title. In recommending approval of any extraction
excavation permit, the Planning Commission shall impose such requirements and
conditions as required by law and any additional conditions as deemed
reasonable and necessary for the protection of adjacent properties, public
improvements and the public welfare.
   E.   Requirements For Approval: The Planning Commission shall not recommend
approval of an extraction/excavation conditional use permit unless it is
clearly shown:
      1.   Such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case,
be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements in the
vicinity.
      2.   The proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions
specified in this article for such use.
      3.   Any impacts created by the proposed use, such as dust, noise,
vibration, water discharge, drainage and haul stress on improved City roadways,
will be reasonably mitigated under the proposed site development plan, together
with any conditions imposed by the City under the extraction/excavation
conditional use permit.
      4.   The proposed use will conform to the intent of the City general
plan.
   F.   Open, Public Meeting: Upon recommendation for approval to the City
Council, the application for conditional permit shall be placed on the City
Council agenda for its regular meeting and shall be reviewed in open meeting by
the City Council. The City Council may, upon review, set the matter for a
public hearing with appropriate public notice at least fourteen (14) days prior
to such public hearing, if the Council finds, based on its review, that such
hearing is appropriate and necessary. Following a public hearing, or if no
public hearing is convened, the City Council may approve, approve with
modifications or additional conditions, or deny any application for an
extraction/excavation conditional use permit. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   G.   Appeal: The applicant may appeal the final action of the City Council
to the Appeal Authority pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-703 and
pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 2018.07,
12-13-2018)
   H.   Procedure On Appeal: Appeals of a final decision regarding the
application for an extraction/excavation conditional use shall follow the
procedure outlined in section
10-3-2 of this title. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 16
SENSITIVE LANDS
SECTION:
10-16-1: Introduction
10-16-2: Statement And Applicability
10-16-3: Purpose
10-16-1: INTRODUCTION:
Toquerville is located in a unique area of Utah where sagebrush and black brush
of the cooler Great Basin Desert (ecosystem) merge with yuccas and cactus of
the hot Mojave Desert (ecosystem) and pinions and junipers of the high Colorado
Plateau (ecosystem). This rare collision of three (3) ecosystems results in a
delicate biological area called an ecotone. Plants and animals common to the
Mojave Desert ecosystem can be seen in the same location with those of the
Great Basin Desert ecosystem and the Colorado Plateau ecosystem. The area is
biologically rich with a large variety of plants and animals. In addition,
several species, such as the shivwits milkvetch and the sandpaper bush are
found here in this ecotone and nowhere else in the world. Over millions of
years the cracking, dropping and thrusting of the earth's surface created a
structural diversity of hills, ledges, soil types, sandstone outcroppings and
lava boulders in southern Utah. The water activity of Ash Creek, LaVerkin Creek
and other tributaries and washes carved and enriched the area leaving it with
stunning views and surroundings.
The lands of Toquerville vary in biological sensitivity, ecological diversity
and resiliency. In order to be accountable and properly manage and protect
these differences, the sensitive lands ordinance (SLO) has been set up to
oversee development and promote public health and safety. For example, natural
area open space (NAOS) may be one of the appropriate development tools utilized
to ensure specific environmental features, including native vegetation, washes,
ridgelines, peaks and viewscapes are protected. This chapter is not intended to
deny reasonable use of the land, but rather guide its use in ways that are
sustainable while recognizing the unique opportunities and responsibilities
this setting provides. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-16-2: STATEMENT AND APPLICABILITY:
The sensitive lands ordinance (SLO) is an overlay district. The underlying
zoning districts that define the allowed uses and development standards for
each property still exist (residential, commercial, etc.) and are modified by
the specific provisions included with this chapter. Where there is a conflict
between the regulations of this chapter and an underlying district, this
chapter will take precedence. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-16-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the sensitive lands regulations is to identify and protect
environmentally sensitive lands in the city and to promote the public safety
and welfare by providing appropriate and reasonable controls for the
development of such lands. The objectives to be achieved include the following:
   A.   Protect people and property from hazardous conditions characteristic of
sensitive land and their development. Such hazards include rockfalls, rolling
boulders, other unstable slopes, flooding, flood related mudslides, sinking,
erosion and sedimentation.
   B.   Protect and preserve significant natural and visual resources. Such
resources include, but are not limited to, major boulder and lava outcroppings,
large boulders, major ridges and peaks, prime wildlife habitat and corridors,
unique vegetation specimens, significant washes and significant riparian
habitats.
   C.   Protect renewable and nonrenewable resources, such as water quality,
air quality, soils and natural vegetation from incompatible land uses.
   D.   Minimize the public costs of providing public services and facilities
in sensitive land areas, such as streets, water, sewer, emergency services,
sanitation services, parks and recreation. Costs associated with the design and
development of infrastructure in environmentally sensitive areas can be higher
than costs in other areas of the city due to the unique and fragile nature of
such lands.
   E.   Conserve the character of the natural landscape. Guide the location and
distribution of meaningful on lot and common tract open space and protect
sensitive features to sustain the unique desert character found in sensitive
land areas.
   F.   Recognize and conserve the economic, educational, recreational,
historic, archaeological and other cultural assets of the environment that
provide amenities and services for residents and visitors.
   G.   Assure that decisions regarding development in sensitive areas are
based on complete and accurate information about the environmental conditions,
including drainage features and probable development impacts.
   H.   Encourage innovative planning, design and construction techniques for
development in sensitive areas to minimize visual and site impacts of
development.
   I.   Retain the visual character of the natural landscape to the greatest
extent feasible by regulating building mass, location, colors and materials;
grading location, design and treatment; and landscaping design, materials and
restoration of cuts and fills.
   J.   Maintain significant open spaces which provide view corridors and land
use buffers, protect landmarks, large boulders, lava rock and sandstone
outcroppings, predominant lava rubble fields, and prime wash habitats by
preserving these features in their natural state to maintain the city's unique
desert ecotone setting.
   K.   Protect sensitive lands, while also recognizing the legitimate
expectations of property owners and city's general plan. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-
2012)
ARTICLE A. HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
10-16A-1: Purpose
10-16A-2: Definitions
10-16A-3: Zone Established
10-16A-4: Hillside Review Board
10-16A-5: Density Standards
10-16A-6: Slope And Slope Areas Determined
10-16A-7: Permit Requirements
10-16A-8: Application Reports
10-16A-9: Street Design
10-16A-10: Building Setbacks
10-16A-11: Restoration Bond
10-16A-12: Appeals
10-16A-13: Verification Of Compliance
10-16A-14: Exhibits Incorporated
10-16A-15: Violations
10-16A-1: PURPOSE:
The city finds that the health, safety and the general public welfare of the
residents of the city will be promoted by establishing standards for the
development and excavation of hillside and slope areas located in the city so
as to minimize soil and slope instability and erosion, to minimize the adverse
effects of grading, cut and fill operations, to preserve the character of the
city hillsides, and to otherwise supplement and amplify the city subdivision
and zoning ordinances. The provisions herein are designated to accomplish the
following:
   A.   Prohibit development of uses which would likely result in a hazardous
situation due to slope instability, rockfalls or excessive soil erosion.
   B.   Provide for safe vehicular circulation and access.
   C.   Encourage the location, design and development of building sites in a
manner that will minimize the scarring and erosion effects of cutting, filling
and grading of hillsides.
   D.   Encourage preservation of open space by encouraging clusters or other
design techniques to preserve the natural terrain.
   E.   Where hillside excavation does occur, require that buildings be located
in the cut area to minimize the visual effects of scarring. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-
18-2012)
10-16A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
CUT: Land surface which is reshaped by man through the removal of soil, rock or
other materials.
DEVELOPMENT: The carrying out of any building activity or clearing of land as
an adjunct of construction.
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR: Considered to be subdivision platting, including townhomes
and condominiums, multi-family residential projects, commercial and industrial
building.
DEVELOPMENT PARCEL: Any quantity of land capable of being described with such
definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is
designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit,
or which has been used or developed as a unit.
EXCAVATION: Any disturbance to the ground, including, but not limited to,
clearing, grubbing, rock removal, cutting, tunneling, drilling or any other
activity which alters the natural ground.
EXCAVATION, MAJOR: A vertical cut of more than four feet (4'), or disturbance
of more than one acre of surface area.
EXCAVATION, MINOR: A vertical cut of four feet (4') or less, or a disturbance
of less than one acre of surface area.
FILL: The deposit of soil, rock or other materials placed by man.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER: A person with a four (4) year degree in civil
engineering or engineering geology from an accredited university who, through
training and experience, is able to assure that geological factors affecting
engineering works are recognized, adequately interpreted and presented for use
in engineering practice and for the protection of the public.
LEDGE: The first substantial abrupt change in slope along the top edge of a
plateau or ridgeline.
SLOPE: A vertical rise in feet measured over a horizontal distance, expressed
as a percentage, measured generally at right angles to contour lines.
TABLELAND: Land where the slope in any direction is less than ten percent
(10%). (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-16A-3: ZONE ESTABLISHED:
   A.   A hillside development overlay zone is established, which shall be an
overlay zone of the zoning classifications in the zoning ordinance. In the
event of conflict between the provisions of the existing zoning classification,
building code or subdivision ordinance and the overlay zone, the most
restrictive provisions shall apply. Areas hereafter annexed to the city shall
be affected by the hillside development overlay zone at the time of annexation
in the manner then determined by the city engineer and reflected in appropriate
amendment to the zone map referred to herein.
   B.   Property within the hillside development overlay zone shall conform to
the provisions of this article.
   C.   The hillside development overlay zone shall be described as any
hillside within the boundaries of the city with a slope of more than ten
percent (10%). (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-16A-4: HILLSIDE REVIEW BOARD:
   A.   Established: There is hereby established a hillside review board for
the city.
   B.   Membership: The hillside review board shall consist of the planning
commission.
   C.   Quorum, Vote Required: A quorum of the hillside review board shall be
three (3) members; and a majority vote of a quorum shall be required for a
decision of any matter before the board. If a quorum is not present, no meeting
shall be held, and any items of business shall be continued to the next meeting
of the board.
   D.   Responsibilities: The hillside review board shall have the following
responsibilities:
      1.   Review proposed major developments as defined in section
10-16A-7 of this article which are on slopes exceeding ten percent (10%) and
make a recommendation for approval, conditional approval or denial to the city
council. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-16A-5: DENSITY STANDARDS:
   A.   In furtherance of the purposes set forth in this article, lot size and
density within the hillside development overlay zone shall comply with the
following schedule. Except as permitted by subsection
10-16A-5.C. below, Any portion of a development parcel having a slope greater
than thirty percent (30%) shall not be included in the calculation of the area
of such parcel for the purposes of determining conformity with the minimum lot
parcel size and density requirements below:
 
                      Minimum Lot Size For Single- Maximum Number Of Dwelling
Percent Natural Slope Family Residential And       Units Per Acre In Zones R-1-
                      Commercial                   12, R-1-20 And A-1
0 - 10                See existing zone
11 - 16               20,000 square feet           2 if zoning permits
17 - 23               40,000 square feet           1 if zoning permits
24 - 30               5 acres                      1 per 5 acres if permitted
30+                   Development not permitted
 
   B.   The contour intervals, maps and calculations required in section
10-16A-6 of this article shall be prepared in a report by a professional civil
engineer, which shall be submitted with applications for permits or subdivision
approvals. Each report shall bear said engineer’s verification as to the
accuracy of the report.
   C.   If MPDO Overlay Zoning is applied for pursuant to section
10-15C-1 of this Title and the proposed MPDO plan: a) contains gross total
acreage in excess of 400 acres, and b) proposes open space 75% or more in
addition to that which is minimally required by section
10-15C-5.I., then base density for the area shall be calculated using the gross
total acreage regardless of whether any portion of the area contains slopes
greater than 30%. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2020.15, 7-16-2020)
10-16A-6: SLOPE AND SLOPE AREAS DETERMINED:
   A.   Applicability: Slope shall be determined on an individual development
parcel basis as an average percent natural slope for purposes of density
limitations. Except as permitted by subsection
10-16A-5.C. of this Title, all property with a slope greater than thirty
percent (30%) shall be excluded from the calculation of the development parcel
area for purposes of determining density limitations.
   B.   Procedure: The location of the natural ten percent (10%), sixteen
percent (16%), twenty four percent (24%) and thirty percent (30%) slopes for
the purposes of this article shall be determined using the following procedure:
      1.   Preparation Of Contour Maps: Current contour maps shall be prepared
and certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor showing contours
at intervals no greater than five feet (5') (the "contour map") drawn at one
inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') scale maximum.
      2.   Verification Through Field Surveys: Field surveys may be required of
the applicant by the city engineer to verify the accuracy of the contour lines
shown on the contour map. The contour map shall identify profile lines, which
shall be used for performing the field survey. Profile lines shall be
perpendicular to contour lines and in no case occur at intervals greater than
one hundred fifty feet (150') apart or seventy five feet (75') from a property
line.
      3.   Determination Of Slope Areas For Density Calculations: Using the
contour maps, slopes shall be calculated in intervals no greater than forty
feet (40') along profile lines. Points identified as slopes of ten percent
(10%), sixteen percent (16%), twenty four percent (24%) and thirty percent
(30%) shall be located on the contour map and connected by a continuous line.
That area bounded by said lines and intersecting property lines shall be used
for determining dwelling unit density. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord.
2020.15, 7-16-2020)
10-16A-7: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: All major development on slopes in excess of ten
percent (10%) or within a geologic hazard area shall require a hillside
development permit granted by the city council prior to any excavation or
construction activity. The hillside review board shall first review all
proposed major development for compliance with this and other city ordinances
and standards, including appendix J of the international building code, and
make a recommendation to the planning commission and city council for approval,
conditional approval or denial of the proposed development. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-
18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   Included Major Development: Major development shall include subdivision
platting, including townhomes and condominiums, multi-family residential
projects, commercial, industrial buildings or excavation which involves a
vertical cut greater than four feet (4') or involves excavating a surface area
larger than one acre.
   C.   Minor Excavation: Minor excavation involves vertical cuts of four feet
(4') or less and also disturbs less than one acre of surface area.
   D.   Exceptions: Permit approval under this section shall not be required
for projects which have received an excavation permit, or for preliminary plats
which have been approved by the city council prior to the adoption date hereof,
and permitting as required under the prior chapter shall continue to have
application. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-16A-8: APPLICATION REPORTS:
Any applicant for a major development, as defined in subsection 10-16A-7B of
this article, on slopes greater than ten percent (10%) within either the
hillside development overlay zone or within a geologic hazard area shall be
required to submit to the hillside review board the following technical
information and reports. Minor excavations shall require a grading permit and
must conform to requirements of appendix J of the international building code,
and if the slope involved is greater than ten percent (10%), the applicant
shall submit an earthmoving plan in conformity with subsection B of this
section, a landscape plan in conformity with subsection G of this section, a
restoration bond if necessary in the discretion of the city engineer, and such
other information as may be required by the city engineer, if any, prior to
issuance of a grading permit. Any applicant for a zone change on slopes greater
than ten percent (10%) shall submit a geology and soils report in conformity
with subsection F of this section, and any other reports required by the
hillside review board. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
   A.   Site Development Plans: Site development plans prepared by a licensed
engineer, architect or licensed landscape architect containing:
      1.   A grading or earthmoving plan showing existing and proposed contours
and cross sections. Accurate contours showing the topography of the existing
ground extending at least one hundred feet (100') outside of all boundary lines
of the site, or sufficient to show on and off site drainage. The slope of
proposed cuts and fills shall be shown on the grading plan. The height of any
cut or fill shall not exceed ten feet (10') when measured vertically from the
finished grade to the intersection of the slope with the natural undisturbed
ground. The combined height of cuts and fills shall not exceed twenty feet
(20') unless otherwise approved by the hillside review board. This approval is
subject to incorporating retaining, terracing and landscaping, or other
approved techniques, for stabilizing cuts and fills. All excavation and fills
shall conform to appendix J of the international building code.
      2.   Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage systems and
facilities, walls, cribbing or other erosion protection devices, to be
constructed in connection with, or as part of the proposed project, together
with a map showing the drainage area and estimated runoff of the area served by
any drainage systems or facilities.
      3.   The location of any existing and proposed streets, buildings or
structures, easements and drainage channels on the property.
      4.   Detailed site plans and elevation drawings showing location of all
structures and how and to what extent hillside cuts will be covered and/or
retained by proposed development. An earthmoving plan shall be prepared by a
licensed civil engineer for all major excavations, and an earthmoving plan for
excavations of a minor nature shall be prepared for approval by the city
engineer. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
      5.   Traffic study, if deemed necessary by the city engineer or historic
review board. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   Earthmoving Plan: An earthmoving plan prepared by a licensed
professional civil engineer, which shall include the following:
      1.   Property contours shall be shown at two foot (2') intervals for
tableland and five foot (5') intervals for steep slopes.
      2.   Special notes and details of the existing terrain shall be noted on
the required topographic information.
      3.   The dimensions, elevations and contours of any proposed earthmoving
shall be shown.
      4.   A description shall be included of the methods to be employed in
disposing of soil and other material removed, including the location of the
disposal site.
      5.   A schedule shall be included showing when each stage of the project
will be completed, including the estimated starting and completion dates.
   C.   Drainage Control Plan And Report: A drainage control plan and report
prepared by a licensed professional civil engineer registered in the state
shall be submitted with each application. The design of the drainage control
system shall be based upon the following criteria:
      1.   All drainage systems shall be separate and independent from the
sanitary sewer system.
      2.   Drainage and flood control shall be designed in conformance with the
city plan and approved by the city engineer.
      3.   Property development shall not cause a natural drainage channel to
be filled in, obstructed or diverted. When modification to a natural drainage
channel is proposed within the development, such changes will be addressed in
the drainage study and shown on the improvement plans, and the developer may be
required to dedicate right of way or record drainage easements for structures
and/or improvements needed to carry storm runoff in the event approval is given
for the proposed modifications.
      4.   The point of location where the natural drainage channel enters and
leaves the property may not be changed without approval of the city engineer.
      5.   All of the drainage basin upstream of the development shall be
considered to be fully developed in conformance with the city's current land
use general plan. Effects on the downstream property owners relative to
increased flood potential and nuisance water shall also be considered in the
design, including acquisition of easements or agreements where necessary, or
construction or modification of improvements where needed.
      6.   The developer shall provide the necessary means to assure drainage
within the property being developed by making use of existing facilities or
natural washes and constructing master planned improvements.
      7.   In general, it shall be required that each new development handle
its stormwater runoff in such manner that no net increase in storm runoff above
the natural state will occur on the downstream properties. In other words, the
preproject flows must not be exceeded by the postproject flows.
      8.   Streets are significant and important in urban drainage and full use
shall be made of streets for storm runoff up to reasonable limits, recognizing
that the primary purpose of streets is for traffic. Reasonable limits of the
use of streets for transportation of storm runoff shall be governed by the
below listed design criteria:
 
Street Classification          Maximum Encroachment
Hillside access/hillside local No curb overtopping. Flow may spread to crown.
Local road                     No curb overtopping. Flow spread must leave at
                               least 1 lane free of water.
                               No curb overtopping. Flow spread must leave 1
Minor collector                lane free of water in each direction (total, 2
                               lanes free of water).
 
When the above encroachment is exceeded, an independent stormwater system shall
be designed and constructed based on a 10-year storm.
      9.   The stormwater from a 100-year frequency storm shall be adequately
conveyed either within the limits of the street right of way or in storm drain
easements without creating flood hazards to dwellings.
      10.   When an underground pipe system is required, it shall be designed
to carry a 10-year storm. Major hydraulic structures shall be designed to carry
a 25-year storm. The minimum storm drain size shall be ten inches (10").
      11.   Unless specifically permitted, retention basins on hillsides shall
not be allowed.
      12.   Detention shall be allowed where it is compatible with all required
reports. Detention basins shall be used for the purpose of eliminating the
effects of the peak runoff of storms and releasing water flow at the
preproject, or approved rate.
      13.   Cross gutter drains on streets shall be avoided wherever possible.
They shall not be allowed on collector and higher order streets.
      14.   Drainage plans must be consistent with all other reports, i.e.,
geotechnical, soils, landscaping, etc.
      15.   When springs or other groundwater sources are found on the
developer's property, the construction of an underground pipe system to
eliminate the nuisance of this water will be required. Minimum pipe size shall
be ten inches (10"). Overland flow will not be allowed for water that is
continuously present.
      16.   All buildings shall be constructed outside the limits of and
eighteen inches (18") above the 100-year flood stage, except on drainages
subject to FEMA.
      17.   Necessary measures shall be taken to prevent erosion and scour at
all points throughout the development. It shall be mitigated at all points of
discharge and at the face of any cut or fill slope throughout the development.
      18.   During grading or construction on any property (including off site
construction), the developer shall control both water used for construction and
storm runoff in such a manner as to not affect any adjoining properties, nor
add silt or debris to any existing storm drain, wash, channel or roadway.
   D.   Drainage Plan: The drainage plan shall be approved by the city engineer
prior to final plat approval and issuance of a building permit.
   E.   Drainage Report (Study): The drainage report shall be approved by the
city engineer prior to final plat approval and issuance of building permits.
The report shall be prepared in conformance with guidelines provided by the
city engineer.
   F.   Geology And Soils Report: Geologic hazard areas, including, but not
limited to, unstable soil, groundwater or springs, mining shafts, tunnels or
natural holes or caves, cliffs and other features which might pose a hazard to
residents now or at any time in the future will require investigation and a
report prepared by a licensed professional engineer trained and experienced in
the practice of geotechnical engineering, and shall contain at least the
following information:
      1.   Slope stability analysis; conclusions and recommendations concerning
the effects of material removal, introduction of water, ground shaking, and
erosion on slope stability.
      2.   Foundation investigation; conclusions and recommendations concerning
the effects of soil conditions on foundation and structural stability,
including bearing capacity, sheer strength and shrink/swell potential of soils.
      3.   The location and yield of springs and seeps which shall be shown on
the site plan.
      4.   Structural features, including any geological limitations.
      5.   Existence of surface hazards, including potential for rockfalls and
toppling failures to cliffs, slopes and overhangs above the subject property.
      6.   Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic
conditions on the proposed development, together with recommendations
identifying the means proposed to minimize any hazard to life or property, or
adverse impact on the natural environment. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   G.   Landscape And Vegetation Plan: Prior to final plat or site plan
approval of a project, a landscape plan, prepared by a licensed landscape
contractor or a landscape architect, in conjunction with the overall site plan,
must be submitted for approval. The plan shall outline areas being excavated
and filled and describe in detail how the developer will restore or replant
these areas. The plan shall specify types of retention being used, together
with sprinkler plans and water usage methods suitable to the soil of the
project.
   H.   Other Information: Other reports, plans and information as may be
deemed necessary by the hillside review board or city engineer may be requested
as a condition of the application procedures. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd.
2014 Code)
10-16A-9: STREET DESIGN:
The following standards apply to public and private streets:
   A.   Street Grades: All street grades shall be a maximum of twelve percent
(12%). However, when conditions can be made more desirable by exceeding twelve
percent (12%) and produce less disturbance to the existing terrain, along with
improvement in safety features, the city engineer may allow grades to fifteen
percent (15%) based on the merits of each case.
   B.   Intersections: Where at all possible, all intersections shall be ninety
degree (90°) angles. In the event an acute angle intersection is required, it
can be mitigated by realigning to achieve a ninety degree (90°) intersection
using a fifty foot (50') section prior to the PC of the curve or a landing area
design in which a vehicle is brought ninety degrees (90°) to the intersecting
road. (See exhibit C attached to ordinance 2012.04, for example.) Acute angle
intersections will only be allowed at T-intersections.
   C.   Intersection Spacing: Intersections should be spaced far enough apart
so that the traffic stopped to make left turns at one intersection does not
interfere with traffic movements at the adjacent intersections. On low volume
streets, such as access road to subcollectors or subcollectors to
subcollectors, the minimum distance should be one hundred twenty five feet
(125'); for the subcollectors to collectors, the minimum distance should be two
hundred fifty feet (250'). (See exhibit C attached to ordinance 2012.04, for
example.)
   D.   Design Speed: The design of geometric features, such as horizontal and
vertical alignment, will depend on the design speed selected for each street.
The design speed is primarily determined by the street function and
classification and is the maximum speed for safe and comfortable operation of a
vehicle. Other than a major collector, all streets in hillside areas are
classified as low speed streets (35 miles per hour or less). The use of design
speeds other than those listed must be approved by the city engineer, who may
decide that the speed provided in this subsection be reduced to that which is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and
potential hazards.
 
Street Design Classification Design  Posted
   Minor collector        30      30
   Local road             25 - 30 25
   Hillside local         251     251
   Hillside access        251     251
 
Note:
       1.    Variance of design speeds may be granted by the city engineer to
no greater than 5 miles per hour or less when conditions warrant. Variances
will not be granted for short segments of roads, but for entire contiguous
stretches so that consistency and driver expectancy are maintained.
   E.   Clear Sight Distance At Intersections: At intersections (see exhibit C
attached to ordinance 2012.04), adequate, clear sight distance should be
provided to permit drivers entering the higher order street to see approaching
traffic from a long enough distance to allow them to decide when to enter the
higher order street, turn onto the street and accelerate in advance of
approaching traffic. Clear sight distance should be in accordance with the
following table:
 
Posted Speed Of   Minimum Y1 Desired Y1
Higher Order Road
20                210        240
25                260        300
30                310        380
35                365        475
 
   Note:
       1.    See exhibit C attached to ordinance 2012.04.
   F.   Vertical Curves And Intersection Relationship: The vertical alignment
of residential streets should ensure that drivers can safely negotiate hills in
adverse weather and that sight distances are adequate for safety. The
requirements for vertical curve design shall be in accordance with latest
editions of AASHTO "Geometric Design Of Highways And Streets". See table below
for listing of pertinent design criteria:
      MINIMUM LENGTH OF VERTICAL CURVES
 
Design Speed Crest "K" Value Sag "K" Value
20           10              20
25           20              30
30           30              40
35           40              50
 
L = KA (for minimum sight distance on a vertical curve).
L = Length of vertical curve for proper sight distance.
A = Algebraic difference in grade.
Vertical alignment with the intersection is also of special nature, and design
alternatives may be required. As a guideline, the approach area where vehicles
stop while waiting to enter an intersection shall not exceed four (4) to five
percent (5%) from the gutter line of the street being intersected for a
distance of fifty feet (50'), though a range of fifty feet (50') to one hundred
feet (100') is more desirable. This applies to all intersections, except those
intersections where both intersecting streets are minor collectors. The landing
area for a minor collector shall be designed for a grade of two (2) to three
percent (3%) for a distance of one hundred feet (100').
   G.   Safe Stopping Sight Distance: The minimum sight distance to be provided
before a stop is required shall comply with the requirements set forth in the
table below:
 
Design Speed Computed1 Recommended Distance1 Add On For 15% Grade2
20           106.7     125                   20
25           146.5     150                   36
30           195.7     200                   64
35           248.4     250                   95
 
   Notes:
      1.    AASHTO, 1990 edition, page 120.
      2.    See AASHTO guidelines for grades other than 15 percent.
See subsection D of this section.
   H.   Horizontal Curves: The recommended minimum centerline radius for
horizontal curves on low speed residential streets is outlined as follows:
      MINIMUM CENTERLINE RADIUS
 
Street Classification Or Speed Curve Radius In Feet
   Private streets                50 - 100
   20 mph1                        100 - 150
   25 mph                         185
   30 mph                         310
 
   Note:
       1.    See subsection D of this section.
   I.   Street Cross Section Standards: The requirements for street cross
section configurations are based on the following factors:
      1.   Traffic capacity.
      2.   Design speed.
      3.   Projected traffic.
      4.   Designs to reduce scarring.
Alternate road cross sections, such as grade separated streets, may be used if
applicable safety and traffic standards are met and approved by the City
Engineer. Exhibits B and C attached to ordinance 2012.04, set forth the
requirements for street standards. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-16A-10: BUILDING SETBACKS:
   A.   The front setback along public streets where the slope is over ten
percent (10%) will be a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from property line.
   B.   On mesa plateaus or ridgelines, the setback for all buildings from the
ledge shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30'), or greater as recommended in the
geotechnical report. The setbacks from other geologic hazards shall be in
compliance with appendix J of the International Building Code and in
conformance with recommendations in the geotechnical report. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-
18-2012)
10-16A-11: RESTORATION BOND:
   A.   Requirement: A performance bond or letter of credit to assure hillside
restoration shall be provided prior to issuance of a hillside development
permit for projects disturbing more than one acre, or where determined
necessary by the City Engineer on projects involving less than one acre. Such
financial guarantee shall be provided in an amount sufficient to ensure
necessary soil stabilization, including grading, planting and maintenance, in
the event the developer fails to complete the hillside restoration in
accordance with the approved plan within one year from the issuance of the
permit; provided, that the Planning Commission may grant such time extension as
may be necessary to allow completion of the restoration work in the event
significant progress toward completion of the project is underway.
   B.   Amount: The performance bond or letter of credit shall cover the cost,
as estimated by the City Engineer, to restore the hillside to an acceptable
level of appearance and stability. In case of a dispute over what constitutes
an acceptable level of restoration, the decision of the Planning Commission
shall be determinative. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-16A-12: APPEALS:
In the event that the City staff makes requirements which are not acceptable to
the developer, the developer may request a hearing of the matter by the
Hillside Review Board. In the event of disagreement with any request or
requirement imposed by the Hillside Review Board in connection with this
article, an applicant may request in writing consideration by the City Council
within ten (10) days thereafter. The City Council shall then hear and make
final determination of the issue, subject in any event to an appeal to the
Appeal Authority as permitted by Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 2018.07, 12-13-
2018)
10-16A-13: VERIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE:
For developments on a development parcel of more than one acre containing
slopes greater than ten percent (10%), certification by a State registered
engineer that the development has been completed in compliance with the
approved hillside development permit, including satisfaction of any conditions
contained in the permit, shall be required. Restoration bonds shall not be
released or building permits issued for such a development, until such
certification has been received by the city engineer and mayor. (Ord. 2012.04,
1-18-2012)
10-16A-14: EXHIBITS INCORPORATED:
Exhibits B and C on street cross section requirements and intersection design,
along with the checklists for property within the hillside development overlay
zone, are attached to ordinance 2012.04 and are a part of this article. The
exhibits are on file at the city office and may be acquired upon request for a
reasonable fee. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-16A-15: VIOLATIONS:
In addition to those penalties prescribed in this title, the city engineer,
planning and zoning administrator or mayor shall have the right to order a halt
to construction of any improvements within a hillside development overlay zone
where, in his discretion, there exists a condition which violates, or threatens
to violate, any of the provisions of this article. Such suspension of
construction activities shall continue until the city engineer, planning and
zoning administrator and mayor are satisfied that measures have been
implemented for substantial compliance with this article. The developer may
appeal to the hillside review board. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
CHAPTER 17
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-17-1: Nonpermitted Uses
10-17-2: Temporary Uses
10-17-3: Residential Facilities For Persons With Disability
10-17-4: Nightly Rental
10-17-5: Model Home Allowances
10-17-1: NONPERMITTED USES:
   Throughout this Title, any use which is neither a permitted use, a
conditional use, or an approved temporary use shall be considered a
“nonpermitted use.”
(Ord. 2015.06, 10-8-2015; amd. Ord. 2025.07, 7-16-2025)
10-17-2: TEMPORARY USES:
   Land uses identified in Section 10-17-2(B) of this Chapter that are not
permitted or conditional uses in a given zone may be allowed on a temporary
basis, subject to the standards and conditions of this Section to ensure
compatibility with surrounding land uses and to protect the character of the
existing neighborhood and zone.
   A.   Permit Required: Unless exempt under Section 10-17-2(G), no person
shall engage in a temporary use, as identified in Section 10-17-2(B), without
first obtaining a temporary use permit.
   B.   Uses Allowed: The following temporary uses may be allowed under this
Section, subject to the standards and requirements herein. The duration of the
temporary use permit shall not exceed the time limits identified below, unless
otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator:
      1.   Construction related trailers or offices - allowed for the duration
of active construction or until a permanent building is constructed on site,
subject to annual review by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
      2.   Temporary storage for construction sites - allowed for the duration
of active construction on the property under construction or development,
subject to annual review by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
      3.   Sales office/trailer for the sale of dwellings in a subdivision or
other residential project - allowed for the duration of active construction on
the property under construction or development, subject to annual review by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator.
      4.   Seasonal sales, including but not limited to:
         a.   Christmas trees - up to sixty (60) days;
         b.   Fireworks - up to thirty (30) days;
         c.   Pumpkins - up to sixty (60) days.
      5.   Temporary uses that qualify as Special Events under Section
3-5-1 of the Toquerville City Code, and that are not exempt under Section 3-5-
2, require a Special Event Permit and are not subject to the Temporary Use
Permit process."
      6.   Any other temporary use deemed compatible with this Section as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   C.   Temporary Use Permit Application: A complete application for a
temporary use permit shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator, along with payment of the applicable fee as set forth in the
City's Uniform Fee Schedule. The application shall be submitted at least three
(3) weeks prior to the proposed start date of the temporary use. The
application shall include:
      1.   The name, address, phone number and email address of the applicant
and the applicant's agent, if any.
      2.   The name and address of the company the applicant represents (if
applicable).
      3.   A description of the proposed temporary use, including start date,
duration, hours of operation and anticipated attendance.
      4.   A site plan, drawn to standard engineering scale showing the
location of existing and proposed structures, signage, access, utilities and
other site features or improvements including but not limited to, parking
areas, curbs, gutter, sidewalk, landscaping, storage areas or any other site
information relevant to the proposed use.
      5.   Proof of ownership (via a title report) or written permission from
the property owner.
      6.   Any additional information deemed reasonable and necessary by the
Planning & Zoning Administrator.
   D.   Review: Once the application is deemed complete, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator may request review and recommendations from the City
Engineer, applicable City departments, utility providers, and other relevant
agencies or entities.
   E.   Authority: The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve
with conditions or deny the application pursuant to the standards set forth in
Section 10-17-2 F. of this Chapter. Conditions may be applied as necessary to
mitigate potential adverse impacts, ensure compliance with applicable
standards, protect public health and safety, and preserve the character of the
neighborhood. Such conditions may include, without limitation, address hours of
operation, noise, signage, parking, site maintenance, and public right-of-way
use.
   F.   Approval Standards: The following standards shall apply to the issuance
of a temporary use permit:
      1.   The temporary use complies with recommendations from City Engineer,
applicable City departments, utility providers, and other relevant agencies or
entities.
      2.   The temporary use will not generate excessive noise, traffic, or
other impacts that would be disruptive to neighboring properties.
      3.   The temporary use will not block public streets, sidewalks, or
rights-of-way or create unsafe conditions for drivers or pedestrians.
      4.   The temporary use will not interfere with construction, development,
or public improvements within public rights-of-way or public facilities.
      5.   The temporary use will not impede or delay emergency response
vehicles such as police, fire, or ambulance.
      6.   The temporary use is compatible with the permitted or conditional
uses and regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
      7.   All signage associated with the temporary use shall comply with the
City's sign regulations in Section 10-22 of this Code and may require a
separate sign permit.
      8.   The temporary use complies with all applicable City Standards and
Specifications, ordinances, regulations, permitting and licensing requirements,
and any conditions imposed to mitigate potential adverse effects.
   G.   Exemptions: The following temporary uses are exempt from permitting
requirements of this Section, provided they comply with all other applicable
City regulations:
      1.   Garage or yard sales - provided they do not exceed four (4) events
per calendar year per property. Each sale shall not exceed three (3)
consecutive days.
      2.   Produce stands on private property provided they do not create
significant public impacts such as excessive traffic, noise, or obstruction of
public rights-of-way.
      3.   City or City sponsored events held on public property.
      4.   Educational, religious or civic activities held at public schools,
churches or government facilities that are temporary in duration, meaning no
longer than sixty (60) days.
   H.   Revocation: A temporary use permit may be revoked by the City if the
permit holder violates any conditions of approval or any provision of this
section, conducts the use inconsistently with the approved permit, or fails to
comply with City requests to correct or mitigate issues related to the
temporary use. The City reserves the right to inspect the site at any time
during the duration of the permit to ensure compliance with permit conditions
and applicable standards. If the permit holder fails to correct or mitigate
issues after one written request from the City, the permit shall be revoked.
Written notice of revocation shall be provided to the permit holder by the
City, and the use must cease immediately upon revocation.
   I.   Expiration: Temporary use permits shall expire at the end of the
approved duration as specified in the permit or under the time limits
established in Section 10-17-2 B. Extensions may be granted only upon written
request submitted prior to permit expiration and for good cause, subject to
approval by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   J.   Restoration: Upon expiration or revocation of a temporary use permit,
the permit holder shall restore the site to its original condition within ten
(10) days, unless permanent improvements have been made and approved by the
City to remain. Restoration must include the removal of all temporary
structures, signage, trash, and any other materials associated with the
temporary use. The City may require documentation or inspection to verify that
restoration is complete.
   K.   Penalty: Any person or entity who violates the provisions of this
Section is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
   L.   Appeal: Any person adversely affected by a decision on a temporary use
permit may file an appeal in accordance with the procedures outlined in Section
10-3-2 F. of this Code.
(Ord. 2025.07, 7-16-2025)
10-17-3: NIGHTLY RENTAL:
   The Planning and Zoning Administrator, in connection with the building
official, shall grant a building and occupancy permit for the establishment of
a residential facility for persons with a disability in a zone in which
residential uses are permitted, if the applicant certifies as follows:
   A.   Compliance with Utah Code Annotated title 57, chapter 21, the Utah Fair
Housing Act, and the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, 42 USC
section 3601 et seq.
   B.   To the extent required by Federal law, provide that a residential
facility for persons with a disability is a permitted use in any zone where
similar residential dwellings that are not residential facilities for persons
with a disability are allowed.
   C.   Subject to subsection B of this section, the City requires that:
      1.   Residential facilities for persons with a disability:
         a.   To be reasonably dispersed throughout the Municipality;
         b.   To be limited by number of occupants;
         c.   For residential facilities for persons with a disability that are
substance abuse facilities and are located within five hundred feet (500') of a
school, to provide, in accordance with rules established by the Department of
Human Services under Utah Code Annotated title 62A, chapter 2, Licensure of
Programs and Facilities:
            (1)   A security plan satisfactory to local law enforcement
authorities;
            (2)   Twenty four (24) hour supervision for residents; and
            (3)   Other twenty four (24) hour security measures; and
         d.   To obtain permits that verify compliance with the same building,
safety and health regulations as are applicable in the same zone to similar
uses that are not residential facilities for persons with a disability; and
      2.   Provides that a residential facility for persons with a disability
that would likely create a fundamental change in the character of a residential
neighborhood may be excluded from a zone.
   D.   The responsibility to license programs or entities that operate
facilities for persons with a disability, as well as to require and monitor the
provision of adequate services to persons residing in those facilities, shall
rest with:
      1.   For programs or entities licensed or certified by the Department of
Human Services, the Department of Human Services as provided in Utah Code
Annotated title 62A, chapter 5, Services to People With Disabilities; and
      2.   For programs or entities licensed or certified by the Department of
Health, the Department of Health under Utah Code Annotated title 26, chapter
21, the Healthcare Facility Licensing and Inspection Act.
(Ord. 2015.06, 10-8-2015)
10-17-4: NIGHTLY RENTAL:
   Nightly rentals shall occur only within the City upon the meeting of the
following requirements:
   A.   Nightly Rental License Application:
      1.   An applicant must apply for and obtain a “Nightly Rental License”,
which is a special license and not a conditional use permit and is approved and
otherwise regulated by this Section. The Nightly Rental License is non-
transferable to another owner or another Dwelling.
      2.   The Nightly Rental License application shall include the name,
address and phone number of the owner and/or other person designated by the
owner as the property manager/emergency contact who shall be responsible for
ensuring compliance with the rules and regulations specified in this section.
      3.   The Nightly Rental License application must include a detailed
drawing to standard engineering scale, a site plan for the lot showing
additional parking stalls, existing and proposed buildings, existing streets,
and a floor plan of the dwelling. The site plan must identify the required off-
street parking to be used in connection with the Nightly Rental License.
      4.   The Nightly Rental License application must include the property tax
ID number for the parcel upon which the Nightly Rental will occur.
      5.   Fire Inspection: To receive an initial license, the nightly rental
must pass a fire inspection. The Fire inspection shall be scheduled with the
Hurricane Valley Fire District and be performed within forty-five (45) days of
submitting a complete application. Zoning Administrator may extend the deadline
to complete the fire inspection based on inspector availability. Failure to do
so will result in the denial of the Nightly Rental License application and the
license will become available to the next applicant on the waiting list.
      6.   All structures on the property that are used for nightly rental
purposes must have a Certificate of Occupancy. An application will not be
considered compelte without a Certificate of Occupancy.
      7.   Notification: Applicant must pay for and provide notification to
neighboring property owners within three hundred feet (300') from all exterior
boundaries of the lot on which the nightly rental is to be located. This notice
shall indicate, and the City’s Planning Commission shall conduct, a public
hearing on the application. To comply with this requirement the applicant must
submit self-addressed, stamped envelopes for the required notification along
with a printed list of the lot owners in the designated notification area.
   B.   Nightly Rental License Application Review Process: A complete Nightly
Rental License application will be reviewed by City staff at the next regularly
scheduled City staff meeting. City staff shall review the application and
forward their recommendation to the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission will hear the application at their next regularly scheduled meeting
where adequate notice is appropriate and conduct a public hearing on the same.
After said public hearing the Planning Commission will forward their
recommendation to the City Council for a final determination on the Nightly
Rental License application. The City Council may deny, approve or approve with
special conditions the Nightly Rental License application.
   C.   One Structure: Each nightly rental must occur within and under one roof
of a dwelling and not in a structure that is temporary. Accessory structures
can create multi-family zoning and shall not be used as nightly rentals. More
specifically, a detached casita, garage, workshop, mother-in-law building, etc.
cannot be used exclusively as a nightly rental without the simultaneous use of
part or all of the dwelling as well.
   D.   Parking: A minimum of four (4) nine feet by 18 feet (9' x 18') parking
spaces are required. Two of those spaces must be available exclusively for
nightly rental use. There shall be no overnight on-street parking by guests or
residents.
   E.   Maximum Guests: The maximum number of occupants per dwelling being used
for nightly rental shall be the lesser of ten (10) (including the owner and
his/her family), or that which is allowed by any Safety Code adopted by the
City.
   F.   Response Time: The owner or other person designated as the property
manager/emergency contact shall respond to complaints and/or concerns within
thirty (30) minutes of any phone call or other notification and be on site
within one (1) hour if necessary. Failure of the owner or property manager to
respond may result in a violation and possible fines to the business license
holder and property owner.
   G.   Nightly Rental Ownership Limitation: Neither a natural person applicant
nor a principal of a business entity applying for a Nightly Rental License
shall have an ownership interest in more than one (1) dwelling wherein nightly
rentals occur within the City. One person residing in the same dwelling shall
not have ownership interest in more than one (1) dwelling wherein nightly
rentals occur within the City.
   H.   Limit on Total number of Nightly Rental Licenses:
      1.   The maximum number of nightly rental business licenses issued will
be set at five percent (5%) of the total number of “Eligible Culinary
Connections” within Toquerville City limits. For purposes of this Subsection,
the term “Eligible Culinary Connections” is defined as all residential culinary
connections within the City except for those residential culinary connections
located within a development in an MPDO Zone where the developer has elected to
allow a Nightly Rental Development in their commercial planning areas.
      2.   The total number of Nightly Rental Licenses available shall be
continually updated as the number of new culinary connections increase.
      3.   Once the maximum number of Nightly Rental Licenses have been issued,
any new application that meets all of the application requirements shall be
placed on a waiting list in order of the date of receipt. The waiting list
shall be capped at ten (10) applications. No fees will be due until a license
becomes available. When a license becomes available, the first applicant on the
waiting list shall be notified of the license availability. From the date of
notification, the applicant shall have fifteen (15) days to resubmit a complete
application and pay the required application fee. The applicant must complete
the licensing process within sixty (60) days thereafter. If the applicant fails
to resubmit a complete application within fifteen (15) days, or fails to
complete the licensing process within sixty (60) days, the application will be
deemed expired. The next applicant will then be notified of the license
availability and shall then follow the same procedure.
   I.   Minimum Distance: Properties used for nightly rentals shall have a
minimum separation of five hundred feet (500'). This will be measured in a
straight line from the closest point of one nightly rental Dwelling to the
closest point of the other.
   J.   Dwelling Modifications: Any modifications to the appearance and size of
a Dwelling to accommodate and facilitate a nightly rental should be in keeping
with the residential character of the neighborhood within which the Dwelling is
located.
   K.   Penalties: Upon finding a violation under this Chapter and Section, the
following penalties and requirements shall apply:
      1.   First Violation: Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00).
      2.   Second Violation: One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).
      3.   Third Violation: Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00).
      4.   Fourth Violation: Nightly rental license automatically revoked.
      5.   Review: Upon the second or subsequent violation of this Section,
there shall be a mandatory review conducted before the City’s Planning
Commission, who shall have the ability and right to revoke the Nightly Rental
License in its sole and absolute discretion. Revocation of a Nightly Rental
License, for any reason shall result in a minimum twelve (12) month waiting
period before any new application. Revocation shall run with the land. Upon
revocation, there is no guarantee of any future issuance of a Nightly Rental
License and all applications will be processed under the then current
ordinances. Failure to pay the fine within thirty (30) days of its issuance
shall constitute grounds for automatic revocation of the owner’s Nightly Rental
License.
      6.   Enforcement: In addition to the fines set forth in this subsection,
all violations of this chapter and section may constitute a misdemeanor as per
1-4-1 of the Toquerville City Code and may be enforced in compliance with
Chapter 5 of this Title.
   L.   Revocation of License: The Nightly Rental License may be revoked at any
time, upon notice and a hearing conducted by the Planning Commission, should
the use of a dwelling for nightly rental become a nuisance per Title 4, Chapter
1 of this Code.
   M.   Annual Renewal of Nightly Rental License:
      1.   Application: A Nightly Rental License has a duration of one year and
must be renewed annually. For renewal, an applicant must submit a renewal
application in a form set by the city staff.
      2.   Fire Inspection: To receive an annual renewal, the nightly rental
must pass an annual fire inspection. The Fire inspection shall be scheduled
with the Hurricane Valley Fire District and be performed within forty-five (45)
days prior to the renewal. Zoning Administrator may extend the deadline to
complete the fire inspection based on inspector availability.
   N.   Action on Renewal Application: Each renewal application shall be
approved, approved with additional conditions, or denied by the city’s zoning
administrator. If the city has received more than two (2) complaints from
neighbors or others regarding a nightly rental during the previous twelve (12)
months, the Zoning Administrator shall defer the decision of renewal to the
Planning Commission who shall hear the matter at their next regularly scheduled
meeting where adequate notice is appropriate, allowing the applicant/license
holder to be present and speak in defense of why the Nightly Rental License
should be renewed.
   O.   Log: The holder of the Nightly Rental License shall maintain and
provide, upon request, the name, and phone number of all renters.
   P.   Business License Required; Room Tax: Applicant must apply for and
obtain a business license pursuant to Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code and pay
the current Transient Room Tax applicable to motels and hotels within the City.
      1.   The business license must be displayed in a prominent location
within the nightly rental.
       2.   Operating a nightly rental without a business license shall
constitute a Class B misdemeanor and shall be enforced in compliance with
chapter 5 of this Title.
   Q.   Fees: Applicant must pay all applicable fees including an annual
Nightly Rental License fee to maintain their license. The amount of said annual
Nightly Rental License fee shall be set and adjusted by the City and set forth
in the City’s Uniform Fee Schedule.
   R.   Health Requirements: Applicants/license holders shall ensure that the
dwellings in which nightly rentals occurs complies with all local, State and
Federal Health Codes, regulations, and requirements.
   S.   Signage: Signs for nightly rentals shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 22 of this Title.
   T.   Exclusions: Hotels, Motels and RV Parks shall not be held to the
requirements of this section. RV Parks shall conform to the requirements of
Section 10-29-1 (RV Parks).
   U.   Exceptions: The Nightly Rental of model homes located within a
subdivision or which sales will be made, will be allowed with the following
conditions:
      1.   The subdivision shall be planned for more than one hundred (100)
dwellings.
      2.   No more than ten (10) model homes used as a Nightly Rentals shall be
allowed per subdivision. Once the development has been sold out at 90% then the
exception shall be voided within two (2) years.
      3.   All other requirements of this Section
10-17-3 shall be met except for 10-17-3(G), (H) and (I).
      4.   A conditional use permit is issued by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2018.06, 10-11-2018; amd. Ord. 2020.01, 1-9-2020; Ord. 2020.04, 2-13-
2020; Ord. 2022.09, 8-25-2022; Ord. 2023.12, 5-17-2023; Ord. 2023.13, 5-17-
2023; Ord. 2023.17, 7-19-2023; Ord. 2024.05, 5-1-2024)
10-17-5: MODEL HOME ALLOWANCES:
   Model homes shall be located within the subdivision for which sales will be
made. The home may be offered for sale as a subdivision residence at any time,
so long as a permanent certificate of occupancy has been obtained from the
Building Department.
(Ord. 2017.03, 5-11-2017)
CHAPTER 18
PERMITS REQUIRED
ARTICLE A. BUILDING AND DEMOLITION PERMITS
SECTION:
10-18A-1: Purpose And Intent
10-18A-2: Conformance With Permit Requirements
10-18A-3: Building Permit Review
10-18A-4: Acceptance Of Improvements And Occupancy
10-18A-5: Demolition Permits
10-18A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of the building and permit review process is to ensure
the public safety of buildings, structures, and development and to meet
applicable health, safety, and public welfare standards. (Ord. 2020.05, 2-13-
2020)
10-18A-2: CONFORMANCE WITH PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Building Permit Required: Construction, alteration, repair or removal
of any building or structure, or any part thereof, in excess of two hundred
(200) square feet of floor area, or if the work costs exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or involves work, as provided for or restricted in this
title or applicable international codes, shall not be commenced without a valid
building permit.
   B.   Permitted Use; Occupancy Permit Required: Land, buildings or premises
in any zoning district shall be used only for the purposes permitted in such
district and in accordance with an occupancy permit issued by the building
department. The use, building or premises must conform to the provisions of the
occupancy permit and all related ordinances, regulations, resolutions and
requirements of this title. A new occupancy permit must be obtained prior to a
change in use or character of any building or land.
   C.   Special Accommodation For Temporary Occupancy: The owner-builder of a
single-family residence may request special accommodation from the city to live
on the residential premises during the construction of the permanent dwelling.
The building permittee may only request one special accommodation/temporary
living quarters. Such accommodation may include living in the following types
of structures:
      1.   Mobile home.
      2.   Motor home.
      3.   Camper trailer.
In order to receive accommodation, the owner-builder must have submitted
application for a building permit and paid all necessary fees, including all
connection fees for utilities on the lot. This special accommodation will have
a primary expiration date of six (6) months and be eligible for one six (6)-
month extension, contingent upon progress toward completion of the single-
family dwelling for occupancy. Temporary living quarters must be vacated and
disconnected from all utilities prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. (Ord. 2020.05, 2-13-2020)
10-18A-3: BUILDING PERMIT REVIEW:
   A.   Single-Family Residential Projects:
      1.   Application: Building permits for a single-family dwelling shall
require a review by the building official. Application shall be made to the
building official for a building permit review. See Chapter 6 of this title for
information required to be included in or with the application.
      2.   Residential Plan Submittal Requirements:
         a.   Residential Plan Packet: A residential plan packet shall be
obtained from the city building staff and shall be completed, which shall
include all submittals required under Chapter 6 of this title, together with
such other additional submittals as are outlined in the residential plan
packet. The residential plan packet requirements may be amended from time to
time by the city as construction requirements necessitate.
         b.   Swimming Pools: A separate pool plan will be required, which
shall include a site plan showing the location of the pool and proximity to any
other stuctures. All pools shall require either a detailed fencing plan and
shall be completely enclosed by a fence, or an automatic pool cover and meet
all international building code standards.
      3.   City Staff Review:
         a.   For all projects, except single-family residential, the city
staff, upon receipt of a completed application and all fees, shall review the
application and shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the building
permit application.
         b.   For single-family residential applications, apply the following
standards:
            (1)   Review for complete application, together with all documents
as required under Chapter 6 of this title.
            (2)   Apply the same standards and review as desiY1ated under
subsection A4 of this section.
            (3)   Determine whether a variance, conditional use or zone
amendment is required. If so, the application shall be returned to the
applicant with notice that application for variance, conditional use or zone
amendment must be pursued prior to building permit review.
            (4)   The residential review staff may approve the completed
application, approve with conditions, or deny.
            (5)   The approval or denial by the residential review staff shall
constitute an action by a zoning officer for purposes of appeal as provided
under this land management code.
      4.   Standards For Review:
         a.   The proposed uses, structures and site improvements conform to
the following:
            (1)   City General Plan.
            (2)   Zoning regulations and other relevant sections of this title.
            (3)   International building code (IBC).
         b.   The design is sensitive to the constraints of topography, soil
types, geologic hazards, watercourses and floodplains, visual impacts and
preservation of views.
         c.   Services are available and adequate to meet the needs of the
proposed structure and use, including sewer, water, roads, gas, electric,
telephone, mail, police and fire protection, schools and recreation.
         d.   The complete building plans and drawings have been reviewed and
approved by the building department/building inspector.
         e.   The installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks and improvements of
streets to centerline, if street is already improved with asphalt or
centerline, plus ten feet (10') where the street is not improved with asphalt,
as approved by the city in accordance with its ordinances and specifications,
shall be required on any existing or proposed street adjoining a lot on which a
building permit application for construction is made. Street improvements are
required for new home construction or remodel for change of use or commercial
use. Such curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street improvements shall be required
as a condition of obtaining a building permit. The city may require a property
owner to make an equivalent payment for the labor and materials necessary to
install curb, gutter, sidewalk and asphalt, as calculated by the city engineer,
in lieu of requiring the property owner to install the requisite improvements.
Any required dedication of property for such improvements shall be conveyed to
the city by quitclaim deed for immediate installation or for such future time
as it becomes prudent for the city to install the said improvements.
         f.   All building pads are required to be one foot (1') higher than
the road centerline, measured at the center of the pad. If this requirement
conflicts with the IBC this requirement will govern.
            (1)   Exception: If the lot is larger than one (1) acre and is
located in an undeveloped area, a grading plan showing positive drainage and a
pad elevated one foot (1') above the natural grade may be exempted.
   B.   Commercial Buildings:
      1.   Application: Upon conceptual approval by the planning commission and
as a precondition to the construction, alteration, improvement, demolition or
other repairs in accordance with this title, application shall be made to the
building department for building permit review. See Chapter 6 of this title for
information required to be included in or with the application.
      2.   City Staff Review: The city staff, upon receipt of a completed
application and all fees, shall review the application and shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the building permit application.
      3.   Standards For Review:
         a.   The proposed uses, structure and site improvements conform to the
following:
            (1)   City General Plan.
            (2)   Zoning regulations, general design standards and other
relevant sections of this title.
            (3)   International building code (IBC).
            (4)   Any city design guidelines as may be adopted by the city
council.
         b.   The design is sensitive to the constraints of topography, soil
types, geologic hazards, watercourses and floodplains, visual impacts and
preservation of views.
         c.   Services are available and adequate to meet the needs of the
proposed structure and use, including roads, gas, electric, telephone, mail,
police and fire protection, schools and recreation.
         d.   The complete building plans and drawings have been reviewed and
approved by the building department/building inspector.
         e.   Every commercial building will require a final site plan approval
before a building permit is issued.
   C.   Expiration:
      1.   Every permit issued by a building department official pursuant to
this article shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the
building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) calendar days from the date of issuance of such permit. Unless,
prior to expiration of the permit, the permittee submits a written request for
extension, which is reviewed and approved by the building department, the
building department may grant only one such extension not to exceed an
additional one hundred eighty (180) days. Only one such extension may be
granted by the building department. Additional extensions shall be treated and
reviewed as an original application for building permit.
      2.   Once a building permit is granted and construction commenced, the
approval shall continue until the building permit expires under the provisions
of the international building code or until occupancy permits are granted for
the project. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2020.05, 2-13-2020)
10-18A-4: ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS AND OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Occupancy Permit: An occupancy permit shall be issued only for a single
building (a single permit may not be issued for multiple buildings) upon
compliance with the following conditions:
      1.   A notice of completion has been issued by the building department
verifying that the building project is completed and in compliance with all
applicable codes for occupancy, including all site improvement work, unless the
city grants special consideration pursuant to section
10-5-3 , "Security For Completion", of this title and related provisions.
      2.   A set of "as built" drawings has been filed with the building
department.
   B.   Inspection: The building official, the fire chief of the Hurricane
Valley fire district or state fire marshal shall, upon presentation of evidence
of authority, have the right of access to any premises at any reasonable hour
for the purpose of inspecting all buildings, structures and other construction
projects during the course of their construction, modification or repair, and
to inspect land uses to determine compliance with the provisions of this title.
The building department, from time to time, may require special inspections by
inspectors certified in areas not common to regular construction. The expense
of such inspections will be borne by the builder.
   C.   Acceptance Of Improvements: On or offsite improvements shall be deemed
accepted by the city only after complete inspection by the appropriate city
official and/or city engineer; for buildings and structures, the issuance of an
occupancy permit; and for on or off site improvements other than building, upon
the issuance of a certificate of acceptance by the mayor.
   D.   Review Fees And Costs: All professional fees, including engineers,
planners and inspectors, incurred for review by the city planner and city
engineer in the review process for any building permit shall be assessed to the
applicant and shall be paid in full as a prerequisite to issuance of a building
permit. (Ord. 2020.05, 2-13-2020)
10-18A-5: DEMOLITION PERMITS:
   A.   Conditions Requiring Permit: A demolition permit shall be required
prior to the removal of any building or structure containing any of the
following: concrete, electrical systems, heating and air conditioning systems,
reinforced steel, or any hazardous material, such as asbestos, lead or lead
based paints.
   B.   Exemptions: Agricultural outbuildings of a single-story construction on
a footprint not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet shall be exempt from a
demolition permit requirement.
   C.   Permit Review Procedure: Demolition permits shall be reviewed under the
building permit review procedures set forth in Section
10-18A-3  of this article. See Chapter 6 of this title for information required
to be included in or with the application. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord.
2020.05, 2-13-2020)
ARTICLE B. GRADING PERMIT
SECTION:
10-18B-1: Permit Required; Exceptions
10-18B-2: Review Process
10-18B-3: Standards For Review
10-18B-4: Discharge Prohibitions
10-18B-5: Dust Control
10-18B-6: Disposal Of Cleared Vegetation
10-18B-7: Nonconstruction Areas Protected
10-18B-8: Underground Public Utilities Protected
10-18B-9: Grading Operations
10-18B-10: Historic Or Prehistoric Ruins
10-18B-11: Annual Review/Expiration
10-18B-12: Enforcement
10-18B-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   General Requirement: No person shall commence or perform any grading,
excavation, filling or clearing of land without first having obtained a permit
from the Zoning Administrator or City Designee and ascertaining the existence
and location of any underground utilities. No grading permit shall be issued
except in connection with a permitted use allowed within the zoning district in
which the property that is to be graded, filled or cleared is located. Any such
permitted use that requires a building permit or other approval as provided by
this Title, such as home construction or a commercial site or a subdivision,
must obtain approval as provided under this Title before a grading permit may
be issued. All grading plans submitted for approval must be prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Utah.
   B.   Exemptions:
      1.   Agricultural: Grading, excavation, filling or clearing for
agricultural purposes within an agricultural zone, that does not negatively
impact adjacent property in regards to drainage, shall be exempt from a grading
permit. Grading, excavation, etc., associated with nonagricultural uses or
construction, in an agricultural zone, shall require a grading permit.
      2.   Residential Landscaping: Minor grading or clearing associated with
landscaping projects for single-family residential uses, that do not negatively
impact adjacent property in regards to drainage, shall be exempt from a permit
requirement.
      3.   Non-disturbance of Natural Grade: Minor Grading (residential),
excavation, filling or clearing that does not disturb the natural grade of more
than two thousand (2,000) square feet or result in a change to the natural
grade, shall be exempt from permit requirements.
      4.   Public Facility Projects: Grading required to construct Public
Facilities including roadways and utility improvements approved by the City
Council shall be exempt from permit requirements.
   C.   Scope of Permit: A grading permit and the approved grading plan is
intended to be utilized for grading purposes only and is not to be used for the
purpose of constructing on-site or off-site improvements. Issuance of a grading
permit based on an approved grading plan does not constitute approval of
driveway locations or sizes, parking lot structural sections or layout of any
structure, ADA-related requirements, building locations or foundations, walls,
curbing, off-site drainage facilities or other items not related directly to
the basic grading operation. On-site and off-site improvements shall be
constructed from construction plans and drawings approved by the City.
   D.   Stockpiling of material is prohibited under the exclusive use of this
Article.
(Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024; amd. Ord. 2024.18, 8-7-2024)
10-18B-2: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Application and Review Process: Grading permit application forms may be
obtained from the City and shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator or
City Designee. Applications must be signed by the property owner. If an agent
is applying for the grading permit, an Affidavit from the owner that gives the
agent the authority to apply for the grading permit is required. The following
must be included in the grading permit application:
      1.   Minor Grading: “Minor Grading” is defined as grading, excavation,
filling, or clearing that disturbs the natural grade of more than two thousand
(2,000) square feet but not more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards. Prior
to the commencement of any Minor Grading, an applicant will submit a “Minor
Grading Plan and Drainage Plan” consisting of the following:
         a.   Location of the site.
         b.   Name of the owner/applicant.
         c.   A statement of the credentials of the person who prepared the
plan.
         d.   Date the plan was prepared.
         e.   A general vicinity of the proposed site.
         f.   Limiting dimensions and depth of cut and fill.
         g.   Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be
performed and the location of any buildings or structures within thirty (30)
feet of the proposed grading.
         h.   Typical cross-section of the cuts/fills resulting from excavation
and grading work.
         i.   Retaining walls greater than four feet (4') in height or creating
slopes steeper than 2 horizontal to 1 vertical must be engineered.
         j.   Additional items as required by the city.
      2.   Engineered Grading: “Engineered Grading” is defined as grading,
excavation, filling, or clearing that disturbs the natural grade of more than
one thousand (1,000) cubic yards. Prior to the commencement of any Engineered
Grading, an applicant must submit an “Engineered Grading Plan and Drainage
Plan” consisting of the following:
         a.   All submitted plans and specifications must be stamped and signed
by a professional civil engineer licensed in the State of Utah.
         b.   Anticipated schedule of commencement of proposed excavation and
grading.
         c.   Plans shall indicate the nature and extent of the work to be
performed and that the work will conform to the most current version of the
Uniform Building Code, the details outlined in the most current version of the
International Building Code, and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations and shall contain the following:
         (1)   The first sheet of each set of the plans shall indicate the
location of the work, name and address of the owner, a statement of the
credentials of the engineer who prepared the plans and the date the plan was
prepared including revision dates.
         (2)   General vicinity of the proposed site.
         (3)   Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and
details of terrain.
         (4)   Existing Ground Slope Map for the proposed site.
         (5)   Limiting dimensions, elevations, or finish contours to be
achieved by the grading and proposed drainage channels and related
construction.
         (6)   Typical cross-sections of cuts/fills resulting from excavation
and grading work.
         (7)   Details of surface and subsurface drainage devices, retaining
walls, cribbing, dams, etc. to be constructed with or as a part of the proposed
work.
         (8)   A Drainage Study.
         (9)   Location of any existing buildings or structures on the site and
the location of any buildings or structures on adjacent property which is
within thirty (30) feet of the site or which may be affected by the proposed
grading.
         (10)   A soils engineering report with the recommendations
incorporated in the plans and specifications. Soils engineer shall acknowledge
that plans are in accordance with the soils report by stamping and signing the
plan or by letter.
         (11)   An erosion control plan stamped and signed by a professional
civil engineer licensed in the State of Utah.
         (12)   SWPPP prepared by a stormwater inspector certified in the State
of Utah.
         (13)   A permanent erosion control plan addressing the final
conditions of the site in accordance with the current maintenance policy.
         (14)   State of Utah - NOI.
         (15)   A fugitive dust plan implementing best management practices for
permanent and ongoing dust control including the installation of an air quality
index monitor whose data is readily accessible to the City.
         (16)   A detailed narrative containing:
            (A)   An estimate of the volumes, in cubic yards, of cut and/or
fill and the area of the site to be graded.
            (B)   A statement regarding the phasing and timing of any grading
activities. If the applicant/permittee needs to grade materially out of
sequence, or fails to grade in sequence, as identified in the narrative and the
Engineered Grading Plan, the City reserves the ability to invoke its
enforcement rights as set forth in
10-18B-12.
            (C)   A statement concerning the ultimate disposition of any excess
dirt that shall remain within City limits. Any location within the City limits
used for the disposal of excess dirt shall require a separate grading permit
application and issuance of a separate grading permit for the receiving site.
            (D)   A description of equipment and methods to be employed in the
grading process.
         (17)   Any additional information reasonably deemed necessary by the
City.
         d.   In addition, the grading plan shall contain an estimate of the
volumes, in cubic yards, of cut and/or fill and area of site to be graded.
         e.   Any location within the city limits used for import of excess
dirt shall require a separate grading permit application and issuance of a
separate grading permit for the receiving site.
      3.   Proof of land ownership in the form of a recorded deed or grant,
recorded plat or title insurance policy not older than sixty (60) days at time
of application.
      4.   Payment of the required grading plan review and permit fees in
accordance with the City’s Consolidated Uniform Fee Schedule.
   B.   Multiple Engineered Grading Sites: For any grading which shall require
export or import of materials from or to other non-contiguous sites within City
limits, a grading permit shall be obtained for each grading site.
   C.   City Review: The Zoning Administrator or City Designee shall determine
the adequacy of the application and may require the submission of further
information where necessary.
   D.   Inspections: All construction or work for which a permit is required
shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times by the Zoning
Administrator and Public Works inspector. The Zoning Administrator and Public
Works Inspector may make any inspections of any construction work deemed
necessary to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this article and other
ordinances which are applicable. The permittee shall notify the Zoning
Administrator and Public Works inspector when grading reaches completion and
prior to being covered or concealed by additional work. Whenever any work on
which inspections are required is covered or concealed by additional work
without first having been inspected, the Zoning Administrator or City Designee
may require, through written notice, that such work be exposed for examination.
The work of exposing and recovering shall be an expense of the permittee
requiring the inspection.
   E.   Grading Bond: In reviewing a grading permit application, the Zoning
Administrator or City Designee may require the applicant/permittee to post a
grading bond, in the form of (i) a cash deposit or (ii) an irrevocable letter
of credit, from a licensed and insured financial institution in favor of the
City in an amount sufficient to cover ten percent (10%) of the cost to perform
the grading identified in the grading and drainage plan. The cost of grading
shall be determined by either an approved engineer’s estimate of cost or an
accepted bid from a licensed and bonded contractor who will be performing the
grading work. The purpose of the grading bond is to ensure that the graded area
maintains a level of appearance and stability as determined by the City. The
City will approve the cost breakdown for the proposed bond prior to the City
accepting said bond. Once the City approves the cost breakdown, the applicant
will be required to provide the bond in the amount shown. Said bond must also
comply with any applicable provisions in Section 10-5-3, “Security For
Completion” of this Title. Further, if one or more of the following instances
are present, a grading bond in the form described above shall be mandatory:
      1.   Grading that is to occur within any area that is designated as part
of the City’s Hillside Development Overlay Zone will need to comply with (
10-16A-1 et seq of this Title);
      2.   Any off-site grading will require the written permission of one or
more adjacent property owners;
      3.   Any project in which on-site drainage structures/storm drain system
connects to a City storm drain and drainage facilities are constructed in
concurrence with grading plan;
      4.   Any grading plan in which the scope of work increases the potential
to transport silt/sediment into a public right of way and/or the City’s storm
drain system;
      5.   Any grading plan in which the scope of work would create a public
safety risk in event of work stoppage;
      6.   Any grading plan in which the Zoning Administrator or City Designee
reasonably determines would create an increased risk of possible damage or
injury to residents or Public Facilities of the City; and/or
      7.   Grading that shall require any export or import of materials from
any source.
   F.   If an applicant or its successor in interest to a transfer of land is
not in compliance with any prior Engineered Grading Permit, the application
shall not be approved. (Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024; amd. Ord. 2024.18, 8-7-2024)
10-18B-3: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW:
All grading, filling and clearing operations which are allowed under this
Article shall be consistent with Section
10-21-9 of this Title, and shall be designed to:
   A.   Minimize cuts and fills on steep or hazardous terrain.
   B.   Eliminate scars from cuts and fills, and preserve the natural scenic
beauty of the area, such as by rounding off sharp angles at the top, toe and
sides of cut and fill slopes to preserve, match or blend with the natural
contours and undulation of the land, and by retaining trees, brush and other
native vegetation where possible.
   C.   Limit clearing of vegetation or disturbances of the soil to those areas
of proven stability, taking into consideration geologic hazards and soil
conditions.
   D.   Assure that the natural runoff capacity of hillsides, slopes, graded
areas, cleared areas, filled areas or streams will not be exceeded, causing
flooding, erosion or silting greater than that which would have occurred if the
land had been left in its natural state.
   E.   Determine if the proposed grading will occur within a designated flood
plain which will require a separate permit from the City’s Certified Flood
Plain Administrator.
   F.   Verify whether the applicant is compliant or noncompliant for any prior
Engineered Grading Permit. (Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024; amd. Ord. 2024.18, 8-7-
2024)
10-18B-4: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Scope: No solid or liquid waste materials, including soil, silt, clay,
sand and other organic or earthen materials shall be discharged, either during
the course of the grading process or as a result of changes created by the
grading process covered under the permit into any creeks or streams, onto lands
below the high water level of the same, or onto adjoining property.
   B.   Control Devices: In order to prevent such discharges from occurring,
approved erosion and siltation control devices may be required by the Zoning
Administrator or City Designee for all grading and filling. (Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-
2024; amd. Ord. 2024.18, 8-7-2024)
10-18B-5: DUST CONTROL:
Whenever the native ground cover is removed or disturbed, or whenever fill
material is placed on the site, the exposed surface shall be treated to
eliminate dust arising from the exposed material. The Zoning Administrator or
City Designee must approve dust control methods. All dust control measures must
meet local, state, and federal standards. (Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024; amd. Ord.
2024.18, 8-7-2024)
10-18B-6: DISPOSAL OF CLEARED VEGETATION:
Vegetation removed during clearing operations shall be disposed of in a manner
approved by the Zoning Administrator or City Designee. (Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024;
amd. Ord. 2024.18, 8-7-2024)
10-18B-7: NONCONSTRUCTION AREAS PROTECTED:
   A.   There shall be no excavation on the site before the Zoning
Administrator or City Designee has approved the location (stakeout) of the
drives, parking sites, building sites and other areas to be graded or filled.
   B.   Construction equipment shall be limited to the actual area to be graded
according to the approved plans. No vehicle of any kind shall pass over areas
to be left in their natural state according to the approved plans.
   C.   Appropriate barriers around all native vegetation proposed for
retention may be required to be erected during construction.
   D.   The permittee shall be fully responsible for any damage caused to
existing trees or other vegetation. The permittee shall carry the
responsibility both for his own employees and for any and all subcontractors
from the first day of construction until the notice of completion is filed.
(Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024; amd. Ord. 2024.18, 8-7-2024)
10-18B-8: UNDERGROUND PUBLIC UTILITIES PROTECTED:
The contractor shall ascertain and verify the location of any public
underground utilities that may be on the property before doing any grading
excavation, and once located, he shall take reasonable care to protect and
avoid damage to any such underground utilities by allowing forty eight (48)
hours for such utilities to be located. Any and all damage caused to public
utilities by any act or negligence of the contractor’s employees shall be
repaired at the contractor’s expense to the satisfaction of the utility company
and/or the City. (Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024; amd. Ord. 2024.18, 8-7-2024)
10-18B-9: GRADING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Hours of operation shall not begin before seven (7:00) AM, and shall
not continue after the hour of seven (7:00) PM. No operations shall take place
on Sunday or holidays recognized by the State of Utah. Upon request, the Zoning
Administrator or City Designee may approve modifications to the date and hours
of operation.
   B.   All grading shall comply with standard engineering specifications for
slope stabilization in accordance with the geotechnical recommendations
included with the application, and all other applicable City ordinances. Slopes
shall be maintained in a manner that will prevent erosion damage on adjacent
properties.
   C.   The grading operation cannot exceed the boundary of the approved Minor
Grading Plan or Engineered Grading Plan (as applicable). No grading may occur
on any site for which there is no approved Minor Grading Plan, Engineered
Grading Plan, or qualified exemption. (Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024; amd. Ord.
2024.18, 8-7-2024)
10-18B-10: HISTORIC OR PREHISTORIC RUINS:
   A.   No grading, filling, clearing of vegetation, operation of equipment or
disturbance of the soil shall take place in areas where any historic,
prehistoric ruins, monuments or objects of antiquity are present.
   B.   The grading plan shall indicate all such historic or prehistoric areas
on the site and shall indicate the measures that will be taken to protect such
areas. Should excavation uncover or discover any historic or prehistoric ruins
or monuments or object of antiquity which were not known at the time of the
submittal of the grading plan, all work in the immediate area shall cease until
the building department shall determine what precautions should be taken to
preserve the historic artifacts. (Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024; amd. Ord. 2024.18, 8-
7-2024)
10-18B-11: ANNUAL REVIEW/EXPIRATION:
   A.   The Zoning Administrator or City designee shall review approved grading
permits annually from the date of approval.
   B.   Approval of a grading permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the
date of approval. If the approved grading on the site is not completed within
one (1) year of the date of approval, the City reserves the ability to invoke
its enforcement rights as set forth in
10-18B-12.
   C.   An applicant may request a one (1) year extension prior to the
expiration of the grading permit approval. The grading permit approval cannot
be extended beyond a total of five (5) years. (Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024; amd.
Ord. 2024.18, 8-7-2024)
10-18B-12: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   If an applicant/permittee fails to comply with any requirement of the
approved grading plan, the Zoning Administrator or City designee shall have the
right to:
      1.   Order the applicant/permittee to cease and desist from all further
grading activities.
      2.   Require applicant/permittee to submit a new Engineered Grading Plan
or any element thereof before they are allowed to recommence grading
activities.
      3.   Call upon the Grading Bond to accomplish completion or reclamation
of the grading activities or the grading site.
   B.   A violation of this Article shall constitute a land use violation and
shall be enforced according to Section
10-5-4 of this Title. (Ord. 2024.03, 3-6-2024; amd. Ord. 2024.18, 8-7-2024)
ARTICLE C. TRENCHING PERMIT
SECTION:
10-18C-1: Permit Required
10-18C-2: Review Process
10-18C-3: Barricades
10-18C-4: Shoring Required
10-18C-5: Inspection
10-18C-6: Pavement Repair; Performance Bond
10-18C-7: Easement And Right Of Way Repair
10-18C-8: Underground Public Utilities Protected
10-18C-9: Historic Or Prehistoric Ruins
10-18C-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall perform any trenching or other excavation on public property,
public right of way or public easement within the city limits before completing
the following:
   A.   For trenching for water pipes, sewer pipes, gas pipes or culverts, file
a written application with the building department and obtaining a written
permit;
   B.   For trenching for power, telephone or television cables, advise the
building department, in writing, of intent to excavate;
   C.   Allow forty eight (48) hours for utility companies to field locate any
coinciding underground utilities;
   D.   Obtain a copy of the city specifications for water and sewer piping
materials and installation. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-18C-2: REVIEW PROCESS:
Application forms are available from and shall be submitted to the building
department. See chapter 6 of this title for information required with the
application. A list of additional information that may be required may be
obtained from the building department. Included shall be the following:
   A.   Site Plan: The site plan shall show all property boundaries, existing
and proposed new underground utility mains, laterals, manhole inverts, piping
grades, valves, meters and thrust blocks.
   B.   Material And Installation Specification And Connection Details:
Underground piping shall comply with city specifications.
   C.   As Built Drawings: These drawings shall be furnished to the building
department for record purposes within thirty (30) days after the work is
completed. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-18C-3: BARRICADES:
All open trenches and excavations shall have approved barricades to protect
pedestrians and vehicles. Appropriate barriers shall also protect vegetation.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-18C-4: SHORING REQUIRED:
Trench shoring, in accordance with OSHA regulations, is required for all
trenches. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-18C-5: INSPECTION:
All trenches and excavations for which a permit is required shall be kept open
until the utility within the trench has been inspected and tested by the
building department or special inspector. All pavement and easement repairs
shall also be subject to inspection and approval before final acceptance is
given. When required by the city, the contractor shall employ a special
inspector during the construction. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-18C-6: PAVEMENT REPAIR; PERFORMANCE BOND:
When required by the city, the contractor shall furnish and file with the city
recorder appropriate security pursuant to section
10-5-3, "Security For Completion", of this title. A cleanup security of three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) shall also be posted prior to approval of the
permit. If the inspection of the completed work shows that the standards and
specifications have been met, the security shall be released within fourteen
(14) days from the date of the inspection. Paving repair materials shall comply
with city specifications and/or the state department of transportation
specifications as are applicable. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-18C-7: EASEMENT AND RIGHT OF WAY REPAIR:
The surface of all disturbed areas within easements or rights of way shall be
returned to its original good condition and properly backfilled and compacted
per city utility specifications. Excess excavated material and vegetation
debris shall be removed from the site. Property adjoining the easement or right
of way shall be protected from damage during trenching, utility installations
and backfilling, and all work shall stay within the easement or right of way
limits. All damage to adjoining or neighboring property caused by any act or
neglect on the part of the contractor shall be repaired at the contractor's
expense to the satisfaction of the city and/or the property owner. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-18C-8: UNDERGROUND PUBLIC UTILITIES PROTECTED:
The contractor shall ascertain and verify the location of any public
underground utilities that may be on the property before doing any grading
excavation, and once located, he shall take reasonable care to protect and
avoid damage to any such underground utilities by allowing forty eight (48)
hours for such utilities to be located. Any and all damage caused to public
utilities by any act or negligence of the contractor's employees shall be
repaired at the contractor's expense to the satisfaction of the utility company
and/or the city. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-18C-9: HISTORIC OR PREHISTORIC RUINS:
   A.   No grading, filling, clearing of vegetation, operation of equipment or
disturbance of the soil shall take place in areas where any historic,
prehistoric ruins, monuments or objects of antiquity are present.
   B.   The grading plan shall indicate all such historic or prehistoric areas
on the site and shall indicate the measures that will be taken to protect such
areas. Should excavation uncover or discover any historic or prehistoric ruins
or monuments or object of antiquity which were not known at the time of the
submittal of the grading plan, all work in the immediate area shall cease until
the building department shall determine what precautions should be taken to
preserve the historic artifacts. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
ARTICLE D. BLASTING PERMIT
SECTION:
10-18D-1: Permit Required
10-18D-2: Blasting Criteria
10-18D-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
When any blasting is to occur within the city, a permit for such activity shall
be applied for at least three (3) working days prior to the desired blasting
day. A detailed blast plan shall be submitted for review at the time of
application for a permit. The blast plan shall contain the following
information:
   A.   Number of holes per blast.
   B.   Blast pattern.
   C.   Depth of holes.
   D.   Maximum holes per delay.
   E.   Number of delays used.
   F.   Type of explosive used.
   G.   Total pounds of explosive.
   H.   Method of detonation.
   I.   Proximity to nearest structure.
   J.   Expected duration of blast activity.
   K.   Name of independent monitoring company. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   L.   Outline for notification of the Hurricane Valley fire district one hour
in advance of each blast and approximate time of each blast. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-
18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-18D-2: BLASTING CRITERIA:
   A.   Blasting activity that is to occur within one thousand feet (1,000') of
any school, university, daycare center, church, library, medical facility or
any public building shall be conducted during off hours where possible and
shall require seismic monitoring of each blast to ensure the integrity of the
building, as well as the safety of the occupants. Since there is a wide variety
in the type, density, specific gravity, velocity and general characteristics
within the geographical area of southern Utah, there are varied methods that
can be employed to attain the desired results. These methods, if used however,
shall adhere to the appropriate limit criteria. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   B.   Any blasting that is intended within five hundred feet (500') of any
structure, tunnel, underground utility, overhead transmission lines, pump
station or radio tower requires that the blast be monitored with a seismograph
capable of measuring peak particle velocities in three (3) spatial components:
horizontal, vertical and transverse, and shall be capable of printing this data
into a permanent record as digital, as well as waveform, and air blast
overpressure in terms of millibar, psi or decibel recording of each event. All
permanent structures within five hundred feet (500') of the blast area shall be
required to have a preblast inspection performed at the expense of the
contractor and/or blaster, by an independent company whose primary business is
to conduct and perform these types of services. The said company will deliver
to the Hurricane Valley fire district a copy of the preblast inspection prior
to the issuance of a blasting permit. A certificate of insurance issued by an
underwriter legally doing business in the state showing the contractor and/or
blaster to be properly insured for the express purpose of blasting and showing
the issuing agency as additional insured, shall be submitted with the
application for a blasting permit. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
   C.   A blasting permit shall be site specific and expire thirty (30) days
from issuance.
   D.   Special signs to warn the public of blasting operations shall be
erected in a manner as to be clearly evident to the public during all critical
periods of the blasting operations.
   E.   Notice shall be given to all utilities with facilities adjacent to the
operation with sufficient time to allow said utilities to advise the contractor
of any special circumstances or precautions to be taken.
   F.   Blasting shall be accomplished in such a manner that nearby buildings,
structures, railways, highways, etc., will be safe from rocks and other
projectiles. Adequate blasting mats or other means of protection shall be
employed when blasting in congested areas, or close proximity to improvements.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
CHAPTER 19
SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-19A-1: Overview
10-19A-2: Short Title
10-19A-3: Statement Of Purpose
10-19A-4: Interpretation
10-19A-5: Coordination With Other Documents
10-19A-6: Orderly Development Required
10-19A-7: Compliance Required
10-19A-8: Amendments
10-19A-9: Public Notice
10-19A-10: Appeals
10-19A-1: OVERVIEW:
   A.   The activities related to the use, sale and development of land have
been determined by federal and state law to be in the public interest for local
government to oversee and regulate in order to bring about the safe and orderly
creation (and maintenance) of communities. These activities may include
subdividing land into lots for sale, building structures, constructing roads,
constructing trails and/or installing utilities.
   B.   In order to effectively regulate these activities, communities are
empowered to establish review and permitting processes. This Chapter contains
the review and permitting processes for conventional subdivision developments,
including simple subdivisions, master planned developments (MPD) and phased
subdivisions. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19A-2: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the TOQUERVILLE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19A-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
This Chapter, and any rules, regulations and specifications hereafter adopted,
are adopted for the following purposes:
   A.   To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   To promote cohesive, orderly growth and development by efficient layout
and use of building lots, roads and public services and utilities.
   C.   To encourage and promote the conservation, wise use and management of
natural resources in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of
the community and value of the land.
   D.   To maintain and enhance property values.
   E.   To minimize conflict among the uses of lands and buildings.
   F.   To implement the goals and objectives of the City General Plan.
   G.   To implement the goals and objectives of the City design guidelines and
standard specifications for design and construction.
   H.   To inform the public of the requirements and conditions necessary to
obtain approvals and permits to change or create property boundaries (subdivide
land).
   I.   To preserve the natural beauty of the City, and preserve the natural,
cultural and historic features and enhance the quality of life in the City.
   J.   To minimize cuts and fills and unnecessary excavations of building
sites, particularly the unnecessary excavation of the natural vegetation on
building lots.
   K.   To minimize traffic congestion and enhance mobility.
   L.   To encourage efficiencies in public services and promote a sustainable
community.
   M.   To protect view corridors and privacy.
   N.   To promote and preserve open space including parks, trails, streetscape
buffers, perimeter landscaping, natural washes and other natural undeveloped
areas.
   O.   To eliminate or minimize nuisances, clutter and visual blight, and to
prevent pollution or degradation of air, streams, ponds and the night sky.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19A-4: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Greater Restrictions Prevail: In their interpretation and application,
the provisions of this Chapter shall be considered as minimum requirements.
Where the provisions of this Chapter impose greater restrictions than any
statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant, the provisions of this
Chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions of any statute, other regulation,
ordinance or covenant impose greater restrictions than the provision of this
Chapter, the provisions of such statute, other regulation, ordinance or
covenant shall prevail.
   B.   Rounding: Rounding to whole numbers may be used to determine distance
or height, but not in determining maximum or minimum area or other quantitative
standards or requirements. A decimal ending with five (5) or greater may be
rounded up to the next whole number.
   C.   Time Computation: Unless otherwise specified herein, a period of time
specified in this Chapter shall be calendar days beginning on the day after the
act, event or decision to which the time period refers, and ending at eleven
fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. the last day of the time period. (Ord. 2012.04,
1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19A-5: COORDINATION WITH OTHER DOCUMENTS:
This Chapter, together with the City General Plan, other provisions of this
Title, City design guidelines and City design standards and specifications for
construction shall guide the use of all land within the municipal boundaries of
the City. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19A-6: ORDERLY DEVELOPMENT REQUIRED:
Subdivisions, site plans, and other developments shall be developed in an
orderly manner and in such a way that the required improvements will be
continuous and available as necessary during construction activities within the
project, and that all of the improvements will be made available for the full,
effective and practical use and enjoyment thereof by the purchaser, grantee,
assignee, transferee or lessee of any of the lands developed within the time
herein provided or in phases specified. Developments shall be planned and
developed to accommodate continuation of roads, utilities, drainage and other
infrastructure to adjoining properties. Oversizing of lines or infrastructure
in the development may be necessary to accommodate future development outside
of the project. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19A-7: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   No tract of land shall be divided, subdivided, reconfigured, developed
or redeveloped except in conformance with provisions of this Chapter and all
other provisions of this Title and all other applicable ordinances and
regulations and provisions of Utah Code Annotated. No plat, condominium,
subdivision amendment or reconfiguring of property shall be recorded except in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. All licenses, permits,
agreements and plans issued or approved by the City shall comply with all
requirements and standards of City ordinances. All subdivisions, condominiums,
site plans, construction and infrastructure shall be designed and constructed
in conformance with City ordinances, engineering regulations and requirements.
All uses shall be conducted in conformance with City ordinances, approved plans
and requirements. Land to be subdivided shall not be transferred, sold or
offered for sale prior to recording the subject plat or until all requirements
of this Chapter for subdivisions, condominiums or other developments are met.
   B.   No building permit may be issued for any structure or development on
any land that has been divided, subdivided, reconfigured, developed or
redeveloped in a manner not in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter
and all applicable provisions of this Title, and all other applicable municipal
ordinances and regulations, and state statutes. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd.
Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19A-8: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   The City Council may, from time to time, in a manner consistent with
the City general plan, amend any provision of this Chapter. Amendments shall be
approved in accordance with all public notice and public hearings required
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated and this Chapter.
   B.   Any amendment or revision to this Chapter shall supersede any prior
provisions or ordinances. Provisions of this Chapter not affected by the
amendment or revision shall continue to be valid and shall not be considered a
new enactment when amendments or revisions are adopted. Any prior provisions of
City ordinances, which do not conform to provisions of this Chapter, are
declared void. Any uses, structures or buildings which were conforming to
previous provisions of this Chapter but do not now conform shall be
nonconforming uses, structures or buildings. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd.
Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19A-9: PUBLIC NOTICE:
   A.   Required Notice: Any public hearing required by ordinance or statute
shall be scheduled and held by the Planning Commission or City Council and
notice provided according to the provisions of Utah Code Annotated sections 10-
9a-201 through 210, as applicable to the specific zoning action and
corresponding hearing as outlined in those sections of Utah Code Annotated.
   B.   Notice To Neighboring Entities: Notice as appropriate or required to
neighboring entities will be provided according to the provisions of Utah Code
Annotated section 10-9a-201 et seq., as the statutes may apply. (Ord. 2012.04,
1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19A-10: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal Authority: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-701(1)
(b), the City Council has established the Toquerville Appeal Authority to act
as the Appeal Authority for decisions applying land use ordinances.
   B.   Procedures: Appeals of decision applying this Chapter shall proceed
under the procedures outlined in section
10-3-2 of this Title. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2018.07, 12-13-2018;
Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
ARTICLE B. TYPES OF SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
10-19B-1: Scope
10-19B-2: Simple Subdivision
10-19B-3: Conventional Subdivision
10-19B-4: Phased Subdivisions
10-19B-1: SCOPE:
   A.   All subdivisions of land shall be divided, subdivided, reconfigured,
developed or redeveloped in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, and
other applicable provisions of this Title, the state land sales practices act,
the City General Plan, and all other applicable City resolutions and ordinances
and Utah Code Annotated.
   B.   Specific procedures for each type of subdivision are outlined in
Articles of this Chapter as noted in this Article. General subdivision
procedures are outlined in Article C of this Chapter. General design
regulations are outlined in Article D of this Chapter. Procedures for simple
subdivisions, lot and parcel splits, master planned developments and phased
subdivisions have additional requirements and/or relaxed requirements as
outlined in this Chapter. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-
2024)
10-19B-2: SIMPLE SUBDIVISION:
The intent of this simple subdivision process is to take advantage of the Utah
State Code exemption to allow for a subdivision with no more than three (3) or
fewer lots to be processed in a shorter time frame as a simple subdivision.
This code outlines a separate process for a simple subdivision with three (3)
or fewer lots. In this process, an applicant may elect to divide property
through a metes and bounds record of survey. See Article E of this Chapter for
the approval process and required improvements. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd.
Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19B-3: CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION:
The purpose and intent of the conventional subdivision procedure is to allow
the division of land in all zones in a standard and more traditional
configuration of lots. While creative and innovative land development is
encouraged, the conventional subdivision may be best suited for smaller acreage
subdivisions and/or tract developments. See Article C of this Chapter for
approval process and Article D of this Chapter for required improvements. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19B-4: PHASED SUBDIVISIONS:
Conventional and master planned developments may be phased subdivisions if the
project is proposed to be completed in designated phases. The purpose of the
phased subdivision procedure is to provide general development parameters for
subdivision phases in the phased subdivision master plan prior to the detailed
and comprehensive requirements of the preliminary plat and final plat. The
developer and/or owner shall enter into a development agreement (see section
10-19C-5) that outlines the duties, responsibilities, obligations, commitments
and promises of the City and the owner and developer. See Article C of this
Chapter for the approval process, Article D of this Chapter for required
improvements, and Chapter 21 of this Title, general design standards, for
additional standards and requirements. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord.
2024.22, 11-20-2024)
ARTICLE C. APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS
SECTION:
10-19C-1: Application And Review Required
10-19C-2: Pre-Application Process
10-19C-3: Preliminary Plat
10-19C-4: Final Plat
10-19C-5: Development Agreement
10-19C-6: Construction Of Improvements
10-19C-1: APPLICATION AND REVIEW REQUIRED:
   A.   All proposed subdivisions shall meet the application and review
requirements outlined in Utah State Code 10-9a-601, et seq, as amended, this
Article and the requirements of the individual zone in which the subdivision is
proposed. All provisions of this Chapter and other City requirements shall be
met in preparing applications and designing and constructing the development.
   B.   No subdivision of land shall be transferred, sold or offered for sale,
contracted for sale, deeded or conveyed, nor shall a building permit be issued
for a structure thereon (other than an approved model home or project
amenities, such as clubhouse, pool, park, etc.) until:
      1.   The approved final plat is recorded in the Office of the Washington
County Recorder; and
      2.   The improvements required in connection with the subdivision have
been constructed or guaranteed as provided in this Chapter.
   C.   In the absence of a Planning and Zoning Administrator, the Chairperson
of the Planning Commission shall fulfill the duties of a Planning and Zoning
Administrator. (Ord. 2017.07, 6-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19C-2: PRE-APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A.   An applicant for a subdivision may request a pre-application meeting
with staff. Should an applicant request a pre-application meeting, the
following shall apply:
      1.   The applicant shall submit a concept plan for staff review.
      2.   Within fifteen (15) business days after the request, the
municipality shall schedule the meeting to review the concept plan and give
initial feedback.
      3.   At the pre-application meeting, the City shall provide or have made
available on the municipal website the following:
         a.   Copies of the applicable land use regulations.
         b.   Complete list of standards required for the project.
         c.   Preliminary and Final Plat checklists.
      4.   Pre-application review of a concept plan does not create any vested
rights and feedback on the concept plan does not grant or infer any official
standing or approval. The applicant is responsible for adhering to the
ordinance.
B.   Concept Plan: A concept plan shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator and shall comply with the City's Subdivision Submittal
Requirements Policy. (Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19C-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the preliminary plat is to review and resolve
most of the technical details of the subdivision design to minimize changes and
revisions which might otherwise be necessary on the final plat. The preliminary
plat and all information and procedures relating thereto shall comply with the
provisions of this Chapter, all other applicable ordinances, and Utah State
Code.
   B.   Submittal Contents: The preliminary plat application shall be submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Administrator, along with the application fee set by
the City Council. The preliminary plat application shall comply with the
Subdivision Submittal Requirements Policy maintained by the City.
   C.   Review Process: Any division of land, unless otherwise exempted in this
Title, requires completion of a Preliminary Plat and Final Plat. The following
outlines the review process, as intended by Utah State Code 10-9a-604, as
amended. State Code shall prevail if there is any conflict in content or
interpretation.
      1.   If the application requires legislative approvals, such as a zone
change, annexation, general plan amendment, right of way or easement vacation,
or any other legislative action, the legislative approval shall be completed
prior to submittal of the Preliminary Plat application.
      2.   The applicant may request a pre-application meeting with a Planning
and Zoning Administrator and/or City Designee to discuss the proposal and
submittal requirements. If requested, the City and applicant shall follow the
process outlined in Chapter 19, Article C, Section 2 of this Title.
      3.   The City shall provide, or have available on the City website, each
of the following:
         a.   The Preliminary Plat Application.
         b.   The owner's affidavit.
         c.   A breakdown of application fees.
         d.   A copy of the applicable land use ordinances.
         e.   A complete list of standards required for the project.
         f.   A checklist for Preliminary Plat drawings.
      4.   The applicant submits an application, including the Preliminary Plat
and all required documentation and information.
      5.   The City checks the submittal for completeness.
         a.   If the submittal includes all required materials, the City
receives the submittal and starts the review cycle.
         b.   If the submittal is found to be incomplete, the submittal is
returned to the applicant. No review shall commence until the City has made a
determination that the application is complete.
      6.   If the location of the proposed subdivision is within one hundred
(100) feet of a water conveyance facility, within twenty (20) calendar days
after receipt of the completed application, the City shall notify in writing
the Water Conveyance Facility Owner(s) of the application and request comments
related to the following aspects of the water conveyance facility: access,
maintenance, protection, safety, and any other issues related.
         a.   Any Water Conveyance Facility shall have at least twenty (20)
calendar days to respond. While the City may provide comments to the applicant
before this twenty (20) calendar day window is complete, the Preliminary
Administrative Land Use Authority shall not grant approval until at least
twenty (20) calendar days after the day on which the City mailed notice to the
Water Conveyance Facility.
         b.   Water Conveyance Facility: Shall mean a ditch, canal, flume,
pipeline, or other watercourse used to convey water used for irrigation or
storm water drainage and any related easement for the ditch, canal, flume,
pipeline, or other watercourse. See Utah State Code 73-1-15.5-1b.
      7.   Within thirty (30) business days, the City shall complete a review
of the Preliminary and provide comments on the application.
         a.   The review cycle number of days only applies to single-family,
two-family, and townhome developments. It does not apply to other land uses,
such as commercial, industrial, or mixed-use.
      8.   Within the review window outlined in Subsection 7, the City shall
complete a review of the Preliminary Plat and submittal contents and provide a
response to the applicant. The City shall determine whether the application
meets all requirements or requires corrective actions and shall notify the
applicant in an written response:
         a.   If the application is found to require corrections, the City
shall be specific and shall cite the ordinance, statute, or specification that
requires the modification. Comments shall be logged in an index or requested
modifications or additions. The required corrections are sent to the applicant
to prepare for resubmittal.
         b.   The City may require additional information relating to an
applicant's plans to ensure compliance municipal ordinances and approved
standards.
         c.   If the applicant is found to meet all codes, standards, and
specifications, the application is forwarded to the Preliminary Administrative
Land Use Authority.
      9.   After receiving the list of required modifications or additions, the
applicant's resubmittal shall include a written explanation in response to each
of the municipality's review comments, identifying and explaining the
applicant's revisions or reasons for declining to make the revisions.
      10.   The City shall review the resubmittal to ensure that the applicant
has responded to each item logged in the index of requested modifications or
additions. If the response does not address each item, the City shall return
the submittal to the applicant.
         a.   If the resubmittal is complete, the City shall review the
application and provide written comment within the review window outlined in
Subsection 7.
         b.   The review window number of days only applies to single-family,
two-family, and townhome developments. It does not apply to other land uses,
such as commercial, industrial, or mixed-use, nor does it apply to any
legislative approval.
      11.   If the City determines that the resubmittal is now complete and
meets all codes, standards, and specifications, the resubmittal shall be
forwarded to the Preliminary Administrative Land Use Authority to complete the
review.
         a.   If the City finds the resubmittal does not comply with all
applicable codes, standards, and specifications, another review letter and
index of requested modifications or additions shall be created and sent to the
applicant. This shall be provided to the applicant up until the fourth review
cycle, at which point the application shall be forwarded to the Preliminary
Administrative Land Use Authority for review with a recommendation that the
application does not meet all codes, standards, and specifications. The
applicant may appeal this determination as outlined in Utah Code 10-9a-604.2
(11), as amended.
      12.   If, on the fourth and final review, the City fails to respond
within thirty (30) business days, the City shall, upon request of the property
owner, and within ten (10) business days after the day on which the request was
received:
         a.   The City shall advise the applicant, in writing, of the
deficiency in the application and of the right to appeal the determination to
the appeal authority designated in
10-19A-9.
   D.   Approval Process: After review, the application shall be submitted to
the Preliminary Administrative Land Use Authority for approval.
      1.   For a Preliminary Plat, the Preliminary Administrative Land Use
Authority shall be the Planning Commission.
         a.   Any contingent legislative approval, such as a zone change,
overlay zone, general plan amendment, annexation, right-of-way vacation, or
other similar approval, shall occur at the City Council prior to the submittal
of a Preliminary Plat Application.
      2.   The Preliminary Administrative Land Use Authority shall hold a
public hearing. A public notice shall be sent to all owners of property within
three hundred (300) feet of the subdivision.
      3.   If the Preliminary Administrative Land Use Authority finds that the
application complies with the applicable municipal ordinances and the
requirements of Utah State Code, the Preliminary Administrative Land Use
Authority shall approve the Preliminary Plat application.
         a.   The Preliminary Administrative Land Use Authority shall remand
the application back to the applicant for corrections if it finds:
            (1)   The applicant has not completed all requirements as outlined
in the review index, or
            (2)   The application does not address all requirements in state
code, and although the item was not addressed in the first review, the
requirement relates directly to public health and safety.
         b.   The Preliminary Administrative Land Use Authority shall deny the
application if the applicant is unwilling to make the required corrections or
provide the required information.
      4.   In instances where a developer abandons or otherwise fails to take
timely actions to address corrections or complete a project, the application
approval shall lapse.
         a.   A Preliminary Plat application expires if it is not approved by
the City within six (6) months from the time its application is submitted and
accepted.
         b.   A one-time six (6) month extension may be approved by the
Preliminary Administrative Land Use Authority if requested prior to the
expiration of the Preliminary Plat application.
         c.   A preliminary subdivision plat approval shall remain valid for
six (6) months from the date of approval. If a final subdivision plat is not
applied for within six (6) months of the date of the preliminary approval, the
preliminary plat shall be void, unless a one-time extension of six (6) months
is requested by the developer and is granted by the Preliminary Administrative
Land Use Authority prior to the expiration date.
         d.   For multi-phased projects, the final subdivision plat for at
least one (1) phase must be approved within one (1) year of the preliminary
subdivision plat approval. The preliminary subdivision plat for all phases for
which a subdivision plat has not been finally approved will expire three (3)
years from the date of the preliminary plat approval by the Preliminary
Administrative Land Use Authority unless an extension of one (1) year is
requested by the developer and is granted by the Preliminary Administrative
Land Use Authority prior to the expiration date or is included in a written
development agreement. (Ord. 2017.07, 6-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19C-4: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the final subdivision plat is to provide formal
approval by the City before a subdivision is recorded in the Office of the
Washington County Recorder. The final subdivision plat application shall be
submitted to the City for any proposed subdivision only after the preliminary
subdivision plat has been approved by the Preliminary Administrative Land Use
Authority.
   B.   Within six (6) months of approval of a Preliminary Plat, the
Subdivision Improvement Plans and a Final Plat prepared by a licensed surveyor
shall be submitted in conformance with this Section. If a complete application
is not submitted within six (6) months of Preliminary Plat approval, the
approval is deemed to have expired.
   C.   Submittal Requirements: The completed final plat application, including
the Subdivision Improvement Plans, shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Administrator. The Final Plat shall comply with the Subdivision
Submittal Requirements Policy maintained by the City. Review Process: The
following outlines the review process, as intended by Utah State Code 10-9a-
604, as amended. If there is any conflict in the content or interpretation,
state code shall prevail.
      1.   The City shall maintain and publish a list of items comprising a
complete Final Plat application, including:
         a.   The application.
         b.   The owner's affidavit.
         c.   An electronic copy of all plans in PDF format.
         d.   The breakdown of fees due upon approval of the application.
      2.   The applicant submits a complete application, including the Final
Plat and all required documentation and information.
      3.   The City checks the submittal for completeness.
         a.   If the submittal includes all materials, the City receives the
submittal and starts the review.
         b.   If the submittal is incomplete, the submittal is returned to the
applicant. No review of the application shall occur until the City has
determined that the applicant has submitted a complete application.
      4.   Within forty (40) business days, the City shall complete a review of
the Final Plat and Subdivision Improvement Plans, except as follows:
         a.   The review cycle dates restrictions and requirements do not apply
to the review of subdivision applications affecting property within identified
geological hazard areas.
         b.   The review cycle number of days only applies to single-family,
two-family, and townhome developments. It does not apply to other land uses,
such as commercial, industrial, or mixed-use.
      5.   If the location is within one hundred feet (100') of a Water
Conveyance Facility, within twenty (20) calendar days after receipt of the
completed application, the City shall notify in writing the Water Conveyance
Facility Owner(s) of the application and request comments related to the
following aspects of the Water Conveyance Facility: access, maintenance,
protection, safety, and any other issues related.
         a.   Any Water Conveyance Facility shall have at least twenty (20)
calendar days to respond. While the City may provide comments to the applicant
before this twenty (20) day window is complete, the Final Administrative Land
Use Authority shall not grant approval until at least twenty (20) calendar days
after the day on which the City mailed notice to the Water Conveyance Facility.
         b.   Water Conveyance Facility: Shall mean a ditch, canal, flume,
pipeline, or other watercourse used to convey water used for irrigation or
stormwater drainage and any related easement for the ditch, canal, flume,
pipeline, or other watercourse. See State Code 73-1-15.5-1b.
      6.   During review, The City Attorney shall review the Final Plat and
shall recommend approval if the attorney finds that:
         a.   There is a current title report. The legal description in the
title report shall be compared with any legal description in the restrictive
covenants, articles, consents, and other legal documents. All persons shown on
the title report as owners or lienholders must sign and have acknowledged by a
notary the plat unless prior approval is given by the City Attorney. All
lienholder consents must not only show consent to the recording of the plat and
any restrictive covenants but must also indicate the lienholder's approval of
and joinder in the dedication of any public streets or rights-of-way.
         b.   The performance bond, escrow deposit, letter of credit, or trust
deed with the City is in appropriate form and signed by the necessary parties.
         c.   That the subdivision does not, in the attorney's opinion, violate
any ordinance of the City, the laws of the State of Utah, or the rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
      7.   Within the review window in Subsection 5, the City shall complete a
review of the Final Plat, Subdivision Improvement Plans, and submittal contents
and provide a response to the applicant. The City shall determine whether the
application meets all requirements or requires corrective action and shall
notify the applicant in a written response.
         a.   If the application is found to require corrections, the City must
be specific and cite the ordinance, statute, or specifications that require the
modification(s). Comments shall be logged in an index of requested
modifications or additions. The required corrections are sent to the applicant
to prepare a resubmittal.
         b.   The City may require additional information relating to an
applicant's plans to ensure compliance with municipal ordinances and approved
standards.
         c.   If the applicant is found to meet all codes, standards, and
specifications, the application is forwarded to the Final Administrative Land
Use Authority for review and approval.
      8.   If corrections are required, the applicant shall provide a
resubmittal. The resubmittal shall include a written explanation in response to
each of the municipality's review comments, identifying and explaining the
applicant's revisions or reasons for declining to make a requested revision.
      9.   The City shall check the resubmittal to ensure that the applicant
has responded to each item logged in the index of requested modifications or
additions. If the response does not address each item, the City shall return
the submittal to the applicant.
         a.   If the resubmittal is complete, the City shall accept the
application for a second review cycle. The time frame to complete the review
depends on how quickly the applicant responded to the corrections in full and
whether the applicant made any material changes.
            (1)   If the applicant responds within forty (40) business days,
the City has forty (40) business days to complete the second review cycle.
            (2)   If the applicant responds after forty (40) business days, the
City has sixty (60) business days to complete the second review cycle.
            (3)   If the applicant made a material change that merits a new
review, the review shall restart at the first review cycle as it relates to the
new material.
         b.   The review window number of days only applies to single-family,
two-family, and townhome developments. It does not apply to other land uses,
such as commercial, industrial, or mixed-use, nor does it apply to any
legislative approval.
      10.   If the City neglects to include a required change or correction in
the initial review process, the modification or correction can only be imposed
on subsequent reviews if necessary to protect public health and safety or to
enforce state or federal law.
      11.   If the City determines that the resubmittal is complete and meets
all codes, standards, and specifications, it shall be forwarded to the Final
Administrative Land Use Authority for review and approval.
         a.   If the City finds the resubmittal does not comply with all
applicable codes, standards, and specifications, another review letter and
index of requested modifications or additions shall be created and sent to the
applicant. This shall be provided to the applicant up until the fourth review
cycle, at which point the application shall be forwarded to the Final
Administrative Land Use Authority for review with a recommendation that the
application does not meet all codes, standards, and specifications. The
applicant may appeal this determination as outlined in Utah Code 10-9a-604.2
(8), as amended.
      12.   If, on the fourth and final review, the City fails to respond
within forty (40) business days, the City shall, upon request of the property
owner, and within ten (10) business days after the day on which the request is
received:
         a.   For a dispute arising from the subdivision improvement plans,
assemble an appeals panel in accordance with Utah State Code 10-9a-508(5)(d) to
review and approve or deny the final revised set of plans.
         b.   For a dispute arising from the subdivision ordinance, advise the
applicant, in writing, of the deficiency in the application and the right to
appeal the determination to the appeal authority designated in 10-19A-10.
   D.   Final Plat Approval and Recordation:
      1.   Ready for Final Approval: Once all reviewing City staff have found
the Final Plat and the Subdivision Improvement Plans to be in conformity, the
plat will be submitted to the Final Administrative Land Use Authority for
approval.
      2.   For the Final Plat, the Final Administrative Land Use Authority
shall be the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or City Designee.
         a.   No public hearing may be held for the subdivision Final Plat
approval.
      3.   Approval: The Final Administrative Land Use Authority shall approve
the Final Plat if it finds:
         a.   The proposed plat complies with the requirements of the City
Code, Utah State Code, and all other applicable policies and regulations.
         b.   The plat has been approved by all regulatory bodies, such as a
culinary water authority, or sanitary sewer authority, or County Health
Department, as applicable.
      4.   Denial: The Final Administrative Land Use Authority may deny or
remand the proposed Final Plat if:
         a.   The Final Administrative Land Use Authority finds the applicant
has not provided a complete, accurate, and satisfactory response to all
comments during review and any other point of non-compliance with applicable
regulations.
         b.   The applicant is unwilling to make required corrections or
provide required information.
      5.   Appeal: Any appeal shall be consistent with the provisions of Utah
Code 10-9a-604.2.
      6.   Preparation Of Final Plat Mylar: Once all requirements have been
met, redline corrections made, revised plans and plat submitted and City staff
review completed, and the Final Administrative Land Use Authority has approved
the final plat, the applicant shall submit a twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-
inch (24" x 36") mylar drawing of the corrected final subdivision plat that
meets the requirements of the Office of the Washington County Recorder, with
the signatures of the owners and other required signatures.
   E.   Final Subdivision Plat Expiration: If the final subdivision plat is not
recorded within one (1) year from the date of approval, the approval shall
expire and the final subdivision plat shall be null and void. The City may
grant a extension to the recording of the final subdivision plat not exceeding
six (6) months; provided, that the developer submits the request for extension
prior to expiration of the final plat and satisfies any new City requirements
pertaining to the public health, safety and welfare.
   F.   Final Subdivision Plat Recording:
      1.   The City Recorder or his/her designee shall record the final
subdivision plat at the Office of the Washington County Recorder. The final
subdivision plat may not be recorded until all of the following items have been
completed:
         a.   The final subdivision plat has been approved by the Final
Administrative Land Use Authority and all requirements of the City Engineer and
City Attorney have been met.
         b.   All required signatures, including the Mayor's signature and City
Recorder's certification, have been applied to the mylar plat drawing.
         c.   The security for improvements as determined by the City Engineer
and approved by the City Attorney has been properly posted with the City or
improvements completed and accepted by the City.
         d.   All necessary deeds and agreements have been executed and
submitted to the City.
         e.   A development agreement, if applicable, for the project has been
approved.
         f.   All impact fees, development fees and other fees have been paid
to the City.
      2.   Once all of the above actions have occurred, the City Recorder or
his/her designee shall record the final subdivision plat at the Office of the
Washington County Recorder. In no instance shall a fully executed final plat be
released to an applicant or property owner for recording on their own.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the City Recorder or his/her designee
may release a fully executed and approved final plat to a licensed title
company of an applicant's choosing for a courtesy recording.
   G.   Amending Recorded Plat:
      1.   Any landowner whose land has been platted as provided in this
Chapter may, upon application to the City, have such plat or portion thereof,
or any street or alley therein contained, altered or amended.
      2.   The procedure for amending or altering a subdivision plat shall
comply with Utah State Code 10-9a-708 and may be the same procedure as for
approval of a new subdivision as determined at the discretion of the Final
Administrative Land Use Authority.
   H.   Vacating Recorded Plat: The procedure for vacation of a plat shall be
governed by provisions of Utah Code Annotated Section 10-9a-609. (Ord. 2017.07,
6-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19C-5: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   Purpose: The developer/property owner and the City may enter into a
development agreement that outlines the duties, responsibilities, obligations,
commitments and promises of the developer/property owner and the commitments of
the City.
   B.   General Requirements:
      1.   The development agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney and
shall incorporate all agreements between the parties.
      2.   The development agreement must be approved prior to final plat
approval.
      3.   If the developer is including parks, open space, clubhouses and/or
trail improvements within a development, the development agreement shall
include proposed phasing and terms of completion of these improvements.
      4.   Any special agreements, conveyances, restrictions or covenants which
govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of common areas shall be
included in the development agreement.
      5.   The development agreement may provide limitations on the number of
building permits issued and/or phases of the project to be approved subject to
the completion of the improvements.
      6.   The development agreement for phased subdivisions shall incorporate
the phased subdivision master plan.
      7.   The development agreement shall include any provisions for security
for completion of the subdivision improvements and/or schedule of utility
construction and restoration bond requirements.
      8.   If the development is a phased subdivision, the development
agreement shall specify all conditions and requirements that must be met in
order to protect and maintain a vested approval for all subsequent phases. For
example, the City may impose as a condition precedent to final approval of
subsequent phases, the availability and access to water and sewer services and
source sufficient to accommodate the subsequent phases.
      9.   Shall comply with current design standards.
   C.   Approval: The development agreement shall be approved by the City
Council and signed by the Mayor.
   D.   Recording: The development agreement shall be recorded by the City at
the Washington County Recorder's Office. Recordation by the City shall only
take place after all of the necessary signatures are obtained, all approvals
given and all bonds and fees posted. The development agreement must be recorded
prior to the recording of the final plat. (Ord. 2017.07, 6-8-2017; amd. Ord.
2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19C-6: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer/owner may begin construction of required improvements after
approval of the final plat, posting of restoration bond and prior to the
recording of the final plat in accordance with the recorded development
agreement and in accordance with construction drawings approved as required in
this Chapter. (Ord. 2017.07, 6-8-2017; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
ARTICLE D. DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-19D-1: Design Standards
10-19D-2: Subdivision Improvement Plans
10-19D-3: Construction Of Improvements
10-19D-4: Expiration Of Construction Drawing Approval
10-19D-5: Standards For Subdivision Improvement Plans
10-19D-6: Lots And Parcels
10-19D-7: Density
10-19D-8: Streets And Roads
10-19D-9: Sidewalks
10-19D-10: Streetscape Buffer
10-19D-11: Preservation Of Natural Features
10-19D-12: Fencing
10-19D-13: Landscaping
10-19D-14: Utilities And Other Improvements Required
10-19D-15: Drawing Of Record
10-19D-16: Improvement Requirements, Guarantee And Warranty
10-19D-17: Building Permits
10-19D-18: Certificates Of Occupancy
10-19D-19: Construction
10-19D-1: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Standards and specifications for design, construction and inspections include,
but are not limited to, street improvements, asphalt, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, culinary and secondary water distribution systems, sewage disposal
facilities, storm and subsurface drainage and flood control facilities and
other infrastructure shall be approved by the City staff. The City has compiled
construction design standards in the standard specifications for design and
construction and design and aesthetic guidelines in the design guidelines.
These documents may be amended from time to time. All public improvements shall
be designed and installed in accordance with the City's standards and
specifications, the requirements of the City and other applicable City
ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-
2024)
10-19D-2: SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
Complete and detailed Subdivision Improvement Plans and drawings of all
improvements shall be prepared in conformance to the design standards of the
City and shall meet the requirements of the Subdivision Submittal Policy
maintained by the City. The Subdivision Improvement plans shall be included as
part of the Preliminary Plat Application. They shall be submitted to the City
for review at the same time the Final Subdivision Plat is being reviewed. Final
approval of the project shall not be granted until the plans have been reviewed
and signed by all utility providers. Plans for all street utilities shall be
included in the same plans. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-
2024)
10-19D-3: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
No construction shall be started until the final subdivision plat and
Subdivision Improvement Plans have been approved and
   A.   Final plat and development agreement (if applicable), including
security for completion, has been recorded; or
   B.   The required improvements have been completed and accepted. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-4: EXPIRATION OF CONSTRUCTION DRAWING APPROVAL:
Approval of construction drawings shall expire six (6) months after approval by
the City if no construction work has begun on the development. Construction
drawings shall also expire if construction of improvements is stopped during
the construction for one year, unless an extension of six (6) months is granted
by the City Council prior to the expiration date or is included in the
development agreement. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-5: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
   A.   General Standards: Standards are set for the purpose of standardizing
the drawings and to obtain uniformity in appearance, clarity, size and
reproduction. Three (3) copies of the Subdivision Improvement Plans and one
electronic version shall be submitted with the Final Plat Application. All
drawings and prints shall be clear and legible and conform to good engineering
and drafting practices. The size of drawings shall be twenty four inches by
thirty six inches (24" x 36").
   B.   Subdivision Improvement Plan Information: The contents of the
Subdivision Improvement Plans shall comply with the Subdivision Submittal
Requirements Policy and the City's standards and specifications. (Ord. 2012.04,
1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-6: LOTS AND PARCELS:
   A.   General Requirements: The following requirements pertaining to
subdivisions or other developments shall be incorporated into project design
and implemented by the developer:
      1.   Each lot or parcel shall be of adequate shape and size to
accommodate yard area, frontage/width, parking, access, landscaping, building
and other requirements of the zone in which the lot or parcel is proposed and
to accommodate reasonable use of the property.
      2.   Allowances for existing topography, easements, vegetation, waterways
and other natural or historic features of the property shall be accommodated in
the design of lots or parcels.
      3.   Individual lots or parcels may not be created which would be divided
by a city boundary or a zone boundary.
   B.   Lot And Parcel Design: The following requirements pertaining to
subdivisions or other developments shall be incorporated into project design
and implemented by the developer:
      1.   Double frontage lots or parcels may only be allowed where lots back
onto collector or arterial streets. However, on a case by case basis, double
frontage lots may be approved elsewhere due to:
         a.   Property constraints;
         b.   Traffic considerations; or
         c.   Other special circumstances.
      2.   Where double frontage lots are approved, the following may be
required:
         a.   An approved decorative masonry wall along the rear lot;
         b.   Limited access on arterial and collector streets;
         c.   No access from street which is established along the rear of the
lot; and
         d.   Altered park strips and sidewalks along the rear frontages of the
lot.
      3.   The minimum lot width for corner lots shall be ten feet (10') wider
than the minimum width required for an interior lot in the same zone.
   C.   Flag Lots: A flag lot for one single-family dwelling may be allowed to
accommodate the development of property that otherwise could not reasonably be
developed under the regulations contained in this Title or other titles adopted
by the City.
      1.   Factors: Flag lots may be allowed and approved after consideration
of the following factors:
         a.   More than two (2) contiguous staffs are prohibited.
         b.   The development of the property in question must be found by the
planning commission to be reasonable and practical under normal city land use
and subdivision regulations.
         c.   The creation of the flag lot must not foreclose the possibility
of future development of other large interior parcels that are not developable
unless a street is extended to them across other adjacent properties.
      2.   Development Standards: If any proposed flag lot meets the above
requirements, the development shall be subject to the following standards and
conditions:
         a.   The original parcel, after the flag lot split, shall conform to
and meet all requirements, setbacks, height restrictions, etc., of the zone in
which it is located.
         b.   The flag portion of the lot shall meet all lot width, setback and
yard requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. The staff
portion of the lot may be included in the calculation of lot area.
         c.   A flag lot shall be comprised of a staff (narrow) portion and a
flag (wide) portion. The flag and staff must be contiguous.
         d.   The staff portion of the lot shall front on a public street. The
minimum width of the staff portion at any point shall be twenty six feet (26')
and comply with fire authority specification. However, a greater staff width
for lots in sensitive lands overlay zones may be required. The maximum length
of the staff shall be five hundred feet (500') and the maximum grade of the
staff shall not exceed twelve percent (12%).
         e.   The lot access turnaround and fire protection shall be approved
by the Hurricane Valley fire district.
         f.   No building or structure will be located within the staff portion
of the flag lot.
         g.   The front yard of a flag lot shall be on the side of the flag
portion which connects to the staff. Yard setbacks shall conform to the setback
requirements of the zone in which the flag lot is located.
         h.   The main building shall be located no more than two hundred fifty
feet (250') from a fire hydrant, measured along a public or private right of
way or along the staff portion of the lot. An easement for any fire hydrant
located on private property shall be provided to the City for access to and
maintenance of the hydrant and water line.
         i.   Upon review, the City may require installation of curb, gutter
and other drainage control measures in the staff portion of the lot to prevent
runoff from entering neighboring properties.
         j.   Clear address signage shall be installed and maintained at the
street by the owner, including notice that the driveway is a private right of
way.
         k.   All structures shall meet the height requirements of the zone in
which a flag lot is located.
         l.   Before a flag lot is approved, a design and site plan must be
approved and accepted by the City of Toquerville and all affected utilities for
all facilities required to accommodate a single-family dwelling. Construction
of the approved facilities must be complete before a building permit will be
issued for the lot. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2017.01, 1-12-2017;
amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-7: DENSITY:
The maximum density for all subdivisions shall be consistent with the zone
district, subject to any density bonus approved by the Planning Commission and
City Council. There shall be no vested right to any density bonuses. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-8: STREETS AND ROADS:
   A.   Effect Of Transportation/Street Element Of General Plan: The
subdivision plan shall be in compliance with the general plan street/
transportation element. Applicants shall take into account proposed streets and
street widths indicated in the City's transportation element of the general
plan in planning of the development.
   B.   Street Requirements: Streets shall be designed and constructed
according to the standards set forth in the standards and specifications of the
City. No private street shall be allowed unless approved by the City Council.
      1.   a.   The developer shall dedicate right of way and install
improvements for proposed collector streets which are planned to adjoin or
traverse the project or which are necessary for the development. The entire
proposed right of way shall be dedicated according to the design width
specified by the City's transportation element of the general plan.
         b.   The City may participate in a percentage of the cost of
improvements for major collector, arterial minor and arterial major streets as
proposed in the City Capital Facilities Plan.
      2.   Subdivisions and other developments shall be designed to provide
future access to adjoining vacant parcels. Developments shall also be designed
so that existing stub streets in existing development will be connected to the
proposed streets and accesses. Where a stub street is provided which accesses
more than two (2) lots on each side, a temporary turnaround and public use
easement at least eighty feet (80') in diameter shall be provided. The City may
require improvements to be installed in temporary turnaround areas.
      3.   Cul-de-sac streets may not exceed six hundred fifty feet (650') in
length as measured from the center of the intersection of a connecting through
street to the center of the turnaround area. The turnaround pavement radius
shall not be less than forty two and one-half feet (421/2').
      4.   Streets in subdivisions, excluding collector streets, exceeding
eighty feet (80') in length are encouraged to be curvilinear or provide
sufficient alignment variation to calm traffic and enhance aesthetic appeal in
the subdivision.
      5.   Accumulations of more than twenty (20) lots shall provide more than
one entrance and exit roadway. No additional lots shall be created in an area
that has twenty (20) lots and only one access.
      6.   Subdivision streets shall be designed to approach an arterial or
collector street in accordance with the City design standards and
specifications for construction. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22,
11-20-2024)
10-19D-9: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of sidewalks is to separate pedestrian travel from
vehicular traffic and to provide safe and convenient pedestrian walkways.
   B.   General Requirements: Sidewalks may be required on both sides of public
streets. Landscaped areas, in compliance with the design guidelines, between
the street curb and gutter and the sidewalk, and between the sidewalk and
outside right of way boundary, are encouraged. The sidewalk may be placed in
the streetscape buffer area. If sidewalks serving public streets are not placed
within a dedicated right of way, an easement for access and maintenance will be
required.
   C.   Sidewalk Design:
      1.   See minimum sidewalk width requirements set forth in the standards
and specifications for public improvements and City standard specifications for
design and construction.
      2.   Required sidewalk and bike paths shall be serpentined on streets
sixty feet (60') wide or wider, and are encouraged to be serpentined on streets
less than sixty feet (60') wide. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord.
2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-10: STREETSCAPE BUFFER:
   A.   Purpose: The streetscape buffer is intended to provide an area of
landscaped open space along all public streets which form the perimeter of the
subdivision where front yards of homes do not front the street and on all
public streets within the subdivision where front yards of homes do not front
the street. The intent is to provide the general public using the public
streets with a more open view of the scenic vistas prominent in the community
and a less congested experience as they travel along the public streets within
the community. It is further the intent to provide a common and consistent
appearance of all public streets within the community.
   B.   Maintenance By Homeowners' Association: Streetscape landscaping shall
be maintained by a homeowners' association. The developer shall note on the
final plat and in the covenants and restrictions for the development of all
other public street streetscape buffer, which the development homeowners shall
be required to maintain. Failure to place such notes will not nullify the
owners' responsibility as described in this section.
   C.   General Requirements:
      1.   All public streets, which form the perimeter of any residential or
nonresidential development, and all public streets within any residential or
nonresidential development where homes or buildings within the development will
not front on the streets, may be required to have a minimum landscaped
streetscape buffer as follows:
         a.   Fifteen feet (15') minimum and twenty feet (20') average,
measured from the back of the curb, on all other streets sixty feet (60') wide
or wider.
         b.   Twelve feet (12') minimum, measured from the back of the curb, on
streets less than sixty feet (60') wide.
      2.   Uneven, creative streetscape buffer areas with varied setbacks and
wall heights are preferred.
      3.   Stepped and staggered buffer walls may be required.
      4.   Serpentine sidewalks, which are encouraged, may be located within
the buffer area.
   D.   Design Approval Required: All landscaping, fencing and sidewalks shall
be approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord.
2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-11: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES:
Existing natural geographic and major landmark topographic land features,
including major rock formations, major washes, wetlands and lava rock shall be
preserved and may not be removed or damaged, except in conformance with
approved development plans and in conformance with this Chapter and this Title.
Development shall be designed to minimize excavation and scarring of these
natural features. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-12: FENCING: 1
   A.   Purpose: Fencing may be used to provide privacy to property owners,
buffer conflicting uses or to provide a architectural/design element to a
development project. Fencing is encouraged to be as low profile and open as
possible to protect scenic vistas from public streets and discourage separation
from the community. The materials, location, height and all elements of fencing
shall comply with the design guidelines.
   B.   General Requirements: Any permanent fencing shall be incorporated into
the development design and implemented by the developer in compliance with any
other applicable ordinances and meet the following general requirements:
      1.   All fencing designed and installed by the developer shall be
approved by the City and shall be considered part of the project improvements
for purposes of security and occupancy.
      2.   All applicable zoning and building code requirements pertaining to
fencing shall be met.
      3.   All fencing installed by the developer shall be maintained in good
condition by the owners after the improvements guarantee is released, unless
said fencing is specifically accepted by the City for maintenance.
   C.   Fencing Design: The following design requirements pertaining to fencing
shall be incorporated into the development design and implemented by the
developer. The developer shall install fencing at his/her expense as follows:
      1.   An approved fence between the development and any incompatible use
identified by the City such as canals, ditches, flood channels or other
waterways or other hazardous or unsightly uses.
      2.   An approved fence between the development and incompatible zones.
      3.   An approved fence between public streets and rear and side yards of
single-family residential lots or parcels in agricultural and residential zones
may be required.
      4.   Concept drawings must be submitted to the City staff for review
prior to construction.
      5.   Building permits are required for fences.
      6.   Fence height shall be measured from the natural grade to the top of
the fence and shall not exceed six feet (6').
      7.   Fences along public streets over four feet (4') in height shall not
be built within the minimum required zoning setback of twenty-five feet (25').
Any fencing erected within the ten-foot (10') public utility easement is
subject to removal by a public utility company for any purpose it deems
necessary. Removal and replacement shall be at the expense of the property
owner.
      8.   Fences and walls shall not exceed forty feet (40') of unbroken
lengths to reduce visual mass. Walls and fences that exceed forty feet (40') in
length shall be designed to vary in height and be stepped in an offset manner.
      9.   When a fence or wall on a public street creates a continuous surface
greater than twenty feet (20') in length, it shall be softened visually with
acceptable vegetation.
      10.   Desired exceptions to this section shall be subject to review by
the building official or the planning commission. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012;
amd. 2014 Code) (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-
2024)
 
Notes
     An additional thirty-six inches (36") of open design fence, such as wrought
1 iron, may be added to the top of any fence along rear property boundaries for
  safety purposes.
10-19D-13: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Purpose: Landscaping is intended to enhance and preserve the natural
beauty of the City while conserving water.
   B.   General Requirements:
      1.   Landscaping, in accordance with
10-21-5 and all applicable City design guidelines, shall be provided according
to an approved plan. Landscaping may include berming, contouring, rocks,
boulders and drought tolerant desert vegetation.
      2.   The developer shall install all required street landscaping
improvements and properly maintain said improvements until one hundred percent
(100%) release of the improvement guarantee. The owners of property in all
developments shall be responsible for proper landscaping and maintenance of
public or private park strips and medians. The developer shall note on the
final plat or site plans and in the covenants and restrictions for the
development those public right of way areas, including park strips, for which
the homeowners shall have responsibility for landscape improvements and
maintenance. Failure to place such notes will not nullify the owners'
responsibilities for park strips and medians as described in this section.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-14: UTILITIES AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Conformance Required: All design and construction work shall be in
conformance with the City design standards and specifications for construction
(latest edition), state and federal regulations, in conformance with the City
General Plan, and conform to generally accepted rules and regulations. All
construction must be approved by the City.
   B.   Off Site Utilities: The developer will be required to construct any off
site utilities mains and/or facilities necessary for the project and as
required by the City.
   C.   Underground Service: All utilities shall be provided through
underground service in properly recorded easements or rights of way.
Underground utilities shall be installed only after the street has been rough
graded to a line and grade approved by the City. All utilities and other
improvements that will be placed beneath the asphalt pavement section shall be
installed prior to the placement of any road base and asphalt and inspected and
accepted by the City, and shall include any necessary crossing of other
improvements or utilities.
   D.   Location: All utilities shall extend through and/or to the furthest
point of the development for future growth, as required by the City.
   E.   Coordination Of Installation: The developer shall be responsible for
the coordination of utility installation with existing utilities, including the
rerouting of existing utilities.
   F.   Applicable Utilities: The general requirements listed above pertain to
all the following utilities and other improvements deemed necessary and shall
be incorporated into the development design and implemented by the developer:
      1.   A culinary water system, including the mains, valves, fire hydrants,
pressure reducing valves and service laterals to each lot or parcel in the
project. All water mains shall be of sufficient size to provide required fire
flows. The locations of all fire hydrants shall be approved by the City.
      2.   A public sanitary sewer system, including the mains, manholes and
service laterals which must be extended from the sewer main to each lot or
parcel in the project.
      3.   A secondary water system to provide water for outside landscaping to
each lot in the project. The secondary water system shall be of similar type
and requirements as the culinary water system and shall comply with all related
standards and specifications.
      4.   Subsurface water drains shall be inspected and approved by the City,
and shall become the responsibility of the homeowners and/or developer. The
City shall not be responsible for the maintenance or failure of the subsurface
drains, or for damage resulting from inadequate, clogged or defective drains.
The developer shall guarantee adequate security for costs associated with
operations, maintenance and repairs of the subdrain line.
      5.   A storm drainage system and detention basins shall be installed as
required by the City. The drainage shall comply with drainage studies,
downstream facilities and capacities and shall conform to the City General Plan
and storm drain capital facilities plan. All developments are required to
provide safe and adequate drainage for the existing flows occurring on, or that
passing through, the project.
      6.   Provisions for other utilities, such as power, phone, gas, and cable
TV as necessary for the project. The developer is required to coordinate the
installation and maintenance of these utilities.
      7.   Permanent monuments shall be furnished, accurately established, and
set by a certified state licensed land surveyor, at such points as necessary to
define and establish all lot lines and rights of way within the project.
      8.   Street signs shall be installed in conformance with the City
standards and specifications.
      9.   Streetlights in conformance with City standards and specifications
shall be installed at all street intersections, school and pedestrian
crossings, and on public streets at intervals and locations specified by city
standards and specifications for design and construction. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-
2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-15: DRAWING OF RECORD:
   A.   As built drawings shall be submitted by the developer for the utilities
and other improvements required. The drawing of record shall include the
following:
      1.   An actual location of the sewer mains and manholes (tied to
acceptable positions) with their depths, grades, sizes and types. Also, the
distance from the closest property line of each lot or parcel to the sewer
lateral service shall be shown.
      2.   An actual location with ties to all valves for the culinary water,
secondary water and irrigation company water shall be shown. An approximation
of the water mains with their sizes and the type of water main shall also be
shown.
      3.   An actual location of the storm drain and subdrain manholes, catch
basins, inlet boxes and pipes with their depths, grades, sizes and types.
      4.   Two (2) benchmarks shall be established and shown on the drawing of
record, that shall be located on or near the development.
      5.   The drawing of record shall reflect all field changes or any aspect
of the original Subdivision Improvement Plans.
      6.   An elevation shall be established at the ends of all new curb and
gutter, waterways and sidewalks, which are stubbed at the ends of the
development.
      7.   Detailed landscaping plans.
      8.   Detailed fence/wall design, including elevation in comparison with
street elevation.
   B.   The developer shall provide three (3) sets of the drawing of record for
review by the City staff. Once the drawing of record has been corrected and is
approved by the planning and zoning administrator, City Engineer, City Attorney
and Ash Creek Special Service District, the developer shall provide one mylar
set of the corrected copies and shall also provide a copy of the electronic
computer generated version. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code; Ord.
2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-16: IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS, GUARANTEE AND WARRANTY:
   A.   Improvements Required:
      1.   Developers of subdivisions, condominiums, master planned
developments or any other development shall be required to design, construct
and dedicate public improvements which are necessary to serve the development
and connect to existing and future infrastructure. Public improvements shall be
designed and constructed according to requirements of this Chapter and all
other City ordinances, and the standard specifications for design and
construction.
      2.   Public improvements shall include, but not be limited to, street
curb and gutter, landscaped park strips, sidewalks, streetscape buffer, project
buffer, street paving, culinary water, secondary water systems, storm drainage
systems, sanitary sewer systems, streetlights, street signs, fences, fire
hydrants and utilities.
      3.   Impact and other fees and dedications associated with the
development are also required in addition to the construction and dedication of
public improvements required with the development.
   B.   Responsibility For Improvements:
      1.   Prior to final acceptance of public improvements by the City as
prescribed in this Chapter, the developer shall be responsible for the proper
replacement, repair and maintenance of any public improvements associated with
the development which were installed by the developer. The developer shall be
obligated to the City to replace, repair and/or maintain any defective, damaged
or deteriorating public improvements related to the development at his/her
expense until the time that said public improvements are inspected and accepted
by the City.
      2.   In the event that certain areas or structures are provided within
the subdivision for private recreational use or as service facilities, the
owner of such land and buildings shall establish an arrangement to assure a
continued standard of maintenance consistent with the conditions of subdivision
approval.
   C.   Improvement Guarantee: In order to ensure proper completion and
maintenance of required improvements for a subdivision, condominium or master
planned development in the City, the developer or owner shall enter into a
security agreement for completion with the City or install improvements to City
standards.
      1.   Security Agreement:
         a.   The developer/owner shall enter into a security agreement and
provide a cash bond deposited with the City, an irrevocable letter of credit or
an escrow security agreement for the improvements on the final plat or site
plan as directed by the City Council and/or City Attorney. The improvement
guarantee shall be posted prior to the City Attorney signing of the final plat
or site plan, and prior to recording of any accompanying documents. The
security agreement shall be included in the recorded development agreement.
         b.   The cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow security
agreement shall ensure the timely and satisfactory construction of all required
public improvements, private streets and sidewalks, perimeter walls, and
streetscape buffers and provide a guarantee for said improvements. The City
Engineer shall determine the amount of the improvement guarantee, which shall
be one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the estimated cost of the
improvements.
         c.   The improvement guarantee may be reduced at intervals at the
request of the subdivider as improvements are installed and accepted by the
City as specified in the development agreement. No security shall be reduced
below fifteen percent (15%) of the City Engineer's estimated cost of the
improvements to be installed until final acceptance by the City Council
following the warranty period.
      2.   Installation Of Improvements:
         a.   The developer/owner may install improvements after approval of
the final plat and recording of the development agreement in lieu of bonding
for required improvements.
         b.   A restoration bond equal to one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of
the City Engineer estimate per platted lot for the project or phase of the
project being constructed. This bond shall be posted prior to construction of
any improvements in accordance with the recorded development agreement. This
restoration bond is intended to protect the City from unfinished improvements
that may create safety hazards or nuisance and debris problems.
         c.   All improvements shall be completed in accordance with approved
construction drawings as required by this Chapter and shall be approved by the
City Engineer prior to the recording of the final plat.
   D.   Warranty Period: The warranty period for public improvements shall
commence on the date that all City required improvements associated with the
development have been completed to the satisfaction of the City and a final
inspection thereof has been made approving the same. The warranty period shall
commence at that date and shall continue for one year thereafter for all
improvements. If any deficiencies are found by the City during the warranty
period in materials or workmanship, the developer shall promptly resolve such
defects or deficiencies and request the City Engineer to reinspect the
improvements. If the defective or deficient improvements are not corrected, the
City will give notice to the developer of the action to file on the security
agreement for completion of the improvements. At the end of the one year
period, as applicable, the developer shall request the City staff to make a
final warranty period inspection of all improvements. If the City Engineer
verifies that the improvements are acceptable, the security posted by the
developer under the security agreement shall be released. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-
2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-17: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permits will be issued and the developer may not begin construction
on any off site or on site improvements or on any building structure until:
   A.   The development agreement has been recorded and the final plat is
approved (recorded if improvements are bonded) and the developer/owner and all
approvals of the City Council, Planning Commission, all affected government
agencies, City departments and public utilities have been given. The
development agreement shall contain satisfactory security guarantees for
installation of public improvements or provisions for the completion of
improvements.
   B.   Water, sewer, storm drain and all other public utilities are provided
and are approved and accepted by the City and affected government agencies and
public utilities.
   C.   All public streets required for and contained in the development have
been improved with curb, gutter and road base placed, graded, compacted and
approved on entire road surface. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22,
11-20-2024)
10-19D-18: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any developer or owner to sell any portion of an
approved development without informing the prospective buyer or builder that
occupancy may not be obtained until all permanent improvements are installed
and approved by the City. These improvements include:
   A.   Culinary water, secondary water, sewer, storm drain and all other
public utilities are provided to the subject lot or parcel and are approved and
accepted by the City and affected government agencies and public utilities.
   B.   All public streets required for and contained in the development have
been improved with curb, gutter and sidewalk paving according to City standards
and specifications.
   C.   All improvements and requirements for the development, including, but
not limited to, fire protection, storm drainage, lighting and fencing have been
installed and approved according to City standards.
   D.   All conditions and requirements of approval are satisfied, including
recording of plats, dedication of property and recording of agreements or
easements.
   E.   All landscaping, paving, screening and other miscellaneous improvements
are installed according to plans and approved by the City. Landscaping
improvements may be delayed because of season and a certificate of occupancy
issued; provided, that a security agreement in the amount of the landscaping
improvements is in place with the City.
   F.   Before the certificate of occupancy is issued, at least three (3) trees
shall be planted and growing. (May include existing trees.)
   G.   Address numbers shall be installed and shall be visible and readable
from the street. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19D-19: CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Preconstruction Meeting:
      1.   Prior to excavating or starting of the work, the developer shall
meet with all utilities, City Public Works Director and the City Engineer in a
preconstruction meeting. The developer, engineer and all contractors
responsible to build the improvements associated with the project shall attend
the preconstruction meeting.
      2.   The purpose of this meeting shall be to:
         a.   Verify approval of the final plat and final approval of the
Subdivision Improvement Plans;
         b.   Verify posting and amount of restoration bond;
         c.   Determine schedule of construction;
         d.   Determine the names, addresses and phone numbers of contractors,
inspectors and all persons involved;
         e.   Review plans and special conditions or requirements;
         f.   Review security reduction release procedures;
         g.   Coordinate inspection and testing;
         h.   Discuss City standards and specifications.
   B.   Inspections:
      1.   Frequency: Construction work involving the installation of public
improvements in subdivisions and other developments shall be subject to the
inspection of the City staff, including, but not limited to, the planning and
zoning administrator and City Engineer.
      2.   Requests For Inspection: Requests for inspections shall be made to
the City Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator by the person
responsible for the construction. Requests for inspection on work shall be made
one working day prior to the commencement of the work. Inspections shall be
made by the City Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator after various
phases of the construction work are completed. Any faulty or defective work
shall be corrected by the developer or the developer's contractor within a
period of thirty (30) days from the date of the City Engineer and Planning and
Zoning Administrator's written notification to the developer that correction of
the faulty or defective work is required. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014
Code; Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
ARTICLE E. SIMPLE SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
10-19E-1: Purpose
10-19E-2: Applicability
10-19E-3: Simple Subdivision Application
10-19E-4: Required Conditions
10-19E-5: Submittal Contents
10-19E-6: Review and Approval Process
10-19E-7: Filing the Record of Survey
10-19E-8: Expiration of the Final Approval
10-19E-9: Flag Lots
10-19E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this simple subdivision process is to take advantage
of the Utah State Code exemption to allow for subdivisions with no more than
three (3) lots to be processed as quickly as possible. This code outlines a
separate process for these smaller subdivisions. In this process, an applicant
may elect to divide property through a metes and bounds record of survey. (Ord.
2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19E-2: APPLICABILITY:
The procedures set forth in this Article shall govern the process and
requirements pertaining to simple subdivisions with no more than three (3)
lots. An applicant may elect to forgo the simple subdivision process and
instead proceed with the standard preliminary and final plat subdivision
process. (Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19E-3: SIMPLE SUBDIVISION APPLICATION:
The subdivider of a simple subdivision shall submit an application to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator along with the application fee set by the
City Council, one (1) twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch (24" x 36") or larger
drawing, and one electronic copy of the plat showing the land to be subdivided,
properly and accurately drawn to scale and with sufficient additional
information to determine the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. Such plat
shall be certified as to the accuracy by a licensed land surveyor. (Ord.
2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19E-4: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
For a proposed subdivision to qualify for simple subdivision approval, the
proposed simple subdivision shall:
   A.   Be for a single-family dwelling or dwellings and any associated
accessory dwelling.
   B.   Be located on property zoned for such use.
   C.   Result in no more than three (3) lots.
   D.   Show frontage on a dedicated roadway for each resulting lot, as
required by the existing zoning.
   E.   Not contain any legislative approval, such as a zone change or general
plan amendment request. Any legislative approval necessary for the simple
subdivision to meet all requirements shall be pursued separately and shall be
completed before the (Land Use Authority) may review the simple subdivision
application.
   F.   Not to be traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed street as shown
in the general plan or master transportation plan unless Toquerville City has
approved the location and dedication of any public street, municipal utility
easement, any other easement, or any other land for public purposes as the
municipality's ordinance requires, and conform to all applicable land use
ordinances. A property that has previously obtained a variance shall be deemed
to conform as it relates to the conflict that had necessitated the variance.10-
19E-5: Submittal Contents:
   A simple subdivision application shall include Subdivision Improvement Plans
and shall comply with the Subdivision Submittal Requirements Policy maintained
by the City. (Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19E-6: SIMPLE SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
The intent of the Simple Subdivision process is to provide timely review and
approval of all applications, as follows:
   A.   Optional Pre-Application Meeting: An applicant may request to meet with
City staff to review the application and requirements.
   B.   Preliminary Review: The applicant shall submit the application and all
required contents. The City will determine if the application is complete. If
not all materials have been submitted, the application shall be returned to the
applicant until all required contents are included.
   C.   Staff Review: Once the application is deemed to be complete, the
Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or City designee shall complete a review
of the simple subdivision application and Subdivision Improvement Plans and
determine whether the application meets all requirements or requires corrective
actions and shall notify the applicant in a written response:
      1.   If the application is found to require corrections, the City shall
be specific and cite the ordinance, statute, or specifications that require the
modification. Comments shall be logged in an index of requested modifications
or additions. The required corrections are sent to the applicant to prepare for
resubmittal.
      2.   The Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or City designee may
require additional information relating to the application to ensure compliance
with the City's ordinances and approved standards.
      3.   If the applicant is found to meet all codes, standards, and
specifications, the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or City designee
shall approve the application.
   D.   Improvements Required: Street and access road improvements shall be
required as a condition to recording a subdivision plat for a simple
subdivision and a condition to issuance of a building permit. The following
minimum improvements are required:
      1.   On Improved Public Streets: All public street improvements must be
completed to the street improvement standards applicable at the time the
application for a simple subdivision is made. Property for the public street
right-of- way shall be dedicated if required in accordance with the City's
General Plan.
      2.   On Unimproved Public Streets: A bond in the amount of one hundred
ten percent (110%) of the estimated required street improvements shall be
obtained at the time the application for a simple subdivision is made.
Improvements may include paving, curb, gutter, sidewalk and streetscape
landscaping. The bond shall be in the form of cash in an escrow account to be
held by the City for the construction of street improvements. Property for the
public street right-of- way shall be dedicated to the City, if required, in
accordance with the City's General Plan.
      3.   On Access Roads: Access roads that are greater than one hundred
fifty feet (150') in length, include a fire hydrant, and serve as access to any
lot, must have a minimum twenty foot (20') paved surface, six inches (6")
minimum of road base and surface drainage designed to handle a 10-year storm.
      4.   All Weather Surface: Options for "all weather" surface may be
approved on a case by case basis.
      5.   Other Improvements Required: Any simple subdivision created for the
purpose of erecting structures, either residential or commercial in nature,
shall comply with section
10-19D-2, "Subdivision Improvement Plans", of this Chapter.
   E.   Building Permits On Unimproved Streets:
      1.   All public streets and access roads that are greater than one
hundred fifty feet (150') in length, include a fire hydrant, and serve as
access to any lot, must conform to the International Fire Code, which
establishes requirements for unobstructed street widths, turnarounds, and
surface so as to provide all weather driving capabilities. The basic
requirements are:
         a.   Twenty six feet (26') minimum of an "all weather" surface;
         b.   Six inches (6") minimum of road base; and
         c.    Surface drainage designed to handle a 10-year storm.
      2.   Options for "all weather" surface may be approved on a case by case
basis. These improvements are required from the lot affected to the closest
road with an "all weather" surface.
   F.   Standards For Review: Approval of a simple subdivision shall be based
on the following standards:
      1.   The proposed simple subdivision will result in parcel sizes and uses
that are consistent with the General Plan.
      2.   The lots created as provided under this Article shall retain their
existing zoning.
      3.   The proposed lots will be consistent with current requirements of
their existing zone.
      4.   The lots created shall comply with all applicable regulations of
this Chapter.
      5.   The simple subdivision may create no more than a total of three (3)
lots or parcels including the original lot or parcel. No additional simple
subdivision may be requested for either resulting parcel sooner than five (5)
years from the previous simple subdivision. (Ord. 2017.10, 6-8-2017; amd. Ord.
2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19E-7: FILING THE RECORD OF SURVEY:
   A.   After the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or designee have
approved the simple subdivision application, the City shall create a written
certificate of approval to accompany the record of survey. At a minimum, the
document shall be notarized by the City Recorder and specify the name of the
subdivision, the number of lots, and the date of approval.
   B.   The applicant shall provide payment sufficient to cover the recording
fees.
   C.   Within one (1) year of approval the Record of Survey, with the
accompanying written certificate of approval, shall be filed in the Office of
the Washington County Recorder. (Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19E-8: EXPIRATION OF THE FINAL APPROVAL:
If a record of survey is not filed within one (1) year from the date of
approval, the approval is deemed to have lapsed and the applicant will need to
obtain a new approval and meet any new regulations that may have been put in
place. (Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19E-9: FLAG LOTS:
   A.   Flag Lots: A flag lot for one (1) single-family dwelling may be allowed
to accommodate the development of property that otherwise could not reasonably
be developed under the regulations contained in this Title or other titles
adopted by the City. Flag lots will be considered and approved on a case by
case basis as a simple subdivision and shall follow the approval process
prescribed in this Chapter. In addition, all flag lots shall meet the following
additional requirements:
      1.   Factors: Flag lots may be allowed and approved after consideration
of the following factors:
         a.   More than two (2) contiguous staffs are prohibited.
         b.   The development of the property in question must be found by the
Planning Commission to be reasonable and practical under normal City land use
and subdivision regulations.
         c.   The creation of the flag lot must not foreclose the possibility
of future development of other large interior parcels that are not developable
unless a street is extended to them across other adjacent properties.
      2.   Development Standards: If any proposed flag lot meets the above
requirements, the development shall be subject to the following standards and
conditions:
         a.   The original parcel, after the flag lot split, shall conform to
and meet all requirements, set-backs, height restrictions, etc., of the zone in
which it is located.
         b.   The flag portion of the lot shall meet all lot width, setback and
yard requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. The staff
portion of the lot may be included in the calculation of lot area.
         c.   A flag lot shall be comprised of a staff (narrow) portion and a
flag (wide) portion. The flag and staff must be contiguous.
         d.   The staff portion of the lot shall front on a public street. The
minimum width of the staff portion at any point shall be twenty six feet (26')
and complies with fire authority specification. However, a greater staff width
for lots in sensitive lands overlay zones may be required. The maximum length
of the staff shall be five hundred feet (500') and the maximum grade of the
staff shall not exceed twelve percent (12%).
         e.   The lot access-turn-around and fire protection shall be approved
by the Hurricane Valley Fire District.
         f.   No building or structure will be located within the staff portion
of the flag lot.
         g.   The front yard of a flag lot shall be on the side of the flag
portion which connects to the staff. Yard setbacks shall conform to the setback
requirements of the zone in which the flag lot is located.
         h.   The main building shall be located no more than two hundred fifty
feet (250') from a fire hydrant, measured along a public or private right-of-
way or along the staff portion of the lot. An easement for any fire hydrant
located on private property shall be provided to the City for access to and
maintenance of the hydrant and water line.
         i.   Upon review, the City may require installation of curb, gutter
and other drainage control measures in the staff portion of the lot to prevent
runoff from entering neighboring properties.
         j.   Clear address signage shall be installed and maintained at the
street by the owner, including notice that the driveway is a private right-of-
way.
         k.   All structures shall meet the height requirements of the zone in
which a flag lot is located.
         l.   Before a flag lot is approved a site plan and construction
drawings must be submitted and approved by the City and all utility providers.
         m.   All required improvements shall be installed on the newly created
lot prior to recording the final plat for such lot. (Ord. 2017.10, 6-8-2017;
amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
ARTICLE F. PHASED SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
10-19F-1: Applicability
10-19F-2: Purpose And Intent
10-19F-3: Phased Subdivision Master Plan
10-19F-4: Preliminary Plan And Final Plat Required
10-19F-5: Dedication Of Open Space Required
10-19F-6: Development Agreement
10-19F-7: Recordation Of Master Plan And Development Agreement
10-19F-1: APPLICABILITY:
Conventional subdivisions and master planned developments may be completed in
phases. Prior to the application and approval of a preliminary plat and final
plat as required in Article C of this Chapter, a developer and/or owner may
submit a phased subdivision master plan that will encompass the general
development parameters for the entire subdivision. The phased subdivision
master plan will establish phases, proposed uses and general development
guidelines for all phases of the subdivision. The established uses, development
parameters and guidelines shall be included in a development agreement as
required in Article C of this Chapter. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord.
2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19F-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose and intent of the phased subdivision master plan is to
allow a conceptual review and approval of general development parameters prior
to detailed reviews of a subdivision preliminary plat and final plat. The
phased subdivision master plan is intended to establish uses, phases and
general development guidelines for all phases of a phased subdivision. It is
the intent of this process to allow a developer and the City to master plan
large scale, multiphased developments and proceed with the development
approval, as well as the actual construction on a phased basis over a period of
years. After approval of the phased subdivision master plan, a preliminary plan
and final plat, as required in Article C of this Chapter, must be approved
prior to development of the subdivision. Required improvements are outlined in
Article D of this Chapter.
   B.   All details, obligations and requirements of the phased subdivision
master plan shall be contained in a development agreement. The development
agreement shall include all obligations of the developer/owner and conceptual
development approvals for future phases. All subdivision requirements and
development standards shall be imposed as part of detailed reviews and
approvals of the subdivision preliminary plan and final plat. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-
18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)12)
10-19F-3: PHASED SUBDIVISION MASTER PLAN:
   A.   Application: The phased subdivision master plan shall be submitted,
along with applicable fees, and contain the following:
      1.   Legal description of property and indication of gross area.
      2.   Nature of the applicant's interest in the land to be developed.
      3.   All persons owning or having interest in land proposed for
development, including easements, tenants, licenses, lienholders or other
interests.
      4.   A generalized location map showing surrounding land use, zoning and
traffic circulation.
      5.   Site condition. An analysis of the existing site conditions, which
includes:
         a.   Topographic contours with intervals of no more than two feet
(2'), to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the property boundary.
         b.   Location and extent of major vegetative cover (if any).
         c.   Location and extent of perennial or intermittent streams or water
ponding areas.
         d.   Existing drainage and irrigation flows and patterns.
         e.   Natural features, such as rock formations.
         f.   Other information that may be relevant to the property.
      6.   Open space expressed as percentage of total area, as well as in
acres.
      7.   A land use plan at a scale not smaller than one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100'), indicating land uses, acres and development densities
of each land use and the most nearly equivalent zoning categories, all arterial
and collector street circulation elements, pedestrian and/or bicycle
circulation, open spaces and recreational areas.
      8.   Conceptual landscaping plans in accordance with the City design
guidelines.
      9.   A traffic analysis report, if deemed necessary by the City.
      10.   Phasing plan indicating the areas to be phased and the sequence of
future development.
   B.   Standards For Review:
      1.   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the general plan, this
Title, applicable design guidelines, and other relevant sections of this
Chapter.
      2.   The proposed water source has adequate capacity and a method of
distribution within the subdivision. If applicable, an agreement to provide
water from the water provider and/or evidence of availability of water may be
required.
      3.   The proposed sewage system meets state and City standards and
regulations.
      4.   The proposed method for fire protection complies with this Chapter
and other City regulations.
      5.   The proposed uses for the property are appropriate to the zone
district.
      6.   The layout/design is responsive to the constraints of topography,
soil types, watercourses, floodplains, visual impacts and preservation of
views.
      7.   Adequate public services are available to meet the needs of the
proposed subdivision, including roads, gas, electric, telephone, mail, police
and fire protection, schools and recreation. If, after reviewing the
application, making site visits and examining materials submitted by the
developers, the City staff determines that adequate public improvements are not
available and will not be available by the time of final plat approval, then
one of the following alternatives may be elected, at the discretion of the City
Council, to assure that adequate public services are available at the time of
occupancy:
         a.   Allow the developer to voluntarily construct those public
improvements which are necessary to service development as determined by the
City staff by entering into an appropriate form of development agreement, which
shall include, if applicable, provisions to recoup any expenses incurred above
and beyond those reasonable and necessary for, or related to, the need created
by, or the benefit conferred upon, the proposed development, and the method and
conditions upon which expenses may be recouped. Any agreement authorized by
this Subsection must be executed prior to the construction of the improvements
and in compliance with the development agreement requirements of this Chapter;
         b.   Require the timing, sequencing and phasing of the proposed
development consistent with the availability of adequate public improvements;
         c.   Defer preliminary and final plat approval and issuance of
building permits until all necessary public improvements are adequate and
available; or
         d.   Deny the master plan approval and allow the applicant to reapply
when adequate public improvements are available.
      8.   The Planning Commission and City Council may request additional
information and/or provide comments, directions and suggestions to the
applicant.
   C.   Termination Of Approval: Failure to submit a preliminary plan on the
first phase as approved in the phased subdivision master plan and development
agreement within one year of the approval of the phased subdivision master plan
shall terminate all proceedings and render the phased subdivision master plan
null and void. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19F-4: PRELIMINARY PLAN AND FINAL PLAT REQUIRED:
A preliminary plat and final plat application must, as outlined in Article C of
this Chapter, be approved prior to the development of the subdivision. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19F-5: DEDICATION OF OPEN SPACE REQUIRED:
All open space, including lands designated as trails, easements, buffers,
parks, medians and any other open space shall be deeded as part of the phased
subdivision master plan development agreement. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd.
Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19F-6: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   The development agreement shall specify all conditions and requirements
that must be met in order to protect and maintain a vested approval for all
subsequent phases. For example, the City may impose as a condition precedent to
final approval of subsequent phases, the availability and access to water and
sewer services and source sufficient to accommodate the subsequent phases.
   B.   A copy of the phased subdivision master plan, showing all phases, shall
be attached to and incorporated in the development agreement.
   C.   The development agreement shall include legal description of lands to
be dedicated as open space, including trails, easements, buffers, parks,
medians and other open space. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-
20-2024)
10-19F-7: RECORDATION OF MASTER PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
The approved phased subdivision master plan and development agreement shall be
recorded and be included in the subdivision plat records of the Washington
County recorder's office. Recordation by the City shall only take place after
all of the necessary signatures are obtained, all approvals given, and all
applicable bonds and fees are posted with the City. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012;
amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
ARTICLE G. LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
10-19G-1: Purpose
10-19G-2: Review Process
10-19G-3: Recorded Plat Title Exchange
10-19G-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to allow adjoining property owners to make
adjustments in location of joint property lines as may be necessary and prudent
with minimal procedural review. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2021.21, 8-
18-2021)
10-19G-2: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The owners of record of adjacent parcels that are described by metes
and bounds description may exchange title to portions of those parcels if a
completed application for lot line adjustment is submitted, along with a map
showing both parcels before and after the lot line adjustment and the lot line
adjustment and the exchange of title is approved by the planning commission as
provided under Utah Code Annotated § 10-9a-608. Staff review and
recommendations on any lot line adjustment will be required.
   B.   The planning commission shall approve an exchange of title under this
section if:
      1.   No new dwelling or housing unit will result from the exchange of
title; and
      2.   The exchange of title will not result in a violation of applicable
zoning requirements.
   C.   If an exchange of title is approved under Subsection B of this Section,
a notice of approval shall be recorded by the Planning Commission which:
      1.   Is executed by each owner included in the exchange and by the
Planning Commission Chairperson.
      2.   Contains an acknowledgment from each party executing the notice in
accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated Title 57, Chapter 2a,
recognition of acknowledgments act; and Recites the descriptions of both the
original parcels and the parcels newly created by the exchange of title.
   D.   A notice of approval recorded under this section does not act as a
conveyance of title to real property and is not required for the recording of a
document purporting to convey title to real property. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012;
amd. 2014 Code; Ord. 2021.21, 8-18-2021; Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19G-3: RECORDED PLAT TITLE EXCHANGE:
The owners of record of adjacent parcels that are part of a recorded plat may
exchange title to portions of those parcels by following the procedure outlined
in section
10-19C-4(F) of this code. (Ord. 2021.21, 8-18-2021; Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
ARTICLE H. LARGE PARCEL PROPERTY DIVISIONS
SECTION:
10-19H-1: Purpose
10-19H-2: Application
10-19H-3: Requirements
10-19H-4: Review Process
10-19H-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to provide a process for dividing larger parcels
of property without the need for development or the construction of
improvements. (Ord. 2017.12, 11-9-2017; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19H-2: APPLICATION:
An application is required for the division of large parcel properties and
shall meet the requirements of this Chapter. A completed application, all
required documents and the appropriate fee must be submitted to the City prior
to the review and approval for such divisions. (Ord. 2017.12, 11-9-2017; amd.
Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19H-3: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The following general requirements must be met for large parcel
divisions.
      1.   Parcel being divided must be at least five (5) acres.
      2.   Each parcel created must meet the requirements of the zone in which
such division occurs.
      3.   Large parcels shall not be divided for the purposes of residential
or commercial development.
      4.   Applicant must submit an "Owners Affidavit or Power of Attorney".
      5.   Applicant must submit a vicinity map.
      6.   Applicant must submit a "Record of Survey" and legal description.
(Ord. 2017.12, 11-9-2017; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19H-4: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Review:
      1.   Staff Review: After the application has been certified complete, a
review of the application will be made at the next regularly scheduled staff
meeting. The Planning and Zoning Administrator will prepare a staff report and
forward the application to the Planning Commission.
         a.   Planning Commission Review: The Planning Commission will conduct
a review of the application at their next regular Planning Commission meeting.
The Planning Commission will recommend approval, approval with conditions or
denial of the application to the City Council.
         b.   City Council Approval: The City Council will consider the
application at a regular meeting. A final determination will be made and the
applicant will be notified of the decision. (Ord. 2017.12, 11-9-2017; amd. Ord.
2024.22, 11-20-2024)
ARTICLE I. CONSOLIDATION OF CONTIGUOUS LOTS AND PARCELS
SECTION:
10-19I-1: Purpose
10-19I-2: Applicability And Criteria
10-19I-3: General Consolidation Application Requirements
10-19I-4: City Internal Review And Approval
10-19I-5: Recordation Of Consolidation Instruments
10-19I-6: Expiration Of Approval
10-19I-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to allow for the consolidation of contiguous
Lots within a platted subdivision, or the consolidation of contiguous un-
platted Parcels, both of which being under common ownership. (Ord. 2023.08, 4-
19-2023; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19I-2: APPLICABILITY AND CRITERIA:
   A.   This Article applies to two or more contiguous Lots that are part of a
previously recorded subdivision plat or, two or more contiguous un-platted
Parcels of land described by a record of survey or instrument containing a
metes and bounds legal description.
   B.   For two (2) or more Lots or Parcels to be consolidated into one Lot or
Parcel, the following criteria shall be met:
      1.   Compliance with all applicable zoning regulations of Title 10 of the
Toquerville City Code (Land Use Regulations) including maximum lot size, if
applicable.
      2.   A Lot or Parcel consolidation cannot yield two (2) principal
Dwellings on one Lot or Parcel, unless permitted in the zoning district or by
an approved Master Planned Development Overlay zoning designation.
      3.   Lots or Parcels being consolidated must share the same zone.
      4.   Lots or Parcels being consolidated shall be contiguous to each other
along the majority of their common boundaries.
      5.   Lots or Parcels being consolidated shall be owned in the same
recorded name.
      6.   Lots or Parcels being consolidated shall retain all accesses,
rights-of-way, and easements (express or prescriptive) located thereon.
   C.   Subdivisions governed by a Homeowners Association (HOA), must have a
written letter of approval from said HOA at the time of application. (Ord.
2023.08, 4-19-2023; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19I-3: GENERAL CONSOLIDATION APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The owners of record of adjacent parcels that are part of a recorded plat may
exchange title to portions of those parcels by following the procedure outlined
in section
10-19C-4(F) of this code.
   A.   The application for consolidation of two or more contiguous Lots within
a recorded subdivision shall include:
      1.   The payment of the Lot Consolidation Application Fee as set in the
City's Uniform Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time.
      2.   A copy of the final plat for the applicable Subdivision or phase
thereof as recorded.
      3.   An amended final plat or a amended partial final plat for the
applicable Subdivision or phase of the Subdivision where the Lots are located
prepared and certified by a licensed land surveyor or engineer containing the
following:
         a.   A partial plat amendment of the Lots being consolidated along
with all contents required in Section
10-19C-4(B)(1) through (18) - as to those consolidated Lots only;
         b.   A metes and bounds legal description for the outer edges of the
consolidated Lot;
         c.   The location of any Dwelling(s), Building(s) or Structure(s) on
the consolidated Lot;
         d.   An Owner's Consent Certificate to be signed by the Owner of the
Lots indicating that the Owner, as the fee simple title holder of both Lots,
consent to consolidation of said Lots into one.
         e.   A notary public acknowledgment of the Owners Consent Certificate.
         f.   A statement on the amended plat as follows: "Consolidation of
Lots        and        are the only changes to the Subdivision depicted
herein".
      4.   A map showing existing utilities and connections to utilities that
will service the consolidated Lot and the Dwellings/Buildings thereon for the
Joint Utility Committee to review and approve.
      5.   An approval letter from the Subdivision's Homeowners Association, if
applicable.
   B.   The application for consolidation of two or more un-platted Parcels
shall include:
      1.   The payment of the Lot Consolidation Application Fee as set in the
City's Uniform Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time.
      2.   A site plan containing the boundaries and the metes and bounds legal
descriptions of the Parcels to be consolidated - as they are currently
recorded.
      3.   A record of survey showing the consolidated Parcel prepared and
certified by a licensed land surveyor containing the following:
         a.   A metes and bounds legal description for the outer edges of the
consolidated Parcel;
         b.   The location of any Dwelling(s), Building(s) or Structure(s) on
the consolidated Parcel; and
         c.   A survey note indicating that the purposes of conducting,
preparing and recording record of survey is to effectuate a parcel
consolidation.
         d.   An Owners Conveyance Certificate to be signed by the Owner of the
Parcels indicating that the Owner, as the fee simple title holder of both
Parcels conveys the same to itself to be held as one consolidated Parcel.
         e.   A notary public acknowledgment of the Owners Conveyance
Certificate.
         f.   A survey note verifying that the elimination of certain boundary
Parcel lines as part of the consolidation will not leave in place any utility
easement(s) that will impede future development.
         g.   A box in the lower left corner of the record of survey indicating
that by signature of the Zoning Administrator or its designee or an official
stamp of the City that the lot consolidation contemplated by the survey is
approved by the City. (Ord. 2023.08, 4-19-2023; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19I-4: CITY INTERNAL REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   The Zoning Administrator or its designee shall review the consolidation
application for completeness and for compliance with all other regulations
contained in Title 10 (Land Use Regulations) of the Toquerville City Code.
   B.   Platted Lot Consolidations. Upon the review and a completeness
determination by the Zoning Administrator or its designee, said official shall
refer the application to consolidate two or more contiguous platted Lots to the
Planning Commission who shall review and approve, deny or approve the same with
conditions.
   C.   Un-Platted Parcel Consolidations. Upon the review and a completeness
determination by the Zoning Administrator or its designee, said official shall
review an application to consolidate two or more contiguous un-platted Parcels
and approve, deny or approve the same with conditions. (Ord. 2023.08, 4-19-
2023; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19I-5: RECORDATION OF CONSOLIDATION INSTRUMENTS:
   A.   Platted Lot Consolidations. Upon approval by the Planning Commission of
the proposed amended final plat consolidating two or more contiguous Lots, the
applicant shall make any additions, deletions or corrections to the amended
final plat as requested by the Planning Commission and City Staff and shall
submit the same to the City in the form of a twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-
six (36) inch mylar containing a signed and acknowledged Owners Conveyance
Certificate and Surveyor's Certificate. The City shall then cause the amended
final plat to be endorsed by all persons identified in Section
10-19C-4 of the Toquerville City Code and recorded in the Official Records on
file in the Office of the Recorder of Washington County, State of Utah.
   B.   Un-Platted Parcel Consolidations. Upon approval by the Zoning
Administrator or its designee of the record of survey consolidating two or more
contiguous unplatted Parcels, the applicant shall make any additions, deletions
or corrections to the record of survey as requested by the City Staff and shall
submit the same to the City in the form of a twenty four (24) inch by thirty
six (36) inch mylar containing a signed and acknowledged Owners Consent
Certificate and Surveyor's Certificate. The Zoning Administrator or its
designee shall then cause the record of survey to be endorsed or stamped as
"approved" and filed in the Official Records on file in the Office of the
Recorder of Washington County, State of Utah. (Ord. 2023.08, 4-19-2023; amd.
Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
10-19I-6: EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL:
Should the applicant fail to produce to required mylar of the amended final
plat or record of survey, as the case may be, and cause the City to endorse and
record the same within one hundred eighty (180) days of the approval being
granted, the consolidation application shall be deemed denied. (Ord. 2023.08,
4-19-2023; amd. Ord. 2024.22, 11-20-2024)
CHAPTER 20
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
10-20-1: Purpose
10-20-2: Approval Required
10-20-3: Review Process
10-20-4: Standards For Review
10-20-5: Burden Of Proof
10-20-6: Additional Conditions
10-20-7: Issuance Of Conditional Use Permit
10-20-8: Fees
10-20-9: Transferability
10-20-10: Time Limit; Abandonment
10-20-11: Modification Requires Review
10-20-12: Related Permits And Requirements
10-20-13: Revocation Of Permit
10-20-14: Appeal
10-20-1: PURPOSE:
Although each zoning district is primarily intended for a predominant type of
use (i.e., dwelling units in Residential Districts), there are a number of uses
which the City Council has identified that may be appropriate in a particular
district if conditions are met that mitigate potential adverse impacts of the
proposed use. For example, as a condition of approval, the traffic that would
be generated by a proposed use may be offset by improvements to an adjacent
intersection to increase its traffic capacity. The conditional use review is
intended to provide additional information necessary to assure compatibility
and harmonious relationships between proposed uses, surrounding properties and
the City at large. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-20-2: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Conditional use approval is required for the conditional uses in each zone.
Conditional use approval may be revoked upon failure to comply with all
conditions attached to the original approval of the conditional use as set
forth in a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-20-3: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Application: An application for approval of a conditional use shall be
filed with the Planning Department on a form provided by the City, and must
include written consent by the owner of all property to be included in the
conditional use. Other information required to be submitted on or with the
conditional use application can be found in chapter 6 of this title.
   B.   Staff Review: Upon receipt of a completed conditional use application,
the City Planner and City staff shall conduct a review of the application. The
City Planner shall prepare and deliver to the Planning Commission a written
advisory report with a recommendation, including any recommended conditions on
the application.
   C.   Planning Commission Review:
      1.   Within a reasonable time of receipt of a complete application, the
Planning Commission shall give public notice consistent with section
10-1-8 of this title, and hold a public hearing on the conditional use
application. Members of the public may submit written comments to be part of
the public hearing record or may present oral comments at the hearing.
      2.   With receipt of input from appropriate City departments or
officials, and input from any public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
review the project and make a preliminary determination regarding the
conditional use application and any conditions of approval. The Planning
Commission will forward to the City Council a recommendation to grant, to grant
with conditions or to deny the conditional use application.
   D.   City Council Action: After receiving the Planning Commission
recommendation regarding a conditional use application, the City Council will
consider the conditional use application and the recommendations of the
Planning Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The City Council
may grant, grant with conditions or deny any application for a conditional use
permit. (Ord. 2019.03, 5-9-2019)
10-20-4: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW:
No conditional use permit shall be issued unless the City Council finds that
the application meets the following standards and conditions:
   A.   Protects safety of persons and property:
      1.   Will not result in traffic congestion and traffic hazards;
      2.   Has adequate and necessary access for safety services (police,
fire);
   B.   Will not exceed the obligations and/or financial capability of the
City. Will not require a level of community facilities and services greater
than that which is available;
   C.   Will protect environmental values:
      1.   Will not cause air, water, groundwater, light or noise pollution;
      2.   Does not have critically expansive soils, high water table, slope
instability or other soil problems;
   D.   Consistent with City general plan:
      1.   Will comply with the minimum requirements of the zone in which the
use is to be established and with all other requirements of this title;
      2.   Will be compatible with the character of the neighborhood and
surrounding structures in scale, mass and traffic circulation;
   E.   Performance assured by the applicant. Applicant has assured performance
of obligations by posting bond or other adequate security. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-
2012)
10-20-5: BURDEN OF PROOF:
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed conditional
use satisfies all of the standards and conditions set forth in section
10-20-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-20-6: ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS:
The City Council shall impose such requirements and conditions as are required
by law and any additional conditions as may be necessary to ensure compliance
with the requirements, standards or conditions of this chapter and the other
provisions of this title. The violation of any condition, safeguard or
commitment of record by the applicant shall be sufficient grounds for
revocation of conditional use approval. Conditions imposed by the City Council
may include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Sewer.
   B.   Drainage.
   C.   Water and other utility requirements.
   D.   Special yards.
   E.   Open spaces.
   F.   Buffers.
   G.   Fences and walls.
   H.   Installation and maintenance of landscaping.
   I.   Street dedications and improvements.
   J.   Vehicular ingress and egress.
   K.   Traffic circulation and regulation.
   L.   Signs.
   M.   Hours of operation.
   N.   Methods of operation.
   O.   Potential nuisances.
   P.   Building and yard maintenance.
   Q.   Development standards.
   R.   Development schedules. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   S.   A variance from the Appeal Authority, if applicable. (Ord. 2018.07, 12-
13-2018)
   T.   Such other conditions as the City Council may deem necessary to ensure
compatibility of the use with surrounding developments and uses and to preserve
the public health, safety and welfare. The City Council may require that the
applicant prepare and record covenants running with the land which, under the
conditions, are binding upon the applicants and their successors. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-20-7: ISSUANCE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
Within a reasonable time after a conditional use has been approved by the City
Council, the City shall issue a written "conditional use permit" identifying
the property subject to the conditional use and any conditions or requirements
that the permit is subject to. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-20-8: FEES:
The City Council shall establish a fee schedule for conditional use
applications to cover the costs of processing and review. An application for a
conditional use shall be accompanied by the application fee established by the
City Council. Any fees incurred by the City for professional services
associated with the review of a conditional use application, including fees for
the City Planner and the City Engineer, shall also be assessed to the applicant
and paid in full as a prerequisite to the issuance of any conditional use
permit. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-20-9: TRANSFERABILITY:
A conditional use permit is transferable with the title to the underlying
property so that an approved project may be conveyed or assigned by the
applicant to others without losing the approval. The permit cannot be
transferred off the site on which approval was granted. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-
2012)
10-20-10: TIME LIMIT; ABANDONMENT:
Unless use of the property (which includes the construction of a building to
house such a use) is commenced within a period of twelve (12) months from the
date of conditional use approval, the approval shall expire and any conditional
use permit issued by the City thereunder shall be null and void. Likewise, if
the owner of the property subject to the conditional use permit ceases to use
the property for the purposes allowed in the conditional use approval and the
conditional use permit for a period of twelve (12) months or longer, the
conditional use approval and conditional use permit shall be deemed abandoned
and will be null and void. In the event of expiration or abandonment, the
property owner shall have the burden of proof to show that use commenced or
remained on the property during the twelve (12) month period in question. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-20-11: MODIFICATION REQUIRES REVIEW:
No approved conditional use may be modified, structurally enlarged or expanded
unless the site plan is amended and reviewed and approved by the City Council
in accordance with the procedures and standards of this chapter. (Ord. 2012.04,
1-18-2012)
10-20-12: RELATED PERMITS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A conditional use shall also be subject to all other procedures, permits and
requirements of other applicable ordinances and regulations of the City. In the
event of any conflict between the provisions of a conditional use permit and
any other permit or requirement, the more restrictive provisions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-20-13: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The City Council may revoke a conditional use permit, following notice
prescribed by section
10-1-8 of this title, and a hearing. A conditional use permit may be modified
or revoked if the City Council finds one or more of the following:
   A.   The permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
   B.   The specific use for which the permit was granted is not being
exercised; or
   C.   Noncompliance with conditions imposed upon said use permit. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-20-14: APPEAL:
Any person shall have the right to appeal the decision to grant, grant with
conditions or deny a conditional use permit. Such appeal shall be made to the
Toquerville Appeal Authority which shall act as the "Appeal Authority" in that
situation pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-701. All appeals shall
be made to the Appeal Authority within thirty (30) days of the date a "final
decision" is rendered. For purposes of this chapter, a "final decision" shall
be deemed to be rendered when that body issues a written decision, which may
include findings of fact and conclusions of law, if requested by the applicant.
(Ord. 2018.07, 12-13-2018)
CHAPTER 21
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
10-21-1: Applicability
10-21-2: Lot Standards
10-21-3: Development Design And Layout
10-21-4: Construction On Slopes Exceeding Ten Percent
10-21-5: Water Efficient Landscaping And Conservation Standards
10-21-6: Buildings
10-21-7: Roads
10-21-8: Driveways
10-21-9: Cuts, Fills And Retaining Walls
10-21-10: Bridge And Tunnel Regulations
10-21-11: Building Setbacks From Waterways And Flood Hazard Areas
10-21-12: Utilities
10-21-13: Parking
10-21-1: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the zone regulations appearing elsewhere in this title. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-21-2: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   The minimum area and dimensions of all lots shall conform to the
requirements of the zone district in which the lot is located.
   B.   All lots or parcels created by a subdivision shall have direct access
with frontage on a dedicated street improved to standards hereinafter required.
Private streets shall be permitted only in a planned unit development that is
approved as provided in this title or pursuant to an approved special exception
permit. Land designated as public right of way shall be separate and distinct
from lots adjoining such right of way and shall not be included in the area of
such lots.
   C.   All subdivisions shall result in the creation of lots which are
developable and capable of being built upon. A subdivision shall not create
lots and no building permit shall be issued for any lots that would make
building or access impractical due to size, shape, steepness of terrain,
location of watercourses, problems of sewerage or driveway grades, or other
physical conditions, except where such lots are suitable and dedicated for a
common open space, private utility or public purpose.
   D.   The side lines of all lots, so far as possible, shall be at right
angles to each street on which the lot faces, or approximately radial to the
center of curvatures. Exceptions may be made to this requirement where
considerations for solar orientation are involved.
   E.   Corner lots for residential use shall be platted wider than interior
lots in order to permit conformance with the required front setback
requirements of both streets.
   F.   A city boundary line shall not divide a lot. Each such boundary line
shall be made on a lot line.
   G.   Lot numbers shall begin with the number "1" and shall continue
consecutively through the subdivision with no omissions or duplications. No
block designations shall be used.
   H.   Except as specifically authorized by this title, not more than one
dwelling unit shall occupy any one lot.
   I.   No area needed to meet the minimum width, yard area, coverage, parking
or other requirements of this title for a lot or building may be sold or leased
away from such lot or building for the purpose of installing any kind of
structure.
   J.   No portion of a lot may be cut off from another portion of a lot that
has been created through a subdivision action.
   K.   Lots with frontage on private streets shall only be allowed by
conditional use or planned unit development procedure and subject to all
applicable requirements of this title and other applicable ordinances. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-21-3: DEVELOPMENT DESIGN AND LAYOUT:
   A.   Hazardous Site Conditions Avoided: The design of the development shall
avoid or fully mitigate hazardous site conditions (unstable slopes, geologic
faults or flood potential, etc.). (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   B.   Drainage: Drainage from individual lots shall be coordinated with the
general storm drainage pattern for the area and shall avoid conveying to
adjacent lots runoff flows higher than historic patterns. A drainage study and
review will be required on all subdivisions and commercial projects. (Ord.
2016.08, 12-8-2016)
   C.   Location Of Recreation Facilities: Recreation facilities should be
located central to all residents of the development.
   D.   Access To Recreation Facilities: All lots should have reasonable access
to open space, trails, park land or recreation facilities that are set aside
for either development use or use by the general public.
   E.   Trails And Open Space Access: Access to public trails and open space
abutting the property shall be provided.
   F.   Utility Extensions: Utility extensions required for future development
shall be provided.
   G.   Maintenance Of Common Facilities: Maintenance of common facilities must
be accomplished through either covenants and a homeowners' association, a
separate maintenance agreement or some other perpetual agreement.
   H.   Layout Of Lots: The layout of lots should provide desirable settings
for structures by making use of natural contours, maintaining views, affording
privacy and protection from wind, noise and vehicular traffic.
   I.   Efficiency For Utilities: Development design should provide for
efficiency in the installation and provision of all public and private
utilities and services.
   J.   Water, Sanitation Facilities: Common water and sanitation facilities
should be located on separate outlots commonly owned by the users. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-21-4: CONSTRUCTION ON SLOPES EXCEEDING TEN PERCENT:
Lots or buildings proposed on slopes exceeding ten percent (10%) warrant
especially close review to assure that all grading, retaining wall, cut/fill
and road/driveway standards will be met. All buildings, lots and developments
which meet this criteria shall only be approved once a hillside development
permit has been issued by the city pursuant to chapter 16, article A of this
title. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-21-5: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING AND CONSERVATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
      1.   Active Recreation Area: dedicated active play areas where irrigated
lawn is used as the playing surface, such as a sports field designed for public
use. Active recreation areas shall be:
         a.   A minimum of1,500 contiguous square feet of lawn area;
         b.   Not less than 30 feet in any dimension;
         c.   Not less than 10 feet from areas dedicated to vehicular use, such
as a street or parking lot;
         d.   Designed and located to be accessible to large populations, such
as at a school, daycare, recreation center, senior center, public park, private
park, water park, or religious institution;
         e.   Co-located with amenities, including but not limited to trash
bins, benches, tables, walking paths, drinking water, playground equipment,
and/or other recreational amenities.
      2.   Irrigation Plan: a plan that shows the components of an irrigation
system that uses potable or culinary water. Those components include water
meter size, backflow prevention, precipitation rates, flow rate, operating
pressure for each irrigation circuit, and identification of all irrigation
equipment.
      3.   Landscape Plan: a plan that clearly and accurately identifies the
location and species of new and existing trees, shrubs, ground covers, and
other plants on a site, and any other landscape elements, and includes an
irrigation plan.
      4.   Lawn: irrigated nonagricultural land planted in closely mowed,
managed grasses.
      5.   Mulch: material (such as, but not limited to, rock, bark, wood
chips) uniformly applied upon the surface of the soil to reduce evaporation and
weed growth. Mulches must allow penetration of water and air. For the purposes
of this chapter, ungrouted pavers, stepping stones, and artificial turf
manufactured to be permeable to air and water may be considered mulch.
      6.   Planting Bed: areas of the landscape that consist of plants, such as
trees, ornamental grasses, shrubs, perennials, and other regionally appropriate
plants.
   B.   Applicability: All new single and multi-family residential, commercial,
institutional, and industrial development, construction activity, or landscape
installation shall comply with the standards found in this chapter as well as
with the current Water Efficiency Standards as adopted by the City. These
standards shall not apply to permitted agricultural, horticultural, and
gardening uses (including fruit trees) in any zone, or public or school-owned
parks, playgrounds, or active recreation areas in any zone.
   C.   Indoor Requirements:
      1.   Fixtures: New and future installations of plumbing fixtures must
meet or exceed the water conservation requirements specified in Utah Code.
      2.   Hot Water Recirculation Systems: Hot water recirculation systems
shall be installed in single and multi-family properties exceeding 1,400 square
feet unless hot water can be delivered without displacing more than 0.6 gallons
of water.
      3.   Car Wash Facilities: All car wash facilities shall be plumbed during
construction for water recycling systems and not exceed an average of 35
gallons of potable water per washed vehicle.
   D.   Landscape Requirements: All landscape projects, including new
installations and rehabilitations, shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   Where lawns are allowed, spray irrigation may be used. All other
plant material must be irrigated from a drip irrigation system equipped with a
pressure regulator filter, flush-end assembly and emitters rated for 20 gallons
per hour (gph) or less.
      2.   Drip irrigation and sprinkler irrigation may not be served from the
same irrigation valve.
      3.   Automated irrigation systems must use a US EPA WaterSense labeled
smart controller or a similar weather-based controller if an appropriate
WaterSense model is not available for the specific application.
      4.   All Planting Beds must have mulch upon the soil surface with
exceptions for areas being restored to appear as native desert.
      5.   Plant Selection: Plants shall be well-suited to the microclimate and
soil conditions at the project site. Both native and locally adapted plants are
acceptable. Plants with similar water needs shall be grouped together as much
as possible.
      6.   At least 40% of the project’s proposed (and installed) landscaped
area shall contain vegetative cover consisting of water-efficient plants
adequate in number and configuration to visually enhance the project, prevent
heat islands, and prevent soil erosion.
      7.   Lawn Allowances:
         a.   Lawns must be accessible for active use and may not be in
streetscape frontages, parking lots, roundabouts, medians, driveways, and other
areas not conducive to access and safe use. Lawns may not be within 10 feet of
a roadway.
         b.   Single-family residential -8% of any residential lot, or 2,500
square feet, whichever is less. Lots less than 7,500 square feet are allowed up
to 600 square feet of lawn.
         c.   Limited common area development - single-family homes with
limited common areas designated for the exclusive use of the adjacent dwelling
shall have the same allowances as a single-family home.
         d.   Attached multi-family residential - up to 100 square feet per
dwelling unit used in functional applications. Properties with less than 6
dwelling units are allowed up to 600 square feet of lawn.
         e.   Commercial, institutional, and industrial - lawn areas are
prohibited except where an Active Recreation Area is appropriate, such as at a
childcare center or athletic complex.
         f.   No lawn shall be less than 8 feet in any dimension, or upon a
slope with a grade exceeding 25% (1 foot of rise per 4 feet of run). To the
extent possible, spray irrigation should be free from obstructions (trees,
signs, posts, enclosures, etc.).
      8.   Certain special purpose landscape areas (e.g., stormwater management
areas, cemeteries, etc.) may receive exceptions from the slope or lawn
allowances and other elements of the Landscaping Requirements. Exceptions shall
be considered by the City on a case-by-case basis.
      9.   Golf Courses:
         a.   All courses using water supplied by the City or the Washington
County Water Conservancy District shall have a separate meter for irrigation.
         b.   All golf courses, without regard to the date of construction,
shall be required to submit and follow a water budget and identify water
conservation measures for regular city and water provider review.
      10.   Manmade Ornamental Water Features:
         a.   Manmade ornamental water features are limited to 25 square feet
per parcel and are limited to the parcel.
   E.   Metering:
      1.   All attached and detached single-family dwelling units with ground
floor square footage shall be separately metered, sub metered, or equipped with
alternative technology capable of tracking the water use of the individual
unit.
      2.   All non-single family residential projects require separate meters
for outdoor water use when irrigating more than 5,000 square feet.
   F.   Multi-family and Nonresidential Application Requirements:
      1.   Landscape Documentation Package: A copy of a Landscape Documentation
Package must be submitted to and approved by the city. The Landscape
Documentation Package shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect
(PLA) and must consist of the following items:
         a.   A Project Data Sheet containing the following:
            (1)   Project name and address;
            (2)   Applicant or applicant agent’s name, address, phone number,
and email address;
            (3)   Landscape architect’s name, address, phone number, and email
address; and
            (4)   Landscape contractor’s name, address, phone number, and email
address, if available currently.
         b.   A Planting Plan. A detailed planting plan must be drawn at a
scale that clearly identifies the following:
            (1)   Location of all plant materials, a legend with common and
botanical names, and sizes of plant materials;
            (2)   Property lines and street names;
            (3)   Existing and proposed buildings, walls, fences, utilities,
paved areas and other site improvements;
            (4)   Existing trees and plant materials to be removed or retained.
            (5)   Scale: graphic and written;
            (6)   Date of design;
            (7)   Designation of hydrozones; and
            (8)   Details and specifications for tree staking, soil
preparation, and other planting work.
         c.   An Irrigation Plan. A detailed irrigation plan must be drawn at
the same scale as the planting plan and contain the following information:
            (1)   Layout of the irrigation system and a legend summarizing the
type and size of all components of the system, including manufacturer name and
model numbers.
            (2)   Static water pressure in pounds per square inch (psi) at the
point of connection to the public water supply;
            (3)   Flow rate in gallons per minute and design operating pressure
in psi for each valve and precipitation rate in inches per hour for each valve
with irrigation equipment (i.e., sprinklers, drip emitters, bubblers, etc.);
and
            (4)   Installation details for irrigation components.
         d.   A Grading Plan. A grading plan must be drawn at the same scale as
the planting plan and must contain the following information:
            (1)   Property lines and street names, existing and proposed
buildings, walls, fences, utilities, paved areas, and other site improvements;
and
            (2)   Existing and finished contour lines and spot elevations as
necessary for the proposed site improvements, as well as drainage.
(Ord. 2024-01B, 2-7-2024)
10-21-6: BUILDINGS:
   A.   Height:
      1.   Building heights are specified in each zone district. (See also
definition of "building height" in section
10-2-1 of this title.)
      2.   Public and quasi-public utility buildings, when authorized in a
district, may be erected to a height greater than the zone district height
limit by conditional use permit.
      3.   No dwellings shall be erected to a height less than one story above
grade, unless specifically designed and approved as an earth sheltered
structure.
      4.   The area of open loft cannot exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area
of the floor above which the loft is located. Any loft exceeding fifty percent
(50%) shall be considered an additional floor for purposes of IBC compliance.
Lofts shall be considered to be bedrooms for parking requirement calculations.
   B.   Fire Standpipes: Standpipes complying with IBC shall be required for
all commercial and multi-residential buildings, regardless of the number of
stories.
   C.   Provisions For Handicapped: Provisions for physically handicapped
persons shall be provided in all new buildings as required by the Americans
with disabilities act (ADA).
   D.   Elevator Emergency Requirements: All elevator emergency operation and
special provisions shall comply with the requirements of IBC, and ANSI/ASME
A17.1, section 211, and shall include the following provisions:
      1.   Commandeering switch.
      2.   Heat and smoke sensing devices.
      3.   Recall system.
      4.   Emergency operation switch.
      5.   Separate power distribution source.
      6.   Connection to emergency power system.
      7.   Emergency communication system.
   E.   Construction Debris Removal: All building/construction sites shall
provide debris removal sufficient to facilitate the regular cleanup and removal
of construction debris from the site. Each site shall be cleaned and all
construction debris removed on a weekly basis. Failure to comply with this
subsection by allowing debris to accumulate on the premises, may result in the
suspension of building permits, fines or such other appropriate penalties as
the city council shall direct. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-21-7: ROADS:
   A.   Road Layout And Geometry:
      1.   The city road standards are made part of this title by reference.
The design and arrangement and construction of all roads, public and private,
shall be in conformance with the road standards, the provisions of this title,
and any city design guidelines as adopted.
      2.   Road systems shall provide efficient internal circulation,
reasonable access to public highways, minimize congestion and unsafe
conditions, and shall be in conformance with the city general plan.
      3.   The arrangement of roads shall provide for the continuation of major
roads between adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for the
convenient movement of traffic, emergency or maintenance vehicles, or the
efficient provision of utilities. Proposed streets shall be continuous and in
alignment with existing planned or platted streets with which they are to
connect.
      4.   Roads shall be designed to provide emergency access and egress for
residents, occupants and emergency equipment providing width, curve radii and
strength for emergency and maintenance vehicles used by or available to the
city.
      5.   Where the potential traffic impacts on the existing street systems
are considered to be great, or in the case of unique circumstances concerning
topography or street layout, the subdivider may be required to prepare a
detailed engineering study of the road system.
      6.   Proposed streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right
angles as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit. "T"
intersections rather than "cross" intersections shall be used wherever possible
for local streets.
      7.   Where a road does not extend to the boundary of the development and
its continuation is not required, its terminus should be no closer than fifty
feet (50') from the boundary.
      8.   Strips of land reserved to control or restrict access to perimeter
or stubbed roads shall be utilized only where the reserve strip is deeded to
and accepted by the city.
      9.   Lawful right of vehicular access must be demonstrated before the
city will issue a building permit. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
      10.   The installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks and improvements of
streets to centerline, if street is already improved with asphalt or
centerline, plus ten feet (10') where the street is not improved with asphalt,
as approved by the city in accordance with its ordinances and specifications,
shall be required on any existing or proposed street adjoining a lot on which a
building permit application for construction is made. Street improvements are
required for new home construction or remodel for change of use or commercial
use. Such curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street improvements shall be required
as a condition of obtaining a building permit. The city may require a property
owner to make an equivalent payment for the labor and materials necessary to
install curb, gutter, sidewalk and asphalt, as calculated by the city engineer,
in lieu of requiring the property owner to install the requisite improvements.
Any required dedication of property for such improvements shall be conveyed to
the city by quitclaim deed for immediate installation or for such future time
as it becomes prudent for the city to install the said improvements. (Ord.
2014.02, 6-12-2014)
      11.   Excessively long and straight streets which are conducive to high
speed traffic shall be prohibited.
      12.   Every cul-de-sac and permanent dead end street shall comply with
the following requirements:
         a.   End at a turnaround area having a radius no less than fifty feet
(50') and an all weather surface;
         b.   Not exceed six hundred fifty feet (650') in total length.
      13.   Temporary dead end streets, intended as access to future
development parcels, shall be a minimum of one lot depth in length (or as
determined by the planning commission) and shall meet all of the other
requirements for permanent dead end streets set forth in subsection A12 of this
section.
      14.   Driveways, mailboxes, fire hydrants and all other obstructions at
such turnaround areas shall be designed in such a way as to provide an area for
the piling of snow.
   B.   Road Grades:
      1.   Intersections, switchbacks and cul-de-sacs shall not exceed a twelve
percent (12%) grade, with cul-de-sac area having a maximum grade of six percent
(6%).
      2.   No public or private roadway or street shall exceed a fifteen
percent (15%) grade, except that grades up to fifteen percent (15%) for public
or private roadways and streets may be allowed by the planning commission upon
review and finding that all of the following conditions are met:
         a.   No more than ten (10) residential units are served by the over
twelve percent (12%) section or the lots have separate, emergency access that
does not exceed twelve percent (12%).
         b.   For roadways of twelve percent (12%) or greater grade, the
applicant shall stake the centerline and both edges in the field for the
inspection of the city engineer to assure full compliance with this section.
         c.   Such other reasonable conditions the planning commission deems
necessary to protect the health, safety and/or welfare of city residents and
public safety officers under all the factual circumstances existing in each
application.
         d.   When approval has been granted for a roadway in excess of twelve
percent (12%), the security requirements may be adjusted to require a security
instrument in excess of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) in order to
cover the cost of removal and reclamation of such roadway, should constructed
roadway exceed the above conditions.
         e.   Roadways and streets exceeding a fifteen percent (15%) grade
shall not be permitted. If new roads are constructed with actual as built grade
steeper than fifteen percent (15%), they must be rebuilt to fifteen percent
(15%) or less or the area reclaimed to natural conditions.
         f.   All streets and roads with grades in excess of twelve percent
(12%) shall also comply with the requirements set forth in chapter 16, article
A of this title.
   C.   Street Names:
      1.   Each street that is a continuation of, or an approximate
continuation of, any existing dedicated street shall be given the name of such
existing street. When any street forms a portion of a proposed street
previously ordered by the city council to be surveyed, opened, widened or
improved, the street shall be given the name established in said city council
order.
      2.   The names of newly created streets shall not duplicate or nearly
duplicate the names of any streets in the city or in adjacent areas of
Washington County.
      3.   Any named street shall also have the proper compass direction
coordinate as approved by the public works department and/or city engineer.
      4.   Subdividers are encouraged to do an investigation of local history
regarding the names and references to geological and historical features
located in the subdivision and wherever possible incorporate the historical
names and references into the names and designations of streets. (Ord. 2012.04,
1-18-2012)
10-21-8: DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   Length; Grade: No driveway shall exceed one hundred fifty feet (150')
in length and/or fifteen percent (15%) in grade.
   B.   Width: Driveways serving single residential dwellings shall be a
minimum of twelve feet (12') wide. Driveways serving two (2) residential
dwellings shall be a minimum of twenty six feet (26') wide. No driveway shall
serve more than two (2) residences.
   C.   Exceptions: Exceptions exceeding one hundred fifty feet (150') in
length and/or fifteen percent (15%) in grade may be granted by the planning
commission. Such a review shall include a review of the application by the
state fire marshal or chief of the Hurricane Valley fire district contracted to
provide fire service for the city, and shall include any conditions imposed by
the fire department as conditions for the exception and use of the driveway.
Such conditions may include, without limitation, installation of a fire hydrant
on applicant's property at applicant's expense. Any such extension may be
denied based on lack of water fire flow pressure at the applicant's property.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-21-9: CUTS, FILLS AND RETAINING WALLS:
   A.   Applicability: Because of the dramatic visual impact of cuts, fills and
retaining walls in a desert environment such as the city, and the public safety
factors that may arise with significant cuts and fills in unsuitable soils,
design plans for cuts, fills and retaining walls shall conform to the following
criteria and other applicable sections of this title, and the city design
guidelines:
      1.   No cuts or fills will be allowed on slopes with grades exceeding
thirty percent (30%).
      2.   Unretained cuts that exceed two to one (2:1) slope shall not exceed
eight feet (8') in height.
      3.   Unretained fills may not exceed twelve feet (12') in height pursuant
to subsection B of this section.
      4.   No single retaining wall or retaining system may exceed twelve feet
(12') in height and/or forty feet (40') in length; retaining systems less than
twelve feet (12') may exceed forty feet (40').
      5.   Up to three (3) terraced cuts may be created under a terraced cuts
retaining system, so long as each wall is separated by a minimum four foot (4')
setback (measured from face to face) for visual relief and revegetation. The
total maximum height for cuts retained under a terraced retaining system shall
not exceed eighteen feet (18').
      6.   All fills over four feet (4') shall be engineered and approved by a
licensed state engineer.
   B.   Measuring Cut/Fill Heights: Cuts and/or fills shall be measured
vertically, from the natural grade at the lowest point of disturbance to
natural grade at the highest point of disturbance.
   C.   Maximum Slope Grades: Unretained cut and fill slopes shall be no
steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical (2:1), except that cuts
in bedrock materials, the stability of which is verified by a geologist and/or
soils engineer with demonstrated expertise, may be steeper as approved by the
city engineer.
   D.   Retaining Walls: All retaining walls and/or approved retaining systems
shall be constructed of decorative materials (i.e., textured surfaces, colored
or tinted materials) and should be designed to blend into and enhance the
natural desert environment and must be approved by the building department
before grading or excavation permits shall be granted.
   E.   Engineering/Geologic Analysis: An engineering/geologic report in
compliance with subsection 10-6-2F of this title, shall be prepared by a
registered geologist or engineer at the schematic plan stage of the subdivision
ordinance to demonstrate that the hillside above any proposed cut will remain
stable after the proposed cut/fill and retaining system, if any, has been
completed.
   F.   Revegetation:
      1.   All unretained cut and fill slopes must be naturalized and
revegetated within one year after the start of construction.
      2.   Unretained cuts and fills should be naturalized by rounding edges,
placing boulders in natural fashion and planting native plants, including
trees, brush and ground cover, to match surrounding areas. A landscape/
revegetation plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and
approval with the cut/fill design plans.
      3.   All retaining systems shall incorporate planter spaces and shall
require native revegetation. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-21-10: BRIDGE AND TUNNEL REGULATIONS:
The design of bridges and/or tunnels shall conform to the following
regulations:
   A.   All bridges and tunnels must be detailed in separate design plans
submitted to the planning commission for its review.
   B.   Bridge abutments shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height, as
measured from top to original grade.
   C.   All wing walls shall be constructed of decorative materials (i.e.,
textured surfaces, colored or tinted materials) and shall be submitted and
approved by the city planner. Wing walls shall be feathered back into cut and
fill slopes in terraces not exceeding six feet (6') in height. Wing wall
systems shall be designed to maximize revegetation under the criteria outlined
in subsection 10-21-9F of this chapter.
   D.   Bridge and tunnel plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city
engineer. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-21-11: BUILDING SETBACKS FROM WATERWAYS AND FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
No building, either residential or commercial, shall be permitted within six
(6) vertical feet or one hundred twenty five (125) horizontal feet of the
existing flow line of any river, creek, stream or other waterway, measured at
right angles to the centerline of the drainage course, or within any floodplain
or floodway designated on the most current FEMA flood map. The vertical feet
calculation specified herein shall be applied to the elevation of the top of a
building's foundation wall. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-21-12: UTILITIES:
   A.   Construction: All utility connections and lines shall be installed
underground. Before any installations are covered, material and service must be
inspected and approved by the city building department. During the construction
period, temporary power poles and lines shall be allowed within the boundaries
of the construction project; however, such poles and lines must be taken down
within thirty (30) days after the final certificate of occupancy for the
project is granted.
   B.   Easements: All utilities shall be placed within public road rights of
way or specific rights of way or easements free of legal encumbrances. Multiple
use of a given easement is encouraged. The final plat shall note all easements.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-21-13: PARKING:
   A.   General Provisions: Except as may be provided elsewhere in this title,
minimum off street parking space according to this section, with adequate
provisions for ingress and egress by standard sized automobiles, shall be
provided at the time of construction or expansion of any building or recreation
facility, or change in use which requires more off street parking spaces.
   B.   Parking Lot Characteristics: Each parcel of land developed for off
street parking in response to the requirements of this title shall provide the
following characteristics:
      1.   Surfacing: Each lot shall have hard surface and be maintained in
good condition and kept clear and in an unobstructed and usable condition at
all times. Responsibility for maintenance of the lot shall rest with the
property owner. The lot shall provide adequate access to a street or alley.
      2.   Grading: Parking lots shall be graded for proper drainage with
surface water diverted in such a way as to keep the parking area free of
accumulated water or ice and to prevent erosion.
      3.   Lighting: Lots shall be properly illuminated with sharp cutoff
luminaries to prevent direct light from spillover onto adjoining buildings,
grounds and the night sky.
      4.   Size Of Spaces: Each parking space shall measure at least nine feet
(9') wide by eighteen feet (18') long.
      5.   Lot Layout: Whenever right angle parking is employed, a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') shall be required between rows of parking. Whenever
other angle parking (i.e., 30 degree angle) is employed, a minimum of eighteen
feet (18') shall be required between rows of parking. The width of the ingress
and egress to the parking lot shall be the same as the minimum distance between
the rows.
      6.   Landscaping: A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the parking lot
shall be dedicated to landscaping.
   C.   Required Spaces: The requirements below may be superseded by
requirements provided in a specific zone district. If the calculation of
required space results in a fractional number, such fraction should be rounded
off to the next higher whole number: (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
Civic buildings              Determined by specific review
Hotel, motel, condo          Minimum of 1 space per unit and 2 for staff
Offices                      2 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Residential uses:             
 Single-unit dwelling       2 parking spaces
 Two-unit dwelling          2 parking spaces per unit
 Three-unit dwelling        2 parking spaces per unit
 Four-unit dwelling         2 parking spaces per unit
 Multi-unit dwelling        Minimum of 8 spaces, 2 spaces for each unit
 Apartment house            2 spaces for each unit
Restaurants, bars            1 space for every 4 seats and 2 for staff
Retail                       1 space for each 1,000 square feet of retail area
                             and 2 spaces for staff
Tennis courts, skating rinks Determined by specific review of comparables
Theaters                     1 space for every 5 seats
 
   (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
   D.   Parking Heavy Equipment: Heavy equipment in excess of twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds' gross vehicle weight, excluding pickup trucks and including,
but not limited to, construction equipment, excavation equipment, dump trucks,
front end loaders, road graders, eighteen (18) wheel semitrailer rigs and
livestock trucks, may be parked only in agricultural zones, multiple use zones
and highway commercial zones, providing the following restrictions are met:
      1.   Equipment shall be parked on property owned by the same person who
is the registered owner of the equipment;
      2.   Equipment shall not be parked on any roadway, street or highway
fronting or bordering the property, but shall be parked on the lot and/or
parcel itself;
      3.   The equipment shall be parked in a place and manner so as to be
reasonably screened from view from the roadway on which the property fronts;
      4.   The equipment engines and/or associated motors (i.e., refrigeration
units) shall not be allowed to run while parked; and
      5.   All equipment used for construction may be parked at the
construction site during the period of ongoing construction that is authorized
by a current building permit. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
ARTICLE A. GENERAL COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-21A-1: Introduction
10-21A-2: General Design Objectives
10-21A-3: Site Planning
10-21A-4: Architectural Guidelines
10-21A-5: Landscaping Guidelines
10-21A-6: Toquerville Plant List
10-21A-1: INTRODUCTION:
   A.   Commercial developments will occupy dominant locations within
Toquerville and serve essential community commerce needs at different levels,
from neighborhood to region-wide. The design of commercial spaces reflects the
community’s character. The care and attention paid to the design of commercial
projects exhibits the City’s pride in itself and contributes to its socio-
economic vitality.
   B.   The following guidelines provide design concepts and direction for all
commercial projects, encourage high quality and innovative design solutions and
recognize the importance of storefront visibility as well as parking and
circulation design to the success of commercial enterprises. The guidelines
that implement the Design Principles set forth are intended to foster
developments which would be in keeping with the overall character of
Toquerville.
   C.   Site-specific standards shall take precedence when in conflict with the
guidelines. Where such standards are silent, these guidelines will serve as a
supplement. Toquerville City Ordinance Title 9 Building Regulations and Title
10 Land Use Regulations should be consulted for specific regulations governing
land use and zoning development standards.
   D.   These Design Standards apply to Neighborhood Commercial Districts,
Highway Commercial, Planned Commercial Zones as defined in Chapter 12 of this
Title and Commercial Planning Areas within a Master Planned Development Overlay
(MPDO) Development as defined in Article C, Chapter 15 of this Title.
   E.   All new commercial development shall be reviewed by the City Staff for
compliance with these Design Standards. (Ord. 2020.16, 9-10-2020; amd. Ord.
2023.11, 5-17-2023)
10-21A-2: GENERAL DESIGN OBJECTIVES:
   A.   The design of each commercial project in Toquerville shall:
      1.   Reinforce or establish a unique environmental image, for the
commercial district zone within which the project site is located, by
considering the scale, proportion and character of development in the
surrounding area.
      2.   Establish attractive and functional site arrangement of buildings,
open space, parking areas and landscaping.
      3.   Provide site-specific, innovative, high quality architectural design
solutions.
      4.   Provide stylistically diverse architectural design solutions which
convey a sense of timelessness and elegance.
      5.   Facilitate pedestrian activity and access.
      6.   Minimize impacts of noise, light and traffic.
      7.   Preserve and take advantage of natural site amenities such as mature
trees and hillside views.
      8.   Preserve and incorporate structures which are distinctive due to
their age, cultural significance, or unique architectural style into the
project development proposal. Simple elegant forms, high quality design,
details and materials are encouraged. (Ord. 2020.16, 9-10-2020; amd. Ord.
2023.11, 5-17-2023)
10-21A-3: SITE PLANNING:
   A.   Grading.
      1.   Landform preservation shall shape and guide site development of
commercial proposals. Grading shall not substantially alter natural grades to
increase the area of developable land. Grading of or within characteristic
topographical areas such as ridgelines, unique hillside features and creeks is
prohibited.
      2.   Innovative grading concepts such as contour grading, that
incorporate use of variable slopes and meandering tops and toes of slopes
techniques are encouraged. Smooth, gradual transitions between manufactured and
natural slopes are recommended.
      3.   Use of retaining walls shall be minimized. Where use of retaining
walls cannot be avoided, they shall be screened to the maximum extent possible
and use of plantable retaining walls systems should be employed as part of the
design solution.
   B.   Compatibility.
      1.   Project design shall complement the surrounding built environment in
pattern, function, scale, character and materials. Natural site features
including streams, scenic vistas and stands of mature trees shall be integrated
into the overall project design where applicable.
      2.   The placement of structures, circulation patterns and open space
location should acknowledge the site’s characteristics. Culturally and
architecturally significant structures shall be preserved and incorporated in
the project development proposal.
      3.   Increased setback buffers, intensified landscaping, and building
orientation and design techniques shall be utilized to attain the greatest
degree of compatibility between commercial developments and lower intensity
land uses.
      4.   Linkages between commercial and residential uses are encouraged,
where appropriate.
   C.   Site Entry Design.
      1.   Site entries may be accentuated by ornamental landscaping,
decorative paving, raised medians, gateway structures, and monument signage.
      2.   Where deemed appropriate, based on context considerations, main
entry drives should include the following design features:
         a.   A median with a 10-ft. (min) wide clear landscaped area between
the street and the first bisecting parking aisle.
         b.   A 5-ft. (min) wide sidewalk on each side of the driveway.
         c.   A 10-ft. (min) wide landscaped parkway on each side of the
driveway.
         d.   A 20-ft. (min) wide decorative paving band.
   D.   Building Siting.
      1.   Structure siting shall take into consideration surrounding context,
location of incompatible uses and unique site characteristics.
      2.   The placement and design of.structures on corner and mid-block
parcels should create a strong visual and physical connection to the street
frontage.
      3.   Building and site arrangements shall facilitate pedestrian activity,
screen parking and foster public use of spaces.
      4.   Clustering of structures to create plazas and pedestrian malls is
encouraged. When clustering is infeasible, visual and physical linkages between
separate structures should be established by the selected architectural style,
freestanding architectural elements (e.g. arcade systems, trellises)
landscaping and hardscape.
      5.   The building design of structures sited adjacent to street corners
shall recognize the importance and visibility of the “local” by incorporating
appropriate building massing and forms to “anchor” the intersections. Angled or
curvilinear building forms and plazas are encouraged at corner locations.
      6.   Extensive parking lot areas between buildings and right-of-ways are
discouraged along pedestrian oriented as well as auto oriented corridors.
      7.   Parking lots shall occupy no more than 60% of a site’s street
frontage. Use of landscaping and architectural elements to enhance perimeter
parking areas is encouraged.
   E.   Vehicular Access/ Circulation/ Parking.
      1.   Site access and circulation design shall promote safety, efficiency,
and convenience for vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
      2.   Use of streets to fulfill internal circulation needs is not
permitted. A continuous circulation network system shall be provided throughout
the site to the greatest extent possible. Dead-end driveways will be minimized.
Adequate areas for maneuvering, stacking, truck staging, loading and emergency
vehicle access shall be provided on site.
      3.   The number of site access points shall be proportional to the
functional needs and scale of the development.
      4.   Placement of driveway entrances in proximity to street intersections
shall be avoided. Use of common or shared driveways is encouraged.
      5.   Driveway entry locations should be aligned with existing or planned
median openings and driveways on the opposite side of the roadway.
      6.   Buildings and/or plazas should “anchor” corner locations.
      7.   The parking lot design, particularly of larger parking lots, should
differentiate and provide the following: major access drives with no direct
access to parking spaces; primary circulation drives with minimal parking; and
parking aisles for direct parking space access. Loading and service access and
circulation should be independent from the general circulation system.
      8.   Parking shall not dominate street frontages. Parking areas shall be
screened by landscaping and structures.
      9.   Larger parking lots should be divided into a series of
interconnected areas.
      10.   A raised walkway and landscape strip should be provided between
parking areas and buildings. Walkway and landscape strip dimensions shall amply
accommodate anticipated functions, intensity of use, landscaping theme and
associated planting materials.
      11.   Placement of parking areas along primary circulation driveways and
adjacent to building entrances is discouraged.
   F.   Pedestrian Circulation.
      1.   Pedestrian linkages shall be established between buildings,
sidewalks and parking areas.
      2.   Clearly defined pedestrian paths must be provided from sidewalks and
parking areas to primary building entrances.
      3.   Pedestrian pathways should be separated from vehicular traffic by a
change in grade level. Use of raised pedestrian pathways in conjunction with
enhanced paving, landscaping and bollards to delineate pedestrian paths is
recommended.
      4.   Parking areas should be designed in a manner that allows pedestrians
to walk parallel to moving cars and minimize the need for pedestrians to cross
parking aisles and landscape islands to reach building entries.
   G.   Plazas and Courtyards.
      1.   Inclusion of plazas and courtyards within commercial developments is
encouraged. Entries to plazas and courtyards should be inviting and well lit.
      2.   Landscaping, water features, and public art should be incorporated
into plaza and courtyard design.
      3.   Courtyards should be buffered from parking areas and drive aisles.
      4.   Primary access to public plazas and courtyards should be provided
from the street. Secondary access should be provided from retail shops,
restaurants, offices and other uses within the development.
      5.   Shade trees or architectural elements which provide shelter and
relief from direct sunlight should be provided within plazas and courtyards.
      6.   Inclusion of architecturally integrated outdoor dining areas should
be integrated within the overall site and building design.
   H.   Auxiliary Structures/Areas.
      1.   Auxiliary structures and areas such as play structures should be
integrated within the overall site and building design.
   I.   Loading, Delivery, Trash Enclosures, Screenings.
      1.   Loading and delivery service areas shall be located and designed to
minimize their visibility, circulation conflicts and adverse noise impacts.
      2.   The building structure(s), architectural wing walls, freestanding
walls and landscape should be used to screen loading and delivery service
areas.
      3.   Placement of loading and delivery areas within setback areas is
discouraged.
      4.   The location of trash enclosures should be easily accessible for
trash collection and shall not impede general site circulation patterns during
loading operations.
      5.   Trash Walls and fences should be designed to complement the
project’s architecture. Landscaping should be used to soften the appearance of
wall and fence surfaces.
      6.   Solid wall enclosures with pilasters, decorative caps and offsets
are recommended for screening purposes.
      7.   Solid walls and fences within front and exterior side yards of
commercial sites shall be avoided.
      8.   The design of outdoor dining enclosures should be integrated within
the overall project design and should be consistent with the architectural
theme.
   J.   Paving.
      1.   Paving materials should complement the overall architectural theme.
Use of unadorned concrete paving solutions is generally discouraged. Use of
decorative paving materials is recommended.
      2.   Decorative paving should be incorporated into parking lot design,
driveway entries, pedestrian walkways and crosswalks on private property.
      3.   Use of pavers that allow water infiltration is encouraged. Use of
stone and brick is acceptable, where such materials are deemed appropriate. Use
of stamped and color concrete treatments is acceptable, where such materials
are deemed appropriate decorative paving is encouraged.
   K.   Lighting.
      1.   The type and location of parking lot and building lighting shall
preclude direct glare onto adjoining property, streets, or skyward. Lighting
systems should be designed for two operating levels; a higher intensity
lighting level for business operating hours and a reduced intensity level for
non-operating hours.
      2.   The design of the light fixtures and their structural support should
be architecturally compatible with the theme of the development.
      3.   Pedestrian scale/decorative light fixtures are encouraged. “High
mast” poles are discouraged.
      4.   Lighting should be designed to satisfy functional and decorative
needs. Security lighting should be designed as part of an overall lighting
plan.
      5.   Storefront lighting should complement the architectural style of the
building while providing illumination of building facades and entrances.
      6.   Use of accent architectural lighting is encouraged.
      7.   Title 10, Chapter 24 should be consulted for specific regulations
governing lighting standards.
   L.   Other Site Amenities.
      1.   Site amenities must be coordinated in terms of color, materials and
design in order to convey a cohesive project appearance and distinctive
character.
   M.   Site Furniture.
      1.   Seating will be included within plazas, courtyards and along
pedestrian circulation areas.
   N.   Tree Grates/Guards.
      1.   Tree grates should be utilized along street frontages and plaza
areas where a decorative and/or continuous walking surface is desirable.
      2.   Grates should be a minimum of four feet in diameter and should
incorporate knockouts to accommodate the growth of the tree trunk over time.
      3.   Tree guards should be provided to protect trees in high activity
areas. Their design should be compatible with site furnishings.
   O.   Bollards.
      1.   Bollard design if utilized shall be consistent with the overall
project theme and should complement other site furnishings.
      2.   At locations where emergency access may be necessary, removable
bollards shall be used.
   P.   Pots and Planters.
      1.   The placement of planters and pots may be used to organize, accent
and direct pedestrian traffic flow.
      2.   Planters and pots should be utilized to provide visual interest and
color accent building recesses, at locations where access is discouraged and
adjacent to blank walls.
      3.   Planter colors and materials shall be compatible with the
architectural theme.
   Q.   Kiosks, Bulletin Boards, Directories.
      1.   Kiosks, bulletin boards and directories shall be provided near
vehicular and pedestrian entrances to multi-tenant commercial developments.
      2.   Directory and bulletin board siting must maximize their visibility
while minimizing the potential for creating a traffic hazard.
      3.   Kiosk design shall be consistent with the architectural theme of the
development and other site furnishings.
   R.   Trash Receptacles.
      1.   Trash receptacle design should coordinate with other streetscape
furnishings.
   S.   Bicycle Racks.
      1.   Bicycle rack design should be consistent with other streetscape
furnishings. Use of “loop racks” and “ribbon bars” are encouraged.
      2.   Bicycle racks should be located in visible areas. (Ord. 2020.16, 9-
10-2020; amd. Ord. 2023.11, 5-17-2023)
10-21A-4: ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES:
   A.   Architectural Imagery.
      1.   The architectural design for all new structures which are located
outside the historic downtown area must consider the City’s early Utah Pioneer
heritage; however, no particular architectural “style” or theme will be
required. Buildings should convey a sense of authenticity, timelessness and
elegance regardless of style or genre. High quality, innovative architecture is
encouraged, avoiding extremes and uncharacteristic themes, styles, and color.
      2.   The architectural style/design should enhance the site’s context and
shall be harmonious with existing building massing, scale, proportions, colors
and materials. In all cases the selected architectural style shall be utilized
on all building elevations.
      3.   Architectural details and variations in form should be incorporated
in the building design in order to create visual interest.
      4.   Site-specific design solutions are encouraged.
      5.   Use of “building prototypes” for the purpose of achieving corporate
image advertising objectives is discouraged.
   B.   Building Facade and Roof Articulation.
      1.   Buildings should be segmented in distinct massing elements.
      2.   Vertical and horizontal offsets should be provided to minimize
building bulk.
      3.   Articulated building facades which employ variable architectural
elements and details are encouraged along street frontages.
      4.   Structures such as pergolas, arcades and trellises should be
utilized to visually and physically link buildings and create connections to
adjacent sidewalks.
      5.   The architectural design and placement of “Anchor buildings” on site
must balance and not overshadow minor “in-line” tenant spaces and “freestanding
pad” structures.
      6.   Building entries should evoke a “sense of arrival”“ by being
distinctively designed and readily identifiable. Variations in massing,
architectural detailing, colors and materials are encouraged to articulate
entry areas.
      7.   All wall surfaces visible to the public should be architecturally
enhanced.
      8.   Where vertical architectural elements (e.g. clock towers, stair
towers) are proposed as focal points, their scale and relationship to the main
structure should be carefully considered.
      9.   Stairways should be designed as an integral part of the building
architecture.
      10.   Nearly vertical or mansard roofs shall be avoided.
      11.   Gutters and downspouts should be concealed, unless designed as a
decorative architectural feature.
      12.   Mechanical equipment should be fully screened. All screening
enclosures must be compatible with the building’s architecture, colors and
materials.
   C.   Fenestration.
      1.   The proportions and location of fenestration elements (e.g. doors,
windows, skylights) should relate to the scale of the building upon which they
are located.
      2.   Security hardware should be architecturally integrated within the
building design. The use of scissor grilles is strongly discouraged.
   D.   Building Materials and Colors.
      1.   The colors and materials palette utilized by national franchise
tenants should complement the overall design theme and surrounding development.
      2.   Use of precast building materials is generally discouraged and may
be considered and permitted on a case-by-case basis.
      3.   A high quality stone and brick veneer as well as use of muted, deep
tone color is encouraged.
      4.   Building Material Color: The color of all exterior building
materials and surfaces shall blend the proposed new buildings with the city.
   E.   Building Lighting.
      1.   Lighting should be designed to satisfy functional and decorative
needs.
      2.   Security lighting should be designed as part of an overall lighting
plan rather than as single stand-alone elements.
      3.   Storefront lighting should complement the architectural style of the
building while providing illumination of building facades and/or entrances.
(Ord. 2020.16, 9-10-2020; amd. Ord. 2023.11, 5-17-2023)
10-21A-5: LANDSCAPING GUIDELINES:
   A.   Standard Guidelines.
      1.   Project landscaping should be designed to contribute towards
achieving an overall cohesive appearance and compatibility with its
surroundings.
      2.   Landscaping should define site functions, enhance architecture,
soften the appearance of structures, buffer incompatible land uses and screen
undesirable views.
      3.   Tiered planting (tree-shrub-groundcover) and decorative hardscape
should be utilized to enhance the visual character of the project. All areas
not covered by structures, with the exception of service yards, walkways,
driveways, and parking spaces, should be landscaped.
      4.   The following planting design concepts are encouraged:
         a.   Specimen trees (12-16 ft. high minimum from finish grade, or as
recommended by conditions of approval) in informal groupings or rows at major
focal points.
         b.   Use of flowering vines both on walls and arbors or trellises.
         c.   Use of planting to soften building lines with shadows and
patterns.
         d.   Use of “canopy-trees” in parking areas and passive open space
areas.
         e.   Use of berms, plantings, and walls to screen parking lots, trash
enclosures, storage areas, utility boxes, etc.
      5.   Existing mature, healthy trees should be preserved and incorporated
within the overall landscaping plan. Landscaping should be used to define site
functions and create a buffer between pedestrians and vehicles.
      6.   Plant species identified Section
10-21a-6 shall be used considering the Toquerville desert environment.
      7.   Trees and large shrubs should be placed as follows:
         a.   A 10 ft. (min) between center of trees and edge of driveway;
         b.   A 10 ft. from water meter or gas meter and sewer laterals;
         c.   A 25 ft. (min) between center of trees and beginning of curb
returns at intersections;
         d.   A 25 ft. (min) between center of trees and large shrubs to
utility poles and street lights;
         e.   An 8 ft. (min) between center of trees or large shrubs and fire
hydrants and fire department sprinkler and standpipe connections;
         f.    Root-barriers (guards) are required to be installed between
planting and adjoining hardscape areas.
         g.   A 5 ft. (min) clearance should be provided between root barriers
and adjacent hardscape areas.
      8.   Synthetic turf is not permitted as a substitute for planting
materials.
      9.   Use of vines and climbing plants on trellises, and privately owned
perimeter walls is encouraged.
      10.   Landscaping should be in scale with adjacent buildings and of
appropriate size at maturity to accomplish its intended goals.
      11.   Landscaping materials must be spaced so that they do not interfere
with the lighting of the premises or restrict access to emergency apparatus
(e.g. fire hydrants, fire alarm boxes).
      12.   Trees or large shrubs shall not be planted under overhead lines or
over underground utilities if their growth will interfere with the installation
or maintenance of these utilities.
      13.   Provision of landscaping adjacent to buildings is encouraged.
   B.   Parking Lot Landscaping.
      1.   Parking lot landscaping should accent driveways, frame the major
circulation aisles, and highlight pedestrian pathways.
      2.   Parking areas should provide interior planting islands. These
landscaping areas should be planted with trees, low shrubs and groundcover.
      3.   All parking lot street frontages should be screened by landscaping.
Parking lot landscape screening should be implemented by utilizing one or a
combination of the following:
         a.   A 32-inch high (max) hedge;
         b.   A 32-inch high (max) earth berm with a slope no greater than 3.5:
1;
         c.   Trees planted at a distance of 35 ft. on center. Trees should be
a 12-16 ft. high min. from finish grade, or as recommended by conditions of
approval.
   C.   Slope Vegetation and Erosion Control.
      1.   All proposed slopes with a gradient greater than 6:1and a vertical
height of 3 ft. or greater, shall be vegetated within 30 days of completion of
grading.
      2.   All plant materials shall be appropriately spaced to control soil
erosion.
      3.   Trees, shrubs, and ground covers should be planted in undulating
groupings to improve the character of manufactured slopes.
      4.   Vegetation of permanent slopes should include permanent necessary
irrigation. (Ord. 2020.16, 9-10-2020)
10-21A-6: TOQUERVILLE CITY PLANT LIST:
(Modified July 16, 2020)
LARGE TREES
Native Common Name Botanical Name Description Water Use
LARGE TREES
Native Common Name         Botanical Name       Description           Water Use
                                                Withstands hot, dry
      Arizona Ash         Fraxinus velutina    conditions, Lows -    Low
                                                10?
       Bloodroot Sycamore/                      Large tree, heavy
      London Plane Tree   plantings acerifolia trunk, large hairy    Moderate
                                                leaves
                           Brachychiton         Evergreen, use for
      Bottle Tree         populneus            shade tree or high,   Low
                                                wide windbreak
                                                Moderate grower,
      Chinese Pastiche    Pistacia chicness    handles alkaline      Low
                                                soils
                                                Tolerates strong
                                                winds, desert heat,
                                                and dry alkaline
      Common Hackberry    Celtis occidentalis  soils; Upright growth Moderate
                                                habit, may exceed 40-
                                                50'; good choice for
                                                street or lawn tree
      Cork Oak            Quercus suber        May see cold injury   Low
                                                in less than Zone 5
      Fan-Tex Ash         Fraxinus velutina    Foliage resistant to  Low
                           ‘Rio Grande’     wind burn
      Fruitless Mulberry  Morus alba                                Low
      Hank Willow         Salix matsudana      Popular in high       Moderate
                                                desert
      Holly Oak           Quercus ilex         May be trained or     Low
                                                sheared
      Honey Locust        Gleditsia            Fast growing          Moderate
                           triacanthos
       Honey Locust,       Gleditsia            Fast growing, G. t.
      Shademaster         triacanthos inemis   inermis are thornless Moderate
                                                and have less litter
                         ‘Shademaster’                         Moderate
      Lace Bark Elm       Ulmus parvifolia                          Moderate
      Live Oak (same as   Quercus virginia                          Low
       Southern Oak)
                                                Adapted well to low
      Montebello Ash      Fraxinus velutina    desert areas, best    Low
                                                tree for low desert
      Mt. Atlas Pastiche  ‘Coracea’        Native of Southern    Low
                                                California
                                                Slow to moderate
      Orange County Ash   Pistacia atlantica   growth, water deep &  Low
                                                infrequent
                                                Fast growing,
                         Fraxinus             tolerates all kinds   Low
                                                of soil
                         ‘Orange County’                       Low
      Raywood Ash         Fraxinus velutina    Foliage sensitive to  Low
                           ‘Raywood’        high wind
                                                Needs well drained
      Red Push Pastiche   Pistacia ‘Red Push�soil, water deep &    Low
                                                infrequent
      Southern Live Oak   Quercus virginiana   Evergreen, best oak   Low
       (same as Live Oak)                       for low desert
      Shademaster                                                  Low
                                                Tolerant of saline,
      Shoestring Acacia   Acacia stenophylla   alkaline and          Low
                                                waterlogged soils,
                                                weeping habit
      Sweet Gum           Liquidambar          Not good in alkaline  Moderate
                           styraciflua          soils
      Texas Red Oak also  Quercus buckleyi     Takes the alkaline    Low
       called Buckley Oak                       soil
      Texas Umbrella/     Melia azedarach      Tolerates heat, wind, Moderate
       Chinaberry                               poor soil, drought
 
SMALL TREES
Native Common Name Botanical Name Description Water Use
SMALL TREES
Native Common Name         Botanical Name        Description          Water Use
      Acacia              Acacia sp.            Not adapted to       No-Low
                                                 colder areas
      Ginko               Ginko biloba          Ancient survivor of  Moderate
                                                 prehistoric times
      Glossy Privet       Ligustrum lucidum     May suffer in full   Regular
                                                 sun, shrub or tree
                                                 Well adapted to St.
      Golden Raintree     Koelreuteria          George, famous for   Moderate
                           paniculata            Japanese lantern-
                                                 like papery fruit
                                                 Tolerant of any
      Hawthorne           Crataegus Sp.         soil, with good      Moderate
                                                 drainage
      Honey Mesquite      Prosopis glandulosa   Good desert tree     No-Low
      Little Leaf Ash     Fraxinum anomala      Native to canyons    Low
                                                 and stream beds
                                                 Tolerates strong
                                                 winds, desert heat,
native Netleaf Hackberry   Celtis reticulata     and dry alkaline     Moderate
                                                 soils. Canyon/wash
                                                 small tree
                                                 Tolerates heat,
      Wilson Olive        Olea europaea         alkaline soil. Cold  Low
                                                 Tender
                                                 Sensitive to iron
      Redtip Photinia     Photinia Fraseri      deficiency, good     Moderate
                                                 espalier
                           Prosopis torreyana    Spirally twisted
      Screwbean Mesquite  pubescens             seedpods, bluish     No-Low
                                                 green foliage
      Silk Tree, Mimosa   Albizia julibrissin   Not long-lived       Low
                                                 Brilliant fall leaf
      Sumac               Rhus                  color, tolerates all Low
                                                 soils, but soggy
                                                 soils can kill them
      Western Mesquite    Prosopis torreyana    Thornless variety of No-Low
                                                 Honey Mesquite
      Yellow/Red Bird of  Caesalpinia gilliesii Attracts             Low
       Paradise                                  hummingbirds
                                                 Tree or shrub, well
      Chaste Tree         Vitex agnus-castus    adapted to desert ,  Moderate
                                                 spreading habit
                                                 Adaptable to
                           Koelreuteria          different soils,
      Chinese Flame Tree  bipinnata             flowers produce      Moderate
                                                 little Japanese
                                                 lanterns
                           Chiltalpa             Struggles with mid-
      Chitalpa            tashkentensis ‘Pink summer heat          Low
                           Dawn’
                                                 Adapted well to St.
      Crape Myrtle        Lagerstroemia sp.     George, flowers      Moderate
                                                 bloom on new wood
      Desert Museum Palo  Cercidium ‘Desert   Fast growing, best   Low
       Verda               Museum’             of this specie
                                                 Native desert
      Desert Willow       Chilopsis linearis    species, blossoms    Low
                                                 attract humming
                                                 birds
      Fruitless Plum      Plum                  Dark purple leaves   Moderate
                                                 Can grow well in
      Flowering Pear      Pyrus calleryana      clay soils, but      Moderate
                                                 struggle if soil is
                                                 shallow
                                                 Large pods hang in
      Indian Bean Tree    Catalpa speciosia     late summer, soil    Moderate
       (Northern Catalpa)                        tolerant, does not
                                                 tolerate wind well
       Japanese Pagoda                           Small yellow
      (Chinese Scholar    Sophora japonica      flowering tree,      Moderate
       Tree)                                     moderate growth up
                                                 to 70 ft.
                                                 Takes well to desert
      Jujube              Jujube                conditions, edible   Moderate
                                                 fruit
      Redbud              Cercis occidentalis   Early blooming tree  Moderate
                                                 Evergreen or
      Texas Mountain      Sophera secundiflora  deciduous, tree or   Moderate
       Laurel                                    shrub, provide good
                                                 drainage
      Aleppo Pine         Pinus halepenis       Handles poor soil    Low
                                                 and desert heat
                                                 Adapted to the
      Arizona Cypress     Cupressus arizonica   cooler area of the   No-low
                                                 county, mass for
                                                 windbreak or screen
      Blue Atlas Cedar    Cedrus atlantica      Drought tolerant,    Moderate
                                                 nice specimen tree
      Deodar Cedar        Cedrus deodara        May get spider mites Moderate
                                                 easily
      Italian Stone Pine  Pinus pinea           Slow growing, large  No-Low
                                                 rounded shape
      Japanese Black Pine Pinus thunbergii      Slow growing,        Moderate
                                                 irregular shape
                                                 fast growing screen
      Leyland Cypress     Cupressocyparis       tree, tolerant of    Moderate
                           leylandii             soils, climate and
                                                 strong wind
      Mondell Pine/Afghan Pinus eldarica        Best desert pine,    No-Low
       Pine                                      upright growth habit
                                                 Fast growing, too
      California Fan Palm Washingtonia filifera tall for most home   Low
                                                 gardens (6)
                                                 Winter hardy for
       Mediteranean Fan                          brief periods, slow
      Palm                Chamaerops humilis    growing, tolerates   Moderate
                                                 poor soil and wind-
                                                 (1)
      Mexican Fan Palm    Washingtonia robusta  Slimmer than         Low
                                                 California Fan (2)
 
SHRUBS
Native Common Name Botanical Name Description Water Use
SHRUBS
Native Common Name Botanical Name Description                                                       Water
                                                                                                    Use
      Agave       Agave          May shrivel during drought, but plump up with moisture            No-Low
       species
Native Apache      Fallugia       Canyon/wash large shrub, flower resemble single white roses and   No-Low
       Plume       paradoxa       progress to a light pink feather look
      Arizona     Vauquelinia    Somewhat reminiscent of oleander in habit                         No-Low
       Rosewood    californica
Native Barrel      Cactacea sp.   Slow growth, needs little water                                   No-Low
       Cactus
      Big         Artemisia      Rock/outcrops medium shrub                                        No-Low
       Sagebrush   tridentata
      Brittlebush Enceila        Deciduous medium shrub, yellow flowering                          No-Low
                   frutescens
       Bush        Convolvulus
      Morning     cnerorum       Evergreen shrub, fast spreading                                   Moderate
       Glory
      Butterfly   Buddleja       Attracts butterflies                                              Moderate
       Bush        davidii
       Centennial  Baccharis
      Brown       centennial     Able to grow in difficult conditions                              No-Low
       Baccharis
      Desert      Ceanothus      An evergreen perennial which forms white flowers blooming from    Low
       Lilac       greggii        March to April.
                   Cowania
Native Cliff Rose  mexicana       Tree or shrub, flowers resemble single roses                      Moderate
                   stansburiana
      Cotoneaster Cotoneaster    Low-growing, prefers poor, dry soil                               No-Low
                   sp.
Native Creosote    Larrea         Native low desert large shrub, tolerates wind, can be used as a   No-Low
       Bush        tridentata     formal hedge
       Datil
      Yucca,      Yucca baccata  Medium shrub, 3' high x 5' wide, fleshy, edible banana- like      No-Low
       Banana                     fruits to 6" long
       Yucca
      Desert      Dasylirion     Very drought tolerant, good drainage                              No-Low
       Spoon       wheeleri
      Dorr Sage   Salvia Dorrii  Evergreen flowering shrub, needs good drainage, drought tolerant  Low
      Fernbush    Chamaebatiaria Screening and hedges, showy flower resembles white lilacs         No-Low
                   millefolium
      Forsythia   Forsythia gold Early yellow blooming, then leafs out long thin glossy green      Moderate
                                  leaves
Native Fourwing    Atriplex       Sand desert large shrub, fire resistant                           No-Low
       Saltbush    canescens
      Fragrant    Rhus aromatica Foliage turns red in fall; Canyon/wash large shrub                Low
       Sumac
      Fremont     Berberis       Canyon/wash large shrub                                           Moderate
       Barberry    fremontii
      Bluebeard   Caryopteris    Heat tolerant, recommend sunny exposure                           Low
                   incana
      Green       Crataegus      attracts birds and bees                                           Moderate
       Hawthorne   viridis
      Fremont’  Dalea pulchra  Low, trailing desert shrub                                        No-Low
       Indigobush
      New Mexican Forestiera     Deciduous shrub to small tree                                     Low
       Privet      neomexicana
      Heavenly    Nandina        Small shrubs, bamboo-type plant                                   Low
       Bamboo      domestica
      Indian fig  Opuntia ficus- Plant bears prickly pears you see sold in grocery stores.         Low
                   indica
      Joshua Tree Yucca          Difficult under ordinary garden conditions, Spiny simple          No-Low
                   brevifolia     branched, slow growth
      Junipers    Juniperus sp.  Many forms of this evergreen shrub                                Varies
      Little      Olea europaea  Olive family, dense shrub excellent as screen or hedge            Low
       Ollie
      Mexican     Salvia         Evergreen flowering shrub, tolerant of heat and cold              Low
       Bush Sage   leucantha
      Mock Orange Choisya        Luscious green leaves, doesn’t like alkaline soil or high- salt Moderate
                   ternata        water
      Mojave      Xylorihiza     Perennial shrub, low growing                                      No-Low
       Aster       tortifolia
Native Mormon Tea  Ephedra        will tolerate dry, exposed conditions and poor soils, but must    No-Low
                   viridis        have good drainage, has small flowers and leaves
Native Mountain    Cercocarpus    Evergreen shrub/tree suited to dry rock slopes                    No-Low
       Mahogany    sp.
      Narrowleaf  Yucca          Best in well-drained soil                                         No-Low
       Yucca       angustissima
      Ocotillo    Fouquieria     Whip-like stems, thorny, orange flowers, need good drainage       No-Low
                   splendens
       Oleander
      (Poisonous  Nerium sp.     Tolerant of heat, blooms most of the summer                       Low
       Potential)
      Pendulous   Yucca          not as stiff and metallic looking as most yuccas                  No-Low
       Yucca       recurvifolia
Native Prickly     Cactacea sp.   Native to desert, flowers in spring, edible fruit                 No-Low
       Pear var.
      Purpleleaf  Purnus cistena valued for its unique coloring and hardiness                      Moderate
       Sandcherry
      Orchid      Cistus         Grows quickly. Does well in well-drained soils.                   Moderate
       Rockrose    purpureus
      Pyracanthus Pyracantha sp. Evergreen shrub with bright orange berries                        Low
Native Rabbitbrush Chrysothamnus  Has yellow flowers                                                No-Low
                   nauseosus
      Red Autumn  Salvia greggii Evergreen or deciduous flowering shrub                            Low
       Sage
      Red Yucca   Hesperolae     Especially heat tolerant.                                         No-Low
                   parviflora
      Rosemary    Rosmarinus     Evergreen feathery shrub, fragrant                                Low
                   species
      Sand        Artemisia      Sand desert large shrub                                           No-Low
       Sagebrush   filifolia
      Santolina   Santolinas     grow in any well drained soil, low growing                        No-Low
                   virens
      Snake Weed  Gutierrezia    blooms profusely with sunflower yellow flowers                    No-Low
                   sarothrae
      Spanish     Spartium       Handles poor soil, yellow blooms, 6-10 ft. high                   No-Low
       Broom       junceum
                   Ziziphus       roots can be used for soap, great habitat for birds, thorns are
      Gray-thorn  obtusifolia    protection and quail and dove eat the fruit                       Low
                   var. canescens
      Texas       Leucophyllum   Green-grey foliage shrubs with colorful blooms                    No-Low
       Ranger      sp.
      Trailing    Rosmarinus     Evergreen feathery shrub, fragrant                                Low
       Rosemary    officinalis
       Utah        Agave
      Century     utahensis      Rock/outcrops succulent                                           No-Low
       Plant
      Winter      Euonymus sp.   Without support will be a foot high ground cover, or with support Moderate
       Creeper                    will cover a wall completely
 
PERENNIAL FLOWERS
Native Common Name Botanical Name Description Water Use
PERENNIAL FLOWERS
Native Common Name        Botanical Name         Description          Water Use
                          Sedum herbstfreude     drought tolerant and
      Autumn Joy         ‘Autumn Joy’       widely adaptable to  Low
                                                 any soil
      Bear Grass         Nolina microcarpa      Accent plants with   No-Low
                                                 tough, grassy leaves
                                                 Become ragged and
                                                 brown with neglect,
                                                 can show tip burn on
                                                 leaves if soil
      Big Blue Lily Turf Liriope muscari        contains excess      Moderate
                                                 salts or if plants
                                                 are kept too wet
                                                 where drainage is
                                                 poor.
      Blue Flax          Linum sp.              Drought tolerant     Moderate
      Canaigre           Rumex hymenosepalus    Herb, some species   Moderate
       (Buckwheat)                               used for medicinal
                                                 Fragrant chocolate
      Chocolate Flower   Berlandiera lyrata     yellow blooms,       Moderate
                                                 thrives well in clay
                                                 soil
                                                 Purple flowers,
      Coneflower         Echinacea purpurea     blooms most of       Moderate
                                                 summer
                                                 Easy-to-grow; Yellow
      Coreopsis          Coreopsis sp.          flowing, about 1-    No-Low
                                                 2 ft. tall
                                                 Low desert
      Desert Marigold    Baileya multiradiata   perennial, yellow    Low
                                                 flowers
                          Dianthus ‘Sweet      mounding green
      Dianthus           William’ & ‘Pinks�foliage, found       Moderate
                                                 jagged petals
                                                 Showy display plant
                                                 in borders, rock
      Euphorbia          E. rigida              gardens, containers. Moderate
                                                 Full Sun. Tolerates
                                                 drought.
      Evening Primrose   Oenothera sp.          Sand desert          No-Low
                                                 perennial herb
      Four O’Clock     Mirabilus multiflora   Magenta colored      Low
                                                 flowers in clumps
                                                 Various colors of
      Freeway Daisy      Osteospermum           Daisies, blooms in   Moderate
                                                 warm weather
      Fremont’s        Lepidium fremontii     white delicate       Low
       Peppergrass                               flowers
                                                 Low, clumping or
      Gazania            G. hybrids             spreading plants,    Moderate
                                                 long bloom season
                                                 Becomes ragged and
                                                 brown with neglect,
                                                 can show tip burn on
                                                 leaves if soil
      Giant Lily Turf    Liriope gigantea       contains excess      Moderate
                                                 salts or if plants
                                                 are kept too wet
                                                 where drainage is
                                                 poor.
      Guara              Guara lindheimeri      Multiple delicate    Moderate
                                                 flowers on one stem
                                                 Sand desert
      Hopi Blanketflower Gaillardia pinnatifida perennial, orange    Moderate
                                                 flowering
                                                 Low growing,
      Ice Plant          (Various genera)       succulent            Low
                                                 groundcover
                                                 Rock/outcrops
      Indian Paintbrush  Castilleja chromosa    perennial, red       No-Low
                                                 flowers
      Lantana            Lantana sp.            Low growing,         Moderate
                                                 evergreen shrubs
      Lavender           Lavendula sp.          Fragrant purple      Moderate
                                                 flowers
                                                 Green grass-like
      Lirope             Liriope muscari        leaves in clumps-    Moderate
                                                 purple bloom
                                                 Tall blue stalks of
      Mealy Cup Sage     Salvia victorian blue  flowers, long        Moderate
                                                 slender leaves,
                                                 clumping base
                                                 Low desert
      Mojave Globemallow Sphaeralcea ambigua    perennial, salmon    Low
                                                 color flowers
                                                 spiny leaves with
      Painted Milkvetch  Astragalus ceramicus   large variegated     No-Low
                                                 pods; Native plant
                                                 blossoms attract
      Penstemon          Penstemon sp.          hummingbirds, do not No-Low
                                                 over water, needs
                                                 good drainage
                                                 Rock/outcrops
                                                 perennial herb,
      Prince’s Plume   Stanleya pinnata       yellow plumelike     Low
                                                 flowers; tolerates
                                                 alkaline soil
                                                 Dense foliage
      Red Hot Poker      Kniphofia sp.          producing yellow-    Moderate
                                                 orange flowers
                          Perovskia              Woody low shrub,
      Russian Sage       atriplicifolia         mass of purple       No-Low
                                                 flowers
      Salvia             Salvia sp.             Many types of this   Low
                                                 perennial
      Snap Dragon        Antirrlinuin majas     Tall flower stalks,  Moderate
                                                 multiplies each year
      Sundancer Daisy    Hymenoxys acaulis      gold daisy           Low
       Perky Sue
                                                 Yellow flowering,
      Sundrops           Calylophus hartwegii   does well in sunny,  No-Low
                                                 hot areas
      Thrifty Goldenweed Haplopappus sp.        Sunflower family     Low
      Verbena            Verbena sp.            Available in many    Moderate
                                                 colors
                                                 Tall erect growth
      Yarrow             Achillea sp.           habit, most are      No-Low
                                                 yellow
 
VINES, GROUND COVERS
Native Common Name Botanical Name Description Water Use
VINES, GROUND COVERS
Native Common Name        Botanical Name        Description           Water Use
                                                Plants will bloom in
      Chinese Wisteria   Wisteria sinensis     sun or considerable   Low
                                                shade
                                                often used as lawn
                                                substitutes, between
      Cliff Sandwort     Arenaria macradenia   stepping stones, or   Moderate
                                                for velvety green
                                                patches
                                                choose types suitable
      Climbing Rose      Rosa species          to climate; use mulch Moderate
                                                to conserve water use
       Common Winter                            Less vigorous,
      Creeper            Euonymus radicans     reddish-colored       Moderate
                                                flowers
      Dwarf Broom        Baccharis piluraris   low growing evergreen Low
                                                ground cover
                                                takes dryness when
      Hall’s HoneysucklLonicera japonica     establish, tolerates  Moderate
                                                poor drainage
                                                Ice plant relative,
      Hearts & Flowers   Aptenia cordifolia    but looks less like   Low
                                                ice plants than most
                          Baccharis hybrid      drought tolerant
      Hybrid Broom       ‘Starn Thompson’  evergreen ground      Low
                                                cover
                                                an evergreen
                                                perennial, great for
      Mondo Grass        Ophiopogon japonicus  shady areas, use for  Moderate
                                                ground cover or
                                                borders
                                                Use as filler between
      Thyme              Thymus sp.            stepping stones, soft Moderate
                                                and fragrant
                                                underfoot
      Texas Wisteria     Wisteria sinensis     will bloom in sun or  Low
                          ‘Texas’           considerable shade
                                                Fast-growing vine to
      Trumpet vine       Campsis grandiflora   40 ft., orange        Moderate
                                                bellshaped flowers
      Virginia Creeper   Parthenocisus inserta Vigorous vine with    Moderate
                                                beautiful foliage
 
ORNAMENTAL GRASSES
Native Common Name Botanical Name Description Water Use
ORNAMENTAL GRASSES
Native Common Name         Botanical Name       Description           Water Use
Native Alkali Scaton Grass Sporobolus airoides  Extremely tough,      Low
                                                showy pinkish plumes
      Big Galleta         Pleuraphis rigida    bunch grass, sandy    Low
                                                rocky soils
      Blue Fescue         Festuca glauca       Clumped ornamental    Moderate
                                                type, 12" high
                                                Native of dry
      Blue Grama          Bouteloua sp.        climate, area, heat   Low
                                                resistant
                                                Metallic blue,
      Blue Switch Grass   Panicum virgatum     adaptable to any      Low
                           ‘Heavy Metal’    soil, drought
                                                tolerant
                                                slender yellow or
      Deer Grass          Muhlenbergia rigens  purplish flower       No-Low
                                                spikes in autumn,
                                                clump grass
                                                Growing in fountain-
                                                like mounds, among
                                                the most graceful of
      Fountain Grass      Pennisetum species   ornamental grasses,   Moderate
                                                use in containers or
                                                in perennial or shrub
                                                borders
      Giant Feather Grass Stipa gigantiea      Native clump grass,   Low
                                                very drought tolerant
      Indian Rice Grass   Oryzopsis hymenoides Sand desert           No-Low
                                                bunchgrass
       Japanese Silver                          Among the showiest
      Grass               Miscanthus sinensis  and liveliest looking Moderate
                                                of ornamental grasses
Native Mexican Feather     Stipa tenuissima     super soft and fuzzy  Low
       Grass                                    ornamental grass
                           Panicum virgatum     perennial grass, deep
      Prairie Sky Switch  ‘Prairy Sky’     green to gray green,  Low
                                                blooms in summer
                                                in summer seed heads
      Purple Three Awn    Aristida purpurea    form a cloud of       Low
                                                purple
      Red Grama           Bouteloua hirsuta    Rock/outcrops small   Low
                                                bunchgrass
                                                Ornamental grass with
      Regal Mist          Muelenbergia         red plumes on tips in Low
                                                late summer & fall
 
Notes:
Trees & plants native to the Toquerville area are identified in the left
column.
With the frequency of high winds in the Hurricane Valley it is recommended to
securely stake trees.
This list has been modified to meet the requirements identified by the
Toquerville Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2020.16, 9-10-2020)
CHAPTER 22
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-22-1: Purpose And Objectives
10-22-2: Interpretation
10-22-3: Definitions
10-22-4: Permit Requirements
10-22-5: Standards And Regulations
10-22-6: Safety In Construction
10-22-7: Specific Regulations For Each Zone
10-22-8: Nonliability Of City
10-22-9: Variances
10-22-10: Enforcement
10-22-11: Appeal
10-22-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of these sign regulations is to encourage the effective use of
signs as a means of communication in the city; to maintain and enhance the
aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic
development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize
the adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to
enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions.
Accordingly, the city adopts these regulations to provide for a healthy
business environment considering safety aspects while maintaining those
aesthetic qualities reflective of the natural surroundings. The goals to be
achieved by these regulations are:
   A.   Effective identification of each business, allowing for creativity and
reflecting the business character and image.
   B.   Stimulating harmony within the community while allowing for competitive
opportunities and protection of property values to preserve a healthy business
environment and sustainable economy.
   C.   Creation of a town image that reflects the relationship with the
surrounding natural scenic grandeur and the city's historical heritage.
   D.   Provision for the safety of pedestrians and motorists and promotion and
protection of the public welfare. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-22-2: INTERPRETATION:
The sign requirements contained herein are declared to be the maximum
allowable, and sign types not specifically allowed as set forth within this
chapter shall be prohibited. Where other ordinances are in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, the most restrictive ordinance shall apply. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-22-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
A-FRAME SIGN: A temporary or movable sign constructed with two (2) sides
attached at the top so as to allow the sign to stand in an upright position.
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which: a) identifies a discontinued use on the property;
or b) has not been maintained for a period of sixty (60) days, where conduct on
the part of the sign owner or the person having control of the sign indicates
an intention to relinquish ownership or title to the sign.
ALTERATION: A change or rearrangement in the structural part or design of a
sign in any manner, including changing area or height, changing display of sign
and relocating or changing position. Alterations shall not be interpreted to
include changing outdoor copy in signs which are designed to accommodate
changeable copy.
ANIMATED SIGN: A sign which involves motion or rotation of any part created by
artificial means, or which displays flashing, revolving or intermittent lights,
or any other means not providing constant illumination or intensity of
illumination, including changeable signs. This shall not include signal lights
and other public safety signs maintained by government authority.
AWNING SIGN: A sign which is a structure made of cloth, metal or other material
affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or
retracted to a position against the building.
BALLOON SIGN: An advertisement supported by a balloon anchored to the premises
where the advertised use is conducted, product or commodity sold, service
performed, or business name is located.
BANNER: A flexible sign characteristically supported by two (2) or more points
and hung on a building or otherwise suspended down or along its face, or across
a public street. The banner may or may not include copy or graphic symbols. It
is generally made of fabric or other nonrigid materials with no enclosing
frame.
BILLBOARD: Any freestanding sign larger than forty (40) square feet.
BULLETIN BOARD: A sign on premises which accommodates changeable copy and
displays information on activities and events.
CANOPY SIGN: A sign which is a structure made of cloth, metal or other material
with frames affixed to the building and carried by a frame which is supported
by the ground. A canopy sign shall be considered an awning sign for purposes of
these regulations.
CHANGEABLE SIGN OR CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign on which copy is changed either
manually in the field; e.g., reader boards with changeable letters, or
automatically on a lampbank through mechanical means; e.g., electrical or
electronic time and temperature units.
CIVIC SIGN: A sign erected by a public or nonprofit agency, service club, etc.,
for civic or public information.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN: An on premises temporary sign identifying a construction
project or subdivision development. The sign may contain the name of the
project, name and address of the construction firm, architect and developer.
Development signs shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height and not contain
more than thirty two (32) square feet. Projects with more than ten (10)
dwelling units may have an additional two (2) square feet of sign area per
unit, up to a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
DILAPIDATED: A sign where: a) the lettering or background material or any part
of the sign has flaked, broken off or changed color; b) structural supports or
frame members are visibly corroded, stained, bent, broken or dented; or c) sign
supports are twisted, leaning or at angles other than those at which the sign
was originally erected.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign supported upon the ground by poles or braces and not
attached to any building.
HEIGHT OF A SIGN: The vertical distance from the average adjacent ground level
to the top of the sign, including the support structure and all design
elements. The average ground level shall be determined from within an eight
foot (8') radius of the base of the sign. The adjacent ground shall not be
elevated for purposes of increasing allowable sign height.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign in which a source of light is used in order to make
the message readable. This definition shall include internally and externally
lighted signs. All illuminated signs must comply with chapter 24 of this title.
MARQUEE SIGN: A sign built on a permanent rooflike structure or canopy of rigid
materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building.
MONUMENT SIGN: A sign less than six feet (6') in height which is flush to the
ground, is incorporated into the landscape or architectural design or scheme,
and displays the name of buildings or occupants only.
NAMEPLATE SIGN: A sign indicating the name and/or occupation of a person
legally occupying the premises.
NONCONFORMING SIGN OR SIGN STRUCTURE: A sign or sign structure, or portion
thereof, lawfully existing at the time of its construction, which does not
conform to all height, area, yard, spacing, animation, lighting or other
regulations prescribed in the zone in which it is located.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: An advertising sign which directs attention to a use,
product, commodity or service not related to the premises on which the sign is
located.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign directing attention to a use conducted, product or
commodity sold, service performed or business name upon the premises on which
it is located.
POLITICAL SIGN: A sign intended to draw attention to or communicate a position
on an issue, candidate or measure in any national, state or local election.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign which is affixed to an exterior wall or building or
structure and which projects more than eighteen inches (18") from the building
or structure wall, and which does not extend more than three feet (3') above
the parapet, eaves or building facade of the building upon which it is placed.
PROPERTY SIGN: A sign related to the property upon which it is located and
offering such information as sale or lease of the property, warning against
trespassing, any hazard, or other danger on the property.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: One sign on any lot or parcel of real property, provided such
sign is located entirely within the property to which the sign applies is not
directly illuminated, does not exceed eight (8) square feet in area, and is
removed within seven (7) days after the sale, rental or lease has been
accomplished.
REFLECTIVE SIGN: A sign whose surface material reflects light so as to generate
a contrast between the sign and adjacent surfaces or surrounding area.
ROOF SIGN: A sign which is erected partly or wholly on the roof of the
building. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a sign structure having main supports
embedded in the ground shall not be considered to be roof sign even if the
supports pass through a roof, canopy or parapet of a building.
SERVICE SIGN: A sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area that is
incidental to a use lawfully occupying the property upon which the sign is
located, and which sign is necessary to provide information to the public, such
as direction to parking lots, location of restrooms, entrance and exits, etc.
Such signs shall be located entirely on the property to which they pertain and
shall not in any way advertise or otherwise mention a business.
SETBACK: The minimum distance that any portion of a sign or sign structure
shall be from any street right of way line.
SIGN: A presentation or representation of words, letters, figures, designs,
picture or colors, publicly displayed so as to give notice relative to a
person, a business, an article of merchandise, a service, an assemblage, a
solicitation, or a require for aid; also, the structure or framework or any
natural object on which any sign is erected or is intended to be erected or
exhibited or which is being used or is intended to be used for sign purposes.
SIGN AREA OR AREA: The number of square feet within the smallest shape within
which the face of a sign can be enclosed. If the sign consists of more than one
section or module, the sign area shall be the total area of all sections or
modules. Only one side of a back to back or double faced sign shall be used in
computing sign area when sign surfaces are parallel or diverge from a common
edge by an angle of less than forty five degrees (45°). Sign area of signs in
the shape of a sphere, prism, cylinder, cone, pyramid, square or other such
shapes shall be computed as one-half (1/2) of the total surface area of such
sign.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected supporting a sign which
requires location on or below the ground or attached to something having
location on or below the ground.
SNIPE: A sign which is attached, painted, printed or otherwise affixed to any
curb, sidewalk, public utility pole, hydrant, bridge, bench, tree or other
surface of public property, or over or across any street or public
thoroughfare, except by a duly authorized public employee or as required or
permitted by law.
SUSPENDED SIGNS: Signs which are anchored to a building and are free to hang
from the structure to which it is attached.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display
constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or
other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed out of
doors for a short period of time, generally not longer than one month as
specified in the required sign permit.
WALL SIGN: A sign that is attached to, or painted on, and parallel to, a
building or wall.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign permanently attached and located within a building so as to
be visible through a window or door outside of the building. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-
18-2012)
10-22-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be
unlawful to display, erect, relocate or alter any sign without first filing a
written application, on a form approved by the city, with the city and
obtaining a sign permit. When a sign permit has been issued by the city, it
shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate from the terms
or conditions of said permit without prior approval of the city. A written
record of such approval shall be entered upon the original permit application
and maintained in the files of the city.
   B.   Application For Permit: The application for a sign permit shall be made
by the owner or tenant of the property on which the sign is to be located, or
his authorized agent, or a licensed sign contractor. The application for a sign
permit shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner or persons
entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or erector.
      2.   The location by street address of the proposed sign structure.
      3.   A site plan showing the proposed location of the sign in relation to
the face of the building or to the boundaries of the lot on which it is
situated, existing and proposed buildings or other structures, control curbs
and parking areas.
      4.   Elevation drawings of the proposed sign, drawn to scale, showing the
type of sign, sign display, sign height and sign area.
      5.   Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be
done, including details of all connections, guylines, supports and footing, and
materials to be used.
      6.   Type of sign illumination, if any, including description of proposed
illumination, technical data sufficient to allow evaluation of proposed light
levels and identification of fixtures, types, locations, mounting and wattage
on plans and elevations.
      7.   The extent to which the sign is proposed to project into or over
public property, if any.
      8.   Such other information as the city or the planning commission deem
relevant to the application.
   C.   Exceptions From Permit Requirements:
      1.   Excepted Changes: The following changes shall not require a sign
permit. These exceptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the
sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance and its compliance
with the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating
the same.
         a.   The changing of the advertising copy or message of a painted,
plastic face or printed sign only. Except for signs specifically designed for
use of replaceable copy, electric signs shall not be included in this
exception.
         b.   The electrical, repainting or cleaning maintenance of a sign.
         c.   The repair of a sign.
      2.   Excepted Types: The following types of signs are allowed without
permit, but otherwise subject to the regulations of this chapter:
         a.   On premises advertising signs that are painted on windows or
attached to windows or walls, clearly of a temporary nature and which promote
specific sales or commercial events, fundraisers or events of civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organizations, provided such signs are
displayed no more than fourteen (14) days prior to said event and are removed
not more than seven (7) days after the event.
         b.   Signs which are associated with public or quasi-public
organization functions which are clearly of a temporary nature.
         c.   Any sign within the interior of any building or within an
enclosed lobby or court or any building that is not visible from any public
right of way.
         d.   Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and bearing only
property number, postal box numbers or names of occupants of premises.
         e.   Legal notices, identification and information for directional
signs erected by governmental bodies.
         f.   Traffic control signs on private property, the face of which meet
department of transportation standards and contain no commercial message.
         g.   Historical or memorial signs, provided the sign is cut into any
masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building and does not exceed
two (2) square feet in area.
         h.   Political and campaign signs on behalf of candidates for public
office or measures on election ballots, limited to an individual sign area of
six (6) square feet and a combined sign area not exceeding twelve (12) square
feet per residence or business, provided such signs be placed, posted or
erected no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to said election and shall be
removed within seven (7) days following said election. Such signs shall only be
placed on private property with the permission of the property owner.
         i.   No more than one property sign which serves to advertise the
actual intent to sell, rent or build to suit, with no more than six (6) square
feet of area and no more than four feet (4') in height, and is located within
the property to which the sign applies; and one off site directional sign, no
more than two feet (2') in width and two feet (2') in height showing direction
to the property for sale. Written permission must be obtained from the owner of
said property before placement of off site signs on any property.
         j.   Property signs which warn of a hazard.
         k.   Service station signs with no more than eight (8) square feet of
area and not more than eight feet (8') in height. In addition, one "self/min/
full serve" sign, not to exceed three (3) square feet in area, is allowed on
each end of each pump island.
         l.   Permanent signs painted or otherwise displayed on the interior or
exterior of windows, provided the total copy area of such signs shall not
exceed a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the total window area of the
building face on which it is displayed, or one square foot per linear front
foot of the premises occupied, whichever is the lesser.
         m.   Signs of a primarily decorative nature, clearly incidental and
customary and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday
which do not display the name of a business, product or other advertising
material. Such signs shall be displayed for a period of not more than forty
(40) consecutive days.
         n.   Each business shall be permitted up to two (2) exterior signs not
to exceed six (6) square feet in area that contain only the word "open" to
designate that a business is open for business, provided such sign shall be
removed or turned off at the end of each business day.
         o.   Flags flown on a temporary basis for purposes of honoring
national or civic holidays, provided such flags do not exceed eight feet (8')
long in their largest dimension. Official flags or emblems of federal, state or
local governments, provided all such flags or emblems shall be placed on
flagpoles not attached to a building or structure not exceeding twenty five
feet (25') in height and such flag or emblem does not exceed eight feet (8') in
its largest dimension.
         p.   Menus displayed on the exterior of premises occupied by
restaurants, provided the size of such menu does not exceed four (4) square
feet and the displayed menu is attached to the structure.
         q.   Service signs with no more than six (6) square feet of area.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
      3.   City Signage Exempt: The provisions of this section do not apply to
any sign constructed by Toquerville City. (Ord. 2016.07, 12-8-2016)
   D.   Fees For Sign Permit: Each application for a permit under this chapter
shall be accompanied by payment of a fee, which shall be established by the
city council from time to time. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
   E.   Issuance And Denial: The city staff shall review an application and
accept it as complete or reject it as incomplete within seven (7) working days
from the date of filing. Applications accepted as complete by the city staff
shall appear on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
planning commission for which the agenda request time requirements shall be
followed. The planning commission shall review such application for action in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The planning commission shall
either approve, approve with conditions or deny a permit based on the criteria
set forth in this chapter. Staff shall issue a permit for said sign when the
application has been given final approval as prescribed herein and the proposed
sign, and the building or business with which it is associated, complies with
all appropriate laws and ordinances. When a permit application is denied by
staff or the planning commission, staff shall give written notice, mailed
within ten (10) working days, of the denial to the applicant, together with a
brief statement of the reasons for the denial. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-22-5: STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS:
All signs requiring permit approval shall comply with the following standards
and regulations, and these standards and regulations shall be considered
minimum requirements in reviewing all applications for sign permits.
   A.   Traffic Hazard: Signs shall not:
      1.   Be erected at the intersection of any streets, thoroughfares or
driveways in such manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any
location where by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere
with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device; or
      2.   Make use of the words "stop", "drive-in", "danger" or any other
words, phrases, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with,
mislead or confuse vehicle operators.
   B.   Clearances And Setbacks:
      1.   Signs less than three feet (3') in height may be placed in the clear
view area.
      2.   Signs more than three feet (3') in height must have a front setback
that shall be the same as for buildings in that zoning district, or a front
setback of at least eighteen inches (18") from the front property line as
measured from the leading edge of the sign, whichever is greater. Signs shall
also meet clear view requirements as detailed in sign definitions.
      3.   Signs over pedestrianways shall have a clearance between the ground
and the lowest portion of any such sign of not less than eight feet (8').
      4.   Signs over driveways for vehicular traffic shall have a minimum
clearance of not less than fourteen feet (14').
   C.   Sign Standards:
      1.   Colors: Sign background shall be lighter, neutral colors. White is
allowed only for lettering. No more than ten percent (10%) of the background
sign area shall be bright, high chroma, highly saturated primary or secondary
colors.
         a.   Primary colors are red, yellow and blue.
         b.   Secondary colors are green, orange and purple.
         c.   Fluorescent colors and reflective metal surfaces are not allowed
except in logos. Logos shall be confined to a maximum of twenty five percent
(25%) of the total sign area, unless otherwise approved by the planning
commission.
      2.   Materials: Signs may be constructed of painted, stained or carved
wood; brick or stone; metal which is painted or anodized, or otherwise treated
to prevent reflective glare, except for theater marquees, where plastic,
polymers or glass may be used only for text and may not be used for the
background or noncopy portions of the sign. Wood signs shall be solid wood or
plywood, MDO grade or equivalent.
      3.   Illumination: Signs may be unlighted, lighted internally or lighted
externally. Internally lighted signs must be designed in such manner that the
light source cannot be seen. Except for theater marquees, internal sign
lighting shall be used only to light text. Background or noncopy portions of
the sign may not be internally lighted. Light sources for externally lighted
signs shall be placed to illuminate only the sign surface and shall not be
visible beyond the premises. Special care shall be taken in the design of
external sign lighting to ensure that the source is not visible. Fluorescent or
sodium, metal halide, neon and mercury light sources are not permitted for
exterior lighting. Internally lighted signs may use any light source desired,
providing the sign meets the other criteria specified in this chapter.
   D.   Signs On And Over Public Property: No sign shall be located on publicly
owned land or inside street rights of way, except signs required and erected by
written permission of the city council. No projecting sign attached to a
building shall project over public property except by written permission of the
city council. Ground signs may not project over public property.
   E.   Prohibited Signs: Signs not specifically allowed by this chapter are
prohibited. The following signs are specifically prohibited:
      1.   Abandoned signs.
      2.   Advertising devices which move in the wind, including, but not
limited to, balloons and balloon signs or other gas filled figures, pennants,
pinwheels and stringers.
      3.   Animated signs.
      4.   Beacons and searchlights.
      5.   Billboards, outdoor advertising and off site signs designed or
intended to direct attention to a business, product or service that is not
provided, sold, offered or existing on the property where the sign is located
and not specifically allowed under this chapter.
      6.   Changeable signs on which copy or sign panels may be changed
manually or electronically or electrically controlled "time and temperature",
message center or reader board where copy changes automatically, except as
specifically provided in this chapter for service stations, theaters and
restaurants.
      7.   Intensely lighted or exposed luminary sources, such as exposed bulbs
or tubes, shall be prohibited. Exposed neon signs shall be prohibited except
for "open", "now serving" and "vacancy/no vacancy" signs.
      8.   Snipe signs.
      9.   Signs that rotate, move or assume any motion constituting a
nonstationary or nonfixed condition.
      10.   No sign shall be painted on or affixed to any natural object in its
natural location, such as, but not limited to, boulders, trees or cliff faces.
      11.   A-frame, sandwich board, sidewalk, curb or any sign not permanently
affixed to the ground or to a structure on the site it occupies.
      12.   Signs made wholly or partially of highly reflective material.
      13.   Signs affixed upon a vehicle, trailer or the like, parked or
located conspicuously for the primary purpose of displaying said sign.
      14.   Signs which bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an
obscene or pornographic character, as defined by the United States supreme
court in Miller v. California, 413 U.S. 15, 24 (1973), and anything that
demeans or otherwise degrades religions, races or ethnic groups.
      15.   Signs which emit audible sound, odor or visible matter.
      16.   Miscellaneous signs and posters. The tacking, posting or otherwise
affixing of signs of a miscellaneous character, visible from a public way,
located on the walls of buildings, bars or sheds, on trees, poles, posts,
fences or other structures, except to identify a residence or residence
structure by means of posting the name of the occupant or structure and the
street address, unless specifically permitted by this chapter. Miscellaneous
signs may be permitted on a temporary basis, in certain locations, with prior
written approval of city staff.
   F.   Anchoring:
      1.   No sign shall be suspended by nonrigid attachments that will allow
the sign to swing in the wind.
      2.   All freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures erected
on or permanently attached to an acceptable foundation as determined under the
building codes adopted by the city.
      3.   All portable signs on display shall be braced or secured to prevent
motion.
   G.   Additional Construction Specifications:
      1.   No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to
obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or door opening used as a means
of egress.
      2.   No sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner which will
interfere with any opening required for ventilation, except that signs may be
erected in front of and may cover transom windows when not in violation of the
provisions of the city building or fire prevention codes.
      3.   Signs shall be located in such way as to maintain horizontal and
vertical clearance with all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with
electrical code specifications, depending on voltages concerned.
      4.   All signs must be inspected and approved by the building official
upon completion.
   H.   Temporary Signs: Permits for any temporary sign shall not exceed thirty
(30) days in a calendar year. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
to remove temporary signs upon expiration of the permit period.
   I.   Maintenance: Every sign shall be kept in good condition as to
maintenance and repair, including the replacement of defective parts,
repainting and cleaning. The ground space within a radius of ten feet (10')
from the base of any ground sign shall be kept free and clear of all weeds,
rubbish and inflammable material. In addition to any other remedy provided in
this chapter, city staff shall have the authority to order the painting,
repair, alteration or removal of signs which become dilapidated, are abandoned
or which constitute physical hazard to the public safety at the expense of the
person having charge, control or benefit of such signs.
   J.   Sign Removal: Signs identifying a discontinued use on the property
shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the time
the use was discontinued. A sign remaining thereafter shall be considered
abandoned.
   K.   Repair Of Building Facade: A damaged building facade as the result of
the removal, repair, replacement or installation of any signs shall be repaired
by the property owner within thirty (30) calendar days of the time the building
facade was damaged.
   L.   Nonconforming Sign: A nonconforming sign may not be moved to a new
location, altered, enlarged or replaced unless it be made to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-22-6: SAFETY IN CONSTRUCTION:
Whenever any sign or other advertising structure is erected in whole or in part
on or over any public street or sidewalk, the person or persons performing the
work shall, before proceeding to erect the same, take all precautions necessary
to ensure the safety of persons and property on such street or sidewalk. Before
hoisting any material whatsoever above the surface of any street or sidewalk,
or placing any material upon the traveled portion of any street or sidewalk,
the person or persons performing such work shall exclude the traveling public
from the portion of such street or sidewalk in which such work is to be done by
means of suitable barriers, protected walkways and warning devices approved by
the building official; and whenever the building official shall deem it
necessary under the conditions then existing shall provide a guard or guards to
exclude all persons not concerned in the work from the portion of the street or
sidewalk in which the work is to proceed. When hoisting any sign or advertising
structure above the surface of any street or sidewalk, the same shall be
accompanied by hoisting devices of approved design and adequate capacity to
accomplish the work in accordance with approved engineering practices, all of
which hoisting equipment shall be kept and maintained in good and workable
condition. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-22-7: SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR EACH ZONE:
No person shall install or maintain any sign in the City and in the zones
listed, except as herein provided. Signs not allowed in the following sections
are specifically prohibited: (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   A.   Residential Zones: In the residential R-1-12, R-1-15, R-1-20, RM-1 and
RM-2 Zones: (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
      1.   Nameplates: One lighted or unlighted nameplate identifying the
occupancy of the premises of maximum area of two (2) square feet. Such signs
shall not advertise a home occupation.
      2.   Property Signs: No more than one property sign advertising the
intent to sell, rent or build to suit shall be permitted. Property signs may
also be modified to indicate that the property has been sold or let; provided,
that the total area for any one sign does not exceed six (6) square feet and is
no more than four feet (4') in height.
      3.   Civic Sign: One civic sign not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in
sign area.
      4.   Residential Monument Signs: Two (2) monument type subdivision
identification signs will be allowed in a residential or other subdivision;
provided, that these signs:
         a.   Are located a minimum of ten feet (10') from front property
lines.
         b.   Are limited to sixty five (65) square feet in area for each sign.
         c.   Have no visible source of illumination.
         d.   Are limited to six feet (6') in height.
      5.   Promotional Signs For Residential Developments: The signs permitted
under this subsection shall be temporary in all cases and shall be removed when
all lots have been sold by the original developer. The signs permitted in this
subsection may be placed on other land belonging to the same owner, providing
the subdivision or planned development being advertised and both properties
involved are different phases of the same overall development. Any sign
permitted by this subsection may be illuminated or may be lighted if the source
of lighting is not visible.
      6.   Multi-Family Residential Complex Signs: For property zoned multiple-
family, one residential sign not to exceed eight (8) square feet for name and
address of a multiple-family residential building. Each multi-family complex
owner may apply for a permit to place a monument type sign on the complex that
identifies only the name and address of the complex. The size of the base shall
be no larger than eighteen (18) square feet and a height not to exceed two feet
(2'). The sign portion of the monument shall not exceed ten (10) square feet,
with the top of the sign no more than four feet (4') above the ground. The sign
shall contain only the name and address of the housing complex. The sign shall
blend with the natural surroundings of the area. If landscaping is planned
around this sign, the application will include details for the landscaping. The
complex may have one residential identification sign, no greater than two (2)
square feet, that is placed on the building and identifies the occupants of the
building.
         a.   Real Estate Sign: One real estate sign.
         b.   Development Sign: One "development sign" shall be permitted, as
defined in section
10-22-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
      7.   Nightly Rentals: A nightly rental established under section
10-17-3 of this title may have a sign not to exceed more than four (4) square
feet: a) attached to the building and not extending above the roofline; or b)
incorporated into the landscaping design or planter box, so long as such sign
is a minimum of six feet (6') from the public right-of-way and not more than
four feet (4') in height. (Ord. 2018.06, 10-11-2018)
      8.   Historic District 1 : Freestanding signs shall be permitted within
the area designated as "historic district" under the following conditions:
         a.   Freestanding signs may not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area
or four feet (4') in height.
         b.   Freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of six feet (6')
from the public right-of-way.
         c.   Freestanding signs shall be incorporated into a landscaping
design or planter box. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   B.   Agricultural, Multiple Use, Planned Commercial, Commercial And
Manufacturing Zones: In the Agricultural (A), Multiple Use (MU-20), Planned
Commercial (PC), Commercial and Manufacturing (N-C, H-C, BMP and M-1) Zones:
      1.   Abutting Residential Zone: When located on property abutting a
residential zone, signs shall conform to residential requirements with respect
to lighting.
      2.   Individual Business: Each duly licensed business on a separate
property shall be allowed one primary sign and one secondary sign. The
secondary sign shall have a maximum sign area of the lesser of twenty (20)
square feet or one square foot for every two (2) linear feet of building
frontage. The primary sign may be freestanding or wall mounted. If the primary
sign is wall mounted, the secondary sign shall be either freestanding or
located on building frontage other than that upon which the primary sign is
located. If the primary sign is freestanding, the secondary sign shall be wall
mounted.
      3.   Building Mounted Signs: Signs mounted on the building shall be
integrated into the building and designed so that the architectural features
and expressions of the building are not obscured. Signs mounted to the building
include, among others, wall signs, roof signs, awning signs, projecting signs
and suspended signs. All except wall signs shall be prohibited unless the
applicant can demonstrate that either no feasible alternative is available for
nonconforming building or structure, or such signs clearly further the purposes
of this chapter. A building mounted sign shall:
         a.   Have a maximum area of the lesser of forty (40) square feet or
one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage upon which the sign
is located;
         b.   Not extend beyond the roofline, nor extend more than a maximum of
fifteen feet (15') in height;
         c.   In the case of a wall mounted sign, be permanently attached or
painted and shall not extend more than twelve inches (12") from said wall;
         d.   In the case of a projecting sign, not extend from the building
face a distance greater than six feet (6'), and no projecting sign shall extend
over public property a distance greater than twelve inches (12");
         e.   In the case of projecting signs, awning signs or suspended signs,
maintain a minimum of eight foot (8') clearance between the lowest point of the
sign and the grade immediately below;
         f.   In the instance of a building set back from the road by more than
one hundred feet (100'), the Planning Commission may allow installation of a
wall mounted sign up to but not exceeding five percent (5%) of the total area
of the wall on which it will be mounted.
      4.   Freestanding Signs: A freestanding sign and the corresponding
support structures shall be designed to complement the building architecture
and the surrounding areas and shall:
         a.   Not exceed twelve feet (12') in height nor forty (40) square feet
in area;
         b.   The base of the freestanding sign shall be incorporated into a
landscaping design or planter box;
         c.   No portion of the sign shall be located closer than three feet
(3') from any public right-of-way and said sign shall be no closer than twenty
five feet (25') from adjoining commercial properties.
      5.   Entrance Or Exit Signs: In addition to the other signs allowed
hereunder, one entrance or exit sign may be permitted at each driveway entering
or leaving the premises of a business on a separate property. Such signs shall
not exceed three (3) square feet in area nor be more than six feet (6') in
height from the ground.
      6.   Property Signs: No more than two (2) signs offering the premises for
sale, lease or inspection by the public may be permitted; provided, that the
total area of each sign does not exceed twenty four (24) square feet. Said
signs may be modified to indicate that the property has been sold or leased.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
      7.   Off Premises Signs: For businesses without frontage on SR-17,
including nightly rentals without frontage on SR-17, one freestanding
directional sign may be permitted at the closest intersection with SR-17,
providing such sign shall:
         a.   Not exceed eight (8) square feet in area nor four feet (4') in
height;
         b.   Be located entirely on private property with the permission of
the property owner;
         c.   Not be located nearer than three feet (3') of any public rights-
of-way; and
         d.   In no way interfere with traffic visibility triangles. (Ord.
2018.06, 10-11-2018)
      8.   Marquee Or Reader Boards: Theaters are allowed one marquee or reader
board. The marquee may be incorporated as part of the primary sign or take the
place of a secondary sign. If incorporated as part of the primary sign, the
Planning Commission may choose to allow an increase in the maximum sign area up
to fifty percent (50%).
      9.   Tertiary Signs: Restaurants and hotels/motels may display tertiary
special features signs. Only one such sign may be displayed at any given time.
Tertiary signs shall have a maximum area of two (2) square feet. Tertiary signs
may be wall mounted or attached to a freestanding sign, providing the tertiary
sign shall be no closer than three feet (3') to any public right-of-way.
Transient lodging facilities may display one tertiary "vacancy/no vacancy"
sign.
      10.   Banners: Temporary use of banners for certain commercial and
community events may be approved as provided herein. In order to secure permit
approval, all banners shall comply with the standards and regulations provided
herein and these standards and regulations shall be considered minimum
requirements in reviewing all applications for banner permits. All banners must
be constructed of strong cloth or vinyl material and satisfy the color
standards provided in this chapter. Banners may be displayed for a maximum
period of seventeen (17) days.
         a.   Commercial Banners: The following standards and regulations shall
also apply to commercial banners:
            (1)   Commercial banners may be used to announce a special event,
such as grand openings, special holiday sales, etc.
            (2)   Commercial banners shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet
in area. Banners shall be maintained flat against a building wall or fence
within the subject property.
            (3)   No more than one banner per business shall be displayed at
any one time.
            (4)   Banners may be displayed for a maximum period of seventeen
(17) days and each business will be permitted a maximum of four (4) banners per
year. Banners must be removed within twenty four (24) hours of the event
conclusion.
         b.   Community Event Banners: The following standards and regulations
shall also apply to community event banners:
            (1)   Community event banners are available to civic organizations
to announce community events and activities, such as festivals, parades,
concerts, art/crafts fairs, etc.
            (2)   A civic organization may utilize a standard banner, which
shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area, in combination with a cross
street banner. A cross street banner is only allowed for community events
sponsored by a civic organization, but the banner may include acknowledgment of
a commercial sponsor of the banner and the event. If a cross street banner is
not available or used, two (2) standard banners may be approved.
Cross street banners shall be between two feet (2') and four feet (4') in
height and twenty feet (20') to forty feet (40') in width. Such banners shall
be displayed at one location on SR 17 selected by the City, in its discretion.
Cross street banners must have sufficient air flaps to help relieve wind
pressure and should be constructed with sleeves for wire supports and corner
grommets to secure each corner. Any application for the display of a cross
street banner on SR 17 must first be approved by the State Department of
Transportation. Only one cross street banner will be approved for each calendar
month, a maximum of twelve (12) cross street banner approvals each calendar
year, unless approved by City staff.
            (3)   There will be no fee charged for approval of a standard
banner application, but there shall be a fee for applications for cross street
banners, as determined by the City. Applicants for cross street banners will be
responsible for the cost of hanging and removing such banners.
            (4)   Standard banners must be mounted flat against a wall or a
fence.
      11.   Facility Signs: Signs identifying churches, schools, public
utilities, buildings and facilities, public owned and operated properties,
hospitals, homes for the aged, nursing homes, convalescent homes, private
clubs, fraternal organizations and roadside stands are subject to the
following:
         a.   Such signs shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area
and shall contain no advertising copy. Such signs shall be located on the
property to which it pertains and the number shall be limited to one.
         b.   There may be two (2) signs per entrance to said facility or if
only one sign is requested, the sign may be double faced. Signs must be located
on the property to which it pertains. It may be a freestanding, wall or
monument type sign and shall meet the specification for the type of sign as
described in this chapter.
      12.   On Premises Signs: On premises signs are specifically allowed in
the agricultural and multiple use district. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-15A-8 of this title.
10-22-8: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The City and its agents shall in no way be liable for any negligence of the
owner or the person responsible for the sign or its installation or
maintenance. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-22-9: VARIANCES:
Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the requirements of
this chapter as applied to a sign that person owns, leases or in which such
person holds some other beneficial interest, may apply to the Appeal Authority
for a variance of this chapter. (Ord. 2018.07, 12-13-2018)
10-22-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Signs To Conform:
      1.   Except as provided in this title, a sign shall not be erected,
raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, unless in
conformity with this chapter.
      2.   A nonconforming sign shall not be altered, reconstructed, raised,
moved, placed, extended or enlarged, unless said sign is changed so as to
conform to all provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Abatement Of Prohibited Signs: Signs prohibited under other laws or
ordinances are also in violation of this chapter and are subject to remedies
herein provided. The nonconforming sign provisions of this chapter shall not be
applicable to such prohibited signs.
   C.   Inspection By Planning Commission: The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for inspecting signs as defined by this chapter, and shall be
authorized to enforce this chapter, but the City Council, by resolution or
ordinance, may from time to time entrust such administration, in whole or in
part, to any other office of City government without amendment to this
subsection.
   D.   Legal Action: The Planning Commission, with the consent of the City
Council, shall be empowered to institute any appropriate action or proceeding
in any case where any sign is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or in any case where any sign is used in
violation of any ordinance, to accomplish the following purposes:
      1.   To prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use.
      2.   To restrain, to correct or abate such violation.
      3.   To abate and remove unsafe or dangerous signs. If an unsafe or
dangerous sign is not repaired or made safe within ten (10) working days after
giving notice as provided below, the Planning Commission may at once abate and
remove said sign and the person having charge, control or benefit of any such
sign shall pay to the City the costs incurred for such removal within thirty
(30) calendar days after written notice of the costs is mailed to such person.
      4.   For purposes of this chapter, "notice by or from the City" shall
mean written notice sent by certified mail to persons having charge, control or
benefit of any sign.
   E.   Immediate Hazard: In the case of an unsafe or illegal sign that is
either an immediate hazard or whose primary purpose will have been served, at
least in part, before the expiration of the notice period required herein, the
Planning Commission may effect an immediate removal, at the expense of the
persons having charge, control or benefit of the sign, without notice, subject
to a subsequent right of hearing by the person receiving benefits therefrom.
   F.   Notice Of Nonmaintained Sign: The Planning Commission shall require
each nonmaintained or abandoned sign to be removed from the building or
premises when such sign has not been repaired or put into use by the owner,
person having control or person receiving benefits of such structure within
thirty (30) calendar days after notice of nonmaintenance or abandonment is
given to the owner, person having control or person receiving benefit of such
structure. The Planning Commission may remove any such sign, at the expense of
the person having control, charge or benefit of the sign, if such sign is not
repaired or removed from the building or premises within thirty (30) calendar
days after notice to repair or remove is given. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-22-11: APPEAL:
Any person who has been ordered by the Planning Commission to alter or remove
any sign, or any person whose application for a sign permit has been refused,
may appeal to the Appeal Authority by serving a written notice to the City
Recorder within ten (10) days of the order or decision of the Planning
Commission. Such notice of appeal shall be considered by the Appeal Authority
at a hearing prescribed by section
10-3-2 of this title. Upon filing of said notice of appeal, the Planning
Commission shall take no further action with regard to any removal of the sign
involved until the final decision of the Appeal Authority on the appeal is
known, unless the Planning Commission finds that the sign involved, by reason
of its condition, presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, or
comes within the provisions of subsection 10-22-10E of this chapter, in which
case the Planning Commission shall proceed immediately as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 2018.07, 12-13-2018)
CHAPTER 23
HOME OCCUPATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 2023.05, 5-17-2023)
CHAPTER 24
EXTERIOR LIGHTING
SECTION:
10-24-1: Title And Purpose
10-24-2: Applicability
10-24-3: Definitions
10-24-4: Standards And Requirements
10-24-5: Procedure For Approval
10-24-6: Violations; Enforcement
10-24-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known as the TOQUERVILLE EXTERIOR LIGHTING ORDINANCE. The
purpose of these regulations is to protect and promote the public health,
safety and welfare, the quality of life, and the ability to view the night sky,
by establishing regulations and a process for review of exterior lighting. This
chapter establishes standards for exterior lighting in order to accomplish the
following:
   A.   Provide safe roadways for motorists, cyclists and pedestrians, and
ensure that sufficient lighting can be provided where needed to promote safety
and security;
   B.   Minimize the effects of direct glare and excessive lighting;
   C.   Protect the nighttime use and enjoyment of property and curtail the
degradation of the nighttime visual environment, and thereby help preserve the
quality of life in the city;
   D.   Prevent light trespass in all areas of the city;
   E.   Promote energy efficient and cost effective lighting in all areas of
the city and comply with adopted state energy codes;
   F.   Allow for flexibility in the style of lighting fixtures;
   G.   Define practical and effective measures by which the obtrusive aspects
of outdoor light usage can be minimized, and provide lighting practices that
direct appropriate amounts of light where and when it is needed;
   H.   Provide nonfinancial assistance to property owners and occupants in
bringing nonconforming lighting into conformance with this chapter; and
   I.   Work with other jurisdictions within Washington County to meet the
purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2017.02, 4-13-2017; amd. Ord. 2020.06, 2-13-
2020)
10-24-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   All exterior lighting, installed after the effective date hereof, shall
conform to the standards established by this chapter. All conforming
characteristics and components must be permanent.
   B.   All existing exterior lighting, installed before the effective date
hereof, shall be brought into conformance with this chapter, except subsection
B1 of this section, within the following time periods:
      1.   All existing exterior lighting located on a subject property that is
part of an application for design review approval, a conditional use permit,
subdivision approval, building permit or any other kind of land use approval is
required to be brought into conformance with this chapter before issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, final inspection or final plat recordation, when
applicable. For other permits, the applicant shall have a maximum of thirty
(30) days from date of permit issuance to bring the lighting into conformance.
      2.   All other existing exterior lighting on property used for
commercial, institutional, or any other public and semipublic use that is not
in conformance with this chapter shall be brought into conformance with this
chapter within eighteen (18) months from the date of adoption of this chapter.
      3.   The city shall perform an audit of all public outdoor lighting in
the city, as recommended. These audits will identify all lighting that does not
conform to the standards of this chapter. The results of these audits will be
made available to the public.
   C.   Interpretation:
      1.   Greater Restrictions Prevail: In their interpretation and
application the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as minimum
requirements. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions
than any statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant, the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions of any statute, other
regulation, ordinance or covenant impose greater restrictions than the
provision of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, other regulation,
ordinance or covenant shall prevail.
      2.   Definitions: Whenever any word or phrase used in this chapter is not
defined herein, but is defined in related sections of the Utah code or in this
code, such definition is incorporated herein and shall apply as though set
forth herein in full, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary
intention. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural, the term
"shall" is always mandatory and the term "may" is permissive.
      3.   Severability Of Parts: The various sections, subsections, sentences,
phrases and clauses of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
such part of this chapter is declared to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction or is amended or deleted by the city council, all remaining parts
shall remain valid and in force. (Ord. 2017.02, 4-13-2017; amd. Ord. 2020.06,
2-13-2020)
10-24-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this section its most reasonable application:
 
            A luminaire equipped with a lamp that produces over one thousand eight hundred
AREA LIGHT: (1800) lumens. Area lights include, but are not limited to, streetlights,
            parking lot lights and yard lights.
AVERAGE     The average level of luminance for a given situation (with snow cover if that
HORIZONTAL  is to be expected in the given situation) measured at ground level with the
FOOT-       light meter placed parallel to the ground.
CANDLE:
BUILDING    The planning and zoning administrator for Toquerville City, or any other person
OFFICIAL:   appointed by the Toquerville City mayor, with the concurrence of the
            Toquerville City council.
DIRECTIONAL A fully shielded fixture that is angled no higher than thirty degrees (30º)
FLOODLIGHT: from vertical and which targets a specific area to be lit.
EIGHTY FIVE
DEGREE      Luminaires that do not allow light to escape above an eighty five degree (85º)
CUTOFF TYPE angle measured from a vertical line from the center of the lamp extended to the
OF          ground.
LUMINAIRES:
            Temporary or permanent outdoor lighting that is installed, located or used in
EXTERIOR    such a manner to cause light rays to shine outdoors. Luminaires that are indoors
LIGHTING:   that are intended to light something outside are considered exterior lighting for
            the purpose of this chapter.
FLOODLIGHT: A light fixture that produces up to one thousand eight hundred (1800) lumens and
            is designed to flood a well-defined area with light.
            The American unit used to measure the total amount of light cast on a surface
FOOT-CANDLE (luminance). One foot-candle is equivalent to the luminance produced by a source
(fc):       of one candle at a distance of one foot (1’). For example, the full moon produces
            0.01 fc (fc is measured with a light meter). One foot-candle is approximately
            equal to ten (10) lux, the metric unit also used to measure luminance.
FULL CUTOFF Luminaires designed and installed where no light is emitted at or above a
LUMINAIRES: horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the luminaires.
FULLY       The luminaire incorporates a solid barrier (the shield), which permits no light
SHIELDED:   to escape through the barrier on the top and sides of the fixture.
            Stray light striking the eye that may result in:
            a.   Nuisance or annoyance glare, such as light shining into a window;
GLARE:      b.   Discomfort glare, such as bright light causing squinting of the eyes;
            c.   Disabling glare, such as bright light reducing the ability of the eyes to
            see into shadows; or
            d.   Reduction of visual performance.
HOLIDAY     Exterior lighting consisting of strings of individual lamps, where the output per
LIGHTING:   lamp is not greater than fifteen (15) lumens.
IESNA:      Illuminating Engineering Society Of North America (IES or IESNA). The
            professional society of lighting engineers.
IESNA
RECOMMENDED The current publications of the IESNA setting forth luminance levels.
PRACTICES:
                        The amount of light falling on any point of a surface
ILLUMINANCE:            measured in foot-candles or lux. Footcandles are
                        measured as lumens per square foot, and lux is measured
                        as lumens per square meter.
LED:                    Light emitting diode solid state lighting source.
                        The generic term for an artificial light source, to be
LAMP:                   distinguished from the whole assembly (see definition
                        of Luminaire). Commonly referred to as "bulb".
LIGHT:                  The form of radiant energy acting on the retina of the
                        eye to make sight possible.
                        Any adverse effect of artificial night light,
                        including, but not limited to, discomfort to the eye or
LIGHT POLLUTION:        diminished vision due to glare, light trespass, or any
                        manmade light that diminishes the ability to view the
                        night sky.
LIGHT TRESPASS:         Light falling on the property of another or the public
                        right of way when it is not required to do
LIGHTING:               Any or all parts of a luminaire that function to
                        produce light.
                        A city official designated by the city council to
LIGHTING ADMINISTRATOR: administer, interpret and enforce this chapter, and
                        make recommendations thereunder.
                        The unit used to quantify the amount of light energy
LUMEN:                  produced by a lamp at the lamp. Lumen output of most
                        lamps is listed on the packaging.
                        A complete lighting unit, consisting of a lamp or
                        lamps, together with the parts designed to distribute
LUMINAIRE:              the light, to position and protect the lamps and to
                        connect the lamps to the power. When used, includes
                        ballasts and photocells. Commonly referred to as
                        "fixture".
                        At a point and in a given direction, the luminous
                        intensity in the given direction produced by an element
                        of the surface surrounding the point divided by the
                        area of the projection of the element on a plane
LUMINANCE:              perpendicular to the given direction. Units: Candelas
                        per unit area. The luminance is the perceived
                        brightness that we see the visual effect of the
                        luminance, reflected, emitted or transmitted from a
                        surface.
               The condition that occurs after two hundred (200) hours of lamp use
MAINTAINED     prior to a point where luminaire cleaning is necessary. Measurements
ILLUMINANCE:   are taken at ground level with sensor parallel to the ground for
               horizontal luminance and measured at five feet (5’) above ground with
               sensor perpendicular to the ground for vertical luminance.
               The effect of a part or parts of a luminaire that provides a barrier
OPAQUE:        above and in some cases around the lamp, that does not allow any light
               to pass through.
PARTIALLY      The luminaire incorporates a translucent barrier, the "partial shield"
SHIELDED:      around the lamp that allows some light to pass through the barrier of
               the fixture's walls while concealing the lamp from the viewer.
PLANNING AND
ZONING         The Toquerville City planning and zoning administrator.
ADMINISTRATOR:
               When a light is built into a structure or portion of a structure such
RECESSED:      that the light is fully cut off and no part of the light extends or
               protrudes beyond the underside of a structure or portion of a
               structure.
               When the light emitted from the fixture is projected below a horizontal
               plane running through the lowest point of the fixture where light is
SHIELDED:      emitted. The bulb is not visible with a shielded light fixture, and no
               light is emitted from the sides of the fixture. Also considered a full
               cutoff fixture.
               The overhead glow from light emitted sideways and upward. Sky glow is
SKY GLOW:      caused by the reflection and scattering of light by dust, water vapor
               and other particles suspended in the atmosphere.
TEMPORARY      Lighting that is intended to be used for a special event for seven (7)
LIGHTING:      days or less, and temporary construction lighting.
               The effect of a part or parts of a luminaire that provides a barrier
TRANSLUCENT:   around the lamp that allows some light to pass through the barrier in a
               diffused manner, such that the lamp cannot be clearly distinguished.
UNSHIELDED:    The luminaires only incorporate clear glass, which permits all light to
               escape.
 
UPLIGHTING: Fully shielded lighting that is directed in such a manner as to
            shine light rays above the horizontal plane.
            The reflectivity of artificial lighting from the exterior surface
WALL WASH:  of a building or structure. (Ord. 2017.02, 4-13-2017; amd. Ord.
            2020.06, 2-13-2020)
 
10-24-4: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Standards:
      1.   Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be designed, located
and lamped to prevent or minimize:
         a.   Over lighting;
         b.   Energy waste;
         c.   Glare;
         d.   Light trespass;
         e.   Sky glow.
      2.   Light Curfews: Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) p.m. and
six o'clock (6:00) a.m., lights must be dimmed by at least thirty percent (30%)
or extinguished. Lights on a timer are encouraged. Sensor activated lights are
encouraged to replace existing lighting that is desired for security purposes.
         a.   Commercial and industrial lighting shall be turned off within
thirty (30) minutes of close of business, except that lighting within forty
feet (40') of a building, outside display areas, or other areas requiring
security lighting shall not exceed two (2) initial lumens per square foot.
         b.   Lighting for signage, except monument signs, shall be turned off
thirty (30) minutes after the close of business.
         c.   Sport court and sports playing field lighting shall be turned off
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) p.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m.,
except to conclude a specific sporting event that is underway.
         d.   Residential lighting above eight hundred (800) lumens shall be
turned off between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) p.m. and six o'clock (6:
00) a.m.
         e.   Exceptions: Lighting reductions are not required for any of the
following:
            (1)   With the exception of landscape lighting, lighting for
residential properties including multiple residential properties not having
common areas.
            (2)   When the outdoor lighting consists of only one luminaire.
            (3)   Code required lighting for steps, stairs, walkways, and
building entrances.
            (4)   When in the opinion of the authority, lighting levels must be
maintained.
            (5)   Motion activated lighting.
            (6)   Lighting governed by special use permit in which times of
operation are specifically identified.
            (7)   Businesses that operate on a twenty four (24)-hour basis.
      3.   Canopy Lights: Canopy lights, such as service station lighting or
covered entries, shall be fully recessed or fully shielded to ensure that no
light source is visible from or causes glare on public rights of way or
adjacent properties.
      4.   Area Lights: All area lights shall be a minimum eighty-five degree
(85°) full cutoff type luminaire.
      5.   Color: Warm lighting colors are strongly recommended. The blue-white
colors of metal halide and mercury vapor lamps are generally prohibited. Twenty
seven hundred (2700) Kelvin color temperature is mandatory for new
construction.
      6.   Luminaires: Public or private utility companies shall not install
any luminaires that lights the public right of way without first receiving
approval for any such application by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/
or City Designee.
      7.   Hillsides, Ridgelines, And Special Cases: In certain cases (such as,
but not limited to, properties on or near ridgelines or hillsides), additional
shielding may be required to mitigate glare or light trespass. The need for
additional shielding will be considered as part of the building permit review
process.
         a.   All monopole, antenna, tower or support facility lighting not
required by the federal aviation administration (FAA) or the federal
communications commission (FCC) is prohibited.
         b.   When lighting is required by the FAA or the FCC, such lighting
shall not exceed the minimum requirements of those agencies. Collision markers
should have a dual mode for day and night to minimize impact to the night sky
and migrating birds.
         c.   All other lighting used on the property not regulated by the FAA
or FCC shall conform to this Chapter.
   B.   Use of Luminaires: No unshielded or clear glass luminaires shall be
allowed; all exterior lighting shall be full cutoff luminaires with the light
source downcast and fully shielded, with the following exceptions:
      1.   Luminaires: Luminaires that have a maximum output of one thousand
(1,000) lumens per fixture (equal to one sixty (60)-watt incandescent lamp)
regardless of number of lamps, may be partially shielded, provided the
luminaire has an opaque top or is under a solid overhang.
      2.   Floodlights: Floodlights with external shielding shall be angled;
provided that no light is directed above a thirty degree (30°) angle measured
from the vertical line from the center of the light extended to the ground, and
only if the luminaires do not cause glare or light to shine on adjacent
property or public rights of way. Residential floodlights must be turned off
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) p.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m.
      3.   Residential Holiday Lighting: Temporary lighting and seasonal
lighting provided that individual lamps are less than ten (10) watts and
seventy (70) lumens. Flashing holiday lights on residential properties are
discouraged. Holiday lights shall be turned off between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) p.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m.
      4.   Commercial Holiday Lighting: Flashing holiday lights are prohibited.
Commercial holiday lights shall be turned off between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00)p.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m.
      5.   Sensor Activated Luminaires: Sensor activated luminaires, provided:
         a.   It is located in such a manner as to prevent glare and light
trespass onto properties of others or into a public right of way;
         b.   The luminaire is set to only go on when activated and to go off
within five (5) minutes after activation has ceased;
         c.   The luminaire shall not be triggered by activity off the subject
property.
      6.   Emergency Lighting: All temporary emergency lighting needed by the
fire and police departments, or other emergency services.
      7.   Lighting Of Flags: Provided the flag is a United States of America
or state of Utah official flag and the maximum lumen output is one thousand
three hundred (1300) lumens. Flags may be taken down at sunset to avoid the
need for lighting. The external beam shall minimize light trespass and/or
glare.
      8.   Landscape Lighting: The primary function of landscape lighting is to
provide illumination for pathways, steps, and entrances to buildings.
         a.   Pathway Lighting: The intent of pathway lights is to provide
pools of light to help direct pedestrians along the path, not to fully
illuminate the path. Steps and path intersections should be illuminated for
safety. The maximum footcandle permitted on the ground is one horizontal foot-
candle or less. Two (2) types of lights may be selected: three and one-half
foot (3'6') bollards with louvers or ten foot (10) pole mounted down directed
luminaires. Lights must be shielded.
         b.   Highlighting, Backlighting: Only low voltage systems, meaning
systems that have a maximum output of one thousand (1,000) lumens per fixture
(equal to one sixty (60)-watt incandescent lamp), are permitted. Lights must be
partially shielded and light must not be directed off the property being
lighted. A maximum foot-candle permitted at ten feet (10) is 0.6 horizontal
foot-candles from the light source. Uplighting is prohibited except where
demonstrated to be nonpolluting at a power density of twenty (20) watts per ten
(10) square feet of landscape area. The lighting of vegetation and other
landscape features shall comply with the regulations this Chapter.
      9.   Trails: Trails lighting shall be low level bollards (below eye level
where possible), shielded, and designed to meet all requirements established in
this Chapter and in accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Design And
Construction". Bollards shall not be necessary where a trail is within one
hundred feet (100) of a streetlight. Other low level lighting alternatives may
be considered during the development process on a case by case basis.
      10.   Uplighting: Uplighting for landscaping and/or structures shall be
fully captured for approval All uplighting shall be turned off between the
hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) p.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m.
      11.   Lighting Of Towers: Lighting of radio, communication and navigation
towers, provided the owner or occupant demonstrates that the federal aviation
administration (FAA) regulations can only be met through the use of lighting
that does not comply with this Chapter.
      12.   Neon Lights: See Subsection
10-22-5(C)(3) of this Title.
      13.   Playing Field Luminaires: Luminaires used for sports playing fields
and sport courts shall be exempt from the height restriction, provided all
other provisions of this Chapter are met and the light is used only while the
field or court is in use. In no case shall the lights be used between the hours
of eleven o'clock (11.00) p.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m. without prior
approval.
      14.   Nonresidential Luminaires: Nonresidential luminaires may deviate
from the requirements of these exterior lighting regulations only upon
submitting for Planning Commission approval a design review application,
detailing the specific reasons for the proposed deviation. Such application may
be granted only if the applicant demonstrates each of the following:
         a.   The proposed deviation is appropriate to the location of the
lighting and the surrounding neighborhood;
         b.   The proposed deviation will not unreasonably diminish either the
health, safety or welfare of the surrounding neighborhood uses; and
         c.   The proposed deviation will not unreasonably conflict with the
general intent of these exterior lighting regulations.
      The Planning Commission may approve, deny or approve with conditions any
such application submitted under this Subsection.
   C.   Placement And Height of Luminaires:
      1.   Parking Lots:
         a.   Full Cutoff Fixtures: All lighting shall be full cutoff fixtures
as defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).
         b.   Appropriate Location: Entrances, exits, and barriers should be
emphasized.
         c.   Integrate With Landscaping: All parking lot lighting should be
integrated into landscape areas wherever possible.
         d.   Height: Height of parking area light poles should be in
proportion to the building mass and height and no more than seventeen feet
(17') high.
         e.   Maximum: A maximum of two (2) initial lumens per square foot of
parking lot surface is permitted.
         f.   Spot or Flood Lighting Prohibited: Spot or flood lighting of
parking lots from a building or other structure is not permitted.
         g.   Compliance Required: Parking lot lighting shall comply with all
other requirements of this Chapter.
      2.   Private Property in Residential Zones: Freestanding luminaires on
private property in residential zones shall be mounted at a height no greater
than twelve feet (12') from ground level to the top of the luminaires.
      3.   Arterial Roads: Streetlights used on arterial roads may exceed
twenty feet (20') in height, with the recommendation by the city council, and
only with a finding that exceeding twenty feet (20') is necessary to protect
the safety of the residents of the city.
      4.   Illumination Of Rights of Way. Lighting of public and private rights
of way shall be fully shielded. In addition, lighting shall comply with source
color temperature of this Section.
         a.   Exception: Traffic signal indications.
         b.   Definitions: Right of way types:
 
                 Roadways serving traffic between major and local streets.
COLLECTOR ROADS: These are streets used mainly for traffic movement within
                 residential, commercial and industrial areas.
                 A divided major roadway for through traffic, with partial
EXPRESSWAY:      control of access and generally with interchanges at major
                 crossroads.
                 Local streets are used primarily for direct access to
LOCAL ROADS:     residential, commercial, industrial, or other abutting
                 property.
                 The part of the roadway system that serves as the principal
MAJOR ROADS:     network for the through traffic flow. The routes connect areas
                 of principal traffic generation and important rural roadways
                 leaving the city.
 
         c.   Illumination Levels of Rights Of Way: The maximum average
illumination level along the entire right of way being illuminated and over the
right of way area only, shall be:
            (1)   Expressway. 1.4foot-candles.
            (2)   Major roads: 1.5 foot-candles.
            (3)   Collector roads: 1.0 foot-candle.
            (4)   Local roads: 0.4 foot-candle.
            (5)   Existing luminaires on local roads may be retrofitted with
full cutoff luminaires with the design not to exceed 0.4 foot-candle average.
The maximum maintained average illumination in the intersection area shall be
two (2) times the average of the maintained foot-candles of the two (2) types
of roads at the intersections.
            (6)   Intersections of collector and local roads shall be 1.6 foot-
candles maximum and at intersections of local and local roads shall be 1.4
foot-candles maximum.
      5.   Playing Fields: Luminaires used for playing fields shall be exempt
from the height restriction, provided all other provisions of this Chapter are
met and the light is used only while the field is in use.
   D.   Luminance And Type of Lamp:
      1.   Luminance levels for parking lots, sidewalks and other walkways
affected by side mounted building lights, and freestanding sidewalk lights (not
streetlights) shall not exceed luminance levels listed in the most current
"IESNA Recommended Practices ", as amended from time to time. The city
recognizes that not every such area will require lighting.
      2.   Aboveground parking lot lighting shall not exceed an overall average
illumination of 1.5 foot-candles. Interior parking structure lighting shall not
exceed the minimum security illumination levels listed in the most current
"ESNA Recommended Practices", as amended from time to time.
      3.   The use of lighting for exterior wall washing is limited for
residences, condominiums and apartments; the use of recessed eave lighting to
achieve wall washing is preferred, and wall washing should strive for uniform
illumination distribution. The maximum average illumination limits for wall
washing are:
         a.   Dark colored exterior surfaces: 1.0 foot-candle.
         b.   Light colored exterior surfaces: 0.5 foot-candle.
      Luminance measurements of indirect light creating wall wash shall be
measured with a luminance meter four feet (4') from ground level with the meter
held horizontally and touching the wall surface.
      4.   Streetlights shall be LED, unless otherwise determined that another
type is more efficient and approved by the City Council. LED street lighting
shall be fully shielded, and emit no light upward. Light housing shall be
constructed to expel excess heat from the fixture. The correlated color
temperature on all fixtures shall be three thousand Kelvin (3000 K) or warmer
(lower number). LED lighting fixtures shall be installed with an adaptive
control system capable of dimming and/or motion sensor control that is
compatible with the current city control system. If a light type other than LED
is permitted, then the replacement fixture shall have the equivalent output as
the other light type.
      5.   LED streetlights shall be implemented in accordance with an
engineering study, specifically a photometric plan that shall have been
conducted and approved prior to installation of LED luminaires. Said
photometric plan shall recommend appropriate perceived levels of illumination
based upon the correlated color temperature of the proposed luminaires and the
specific location and purpose of the luminaire, e.g., residential cul-de-sac,
highway intersection, etc., as referenced in "IESNA Recommended Practices"
      6.   Exempt Lighting: The following lighting shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Chapter:
         a.   Traffic control signals and devices.
         b.   Temporary emergency lighting in use by law enforcement or
government agencies or their direction.
         c.   Temporary lighting, used for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days in any one year period for festivals, celebrations, or other public
activities.
         d.   Security lighting controlled by a motion sensor switch that
remains on for no longer than ten (10) minutes after activation, but shall in
all cases be shielded and directed to the areas where such lighting is
required.
         e.   Temporary construction lighting used for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days in any one-year period.
      7.   Prohibited Lighting: The following lighting shall be prohibited:
         a.   Unshielded Lighting: Unshielded lighting for any purpose is
prohibited.
         b.   Flashing, Blinking, Intermittent Lights: Flashing, blinking,
intermittent lights or other lights that move or give the impression of
movement is prohibited. Holiday lighting is permitted.
         c.   Building Mounted Lights Under Most Conditions: Spotlights may not
be affixed to buildings for the purpose of lighting parking lots or sales
display lot areas. Fully shielded fixtures may be attached to buildings to
light walkways and parking lot spaces adjacent to buildings.
         d.   Laser Lighting: A ll laser lighting is prohibited.
         e.   Searchlights: All searchlights are prohibited.
         f.   Neon: All neon lighting must be shielded.
         g.   Linear Fluorescent Lamps: Generally not allowed. (Ord. 2017.02,
4-13-2017; amd. Ord. 2020.06, 2-13-2020; Ord. 2025.02, 2-19-2025)
10-24-5: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL:
   A.   All applications for design review, conditional use permits, planned
unit developments, subdivision approvals, applicable sign permits or building
permits shall include lighting plans showing location, type, height, lumen
output and luminance levels in order to verify that lighting conforms to the
provisions of this chapter. The lighting administrator may waive the
requirement for luminance level information only, if the lighting administrator
finds that the luminance levels conform to this chapter. For all other exterior
lights which must conform to the requirements of this chapter, an application
shall be made to the lighting administrator, showing location, type, height,
lumen output and luminance levels.
   B.   The lighting administrator shall review any new exterior lighting or
any existing exterior lighting on subject property that is part of an
application for design review, conditional use permit, planned unit
development, subdivision approval, applicable sign permits or building permits,
or any other land use approval, to determine whether the exterior lighting
complies with the standards of this chapter.
   C.   The lighting administrator shall convey in writing a recommendation
whether the exterior lighting complies with the standards of this chapter to
the building official, the planning commission, or to the appropriate approving
body as the case may be, before any review or hearing on a building permit,
design review, conditional use permit, planned unit development, subdivision or
applicable sign permit.
   D.   For all other exterior lighting which must conform to the requirements
of this chapter, the lighting administrator shall issue a decision whether the
exterior lighting complies with the standards of this chapter. All such
decisions may be appealed to the appeal authority within thirty (30) days of
the decision. (Ord. 2017.02, 4-13-2017; amd. Ord. 2018.07, 12-13-2018; Ord.
2020.06, 2-13-2020)
10-24-6: VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
If the Lighting Administrator finds that any provision of this chapter is being
violated, the Lighting Administrator shall give notice by hand delivery or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of such violation to the owner and/or
to the occupant of such premises, demanding that the violation be abated within
thirty (30) days of the date of hand delivery or of the date of mailing of the
notice. The planning department staff shall be available to assist in working
with the violator to correct said violation. If the violation is not abated
within the thirty (30) day period, the lighting administrator may institute
actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, to enjoin, restrain or
abate any violations of this chapter. Such actions or proceedings shall be in
addition to the enforcement and penalties provisions of Chapter 5 of this
title. (Ord. 2017.02, 4-13-2017; amd. Ord. 2020.06, 2-13-2020)
CHAPTER 25
STORMWATER UTILITY
SECTION:
10-25-1: Title And Purpose
10-25-2: Jurisdiction
10-25-3: Definitions
10-25-4: Funding Of Stormwater Utility
10-25-5: Stormwater Utility Management Fund
10-25-6: Operating Budget
10-25-7: Stormwater User Fee Established
10-25-8: Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU)
10-25-9: Property Classification For Stormwater User Fees
10-25-10: Base Rate
10-25-11: Property Owners To Pay Charges
10-25-12: Billing Procedures And Penalty For Late Payment
10-25-13: Appeal Of Fees
10-25-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Title: This chapter shall be known as the STORMWATER UTILITY ORDINANCE
for the city.
   B.   Purpose:
      1.   The city finds, determines and declares that the stormwater system,
which provides for the collection, treatment, storage and disposal of
stormwater, provides benefits and services to all property within the
incorporated areas of the city. Such benefits include, but are not limited to,
the provision of adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention,
retention, treatment and release of stormwater, the reductions of hazards to
property and life resulting from stormwater runoff, improvements in general
health and welfare through reduction of undesirable stormwater conditions, and
improvements to water quality in the stormwater and surface water system and
its receiving waters.
      2.   In accordance with state law, the city desires to develop a
stormwater utility in order to provide a funding mechanism to operate and
maintain the city's stormwater management program and finance the necessary
stormwater repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. The stormwater utility
purpose is to:
         a.   Administer and enforce this chapter;
         b.   Administer, plan and implement stormwater projects to protect,
maintain, and enhance the environment of the city;
         c.   Implement activities necessary to maintain compliance with the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit and applicable
regulations, 40 CFR section 122.26, for stormwater discharges;
         d.   Annually analyze the cost of service and benefits provided, and
the system and structure of fees, charges, civil penalties and other revenues
of the utility; and
         e.   Advise the city council and other departments on matters relating
to the utility. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
      3.   The stormwater utility shall be part of the public works department
and under the direction and supervision of the planning and zoning
administrator, or his designee, who shall administer the provisions of this
chapter as approved by the city council. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014
Code)
10-25-2: JURISDICTION:
This chapter shall govern all properties within the incorporated limits of the
city. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-25-3: DEFINITIONS:
Words in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is
permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the
meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of
Webster's Dictionary.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AGRICULTURAL PROPERTY: Property which is zoned agricultural and is designated
as agricultural in the Toquerville City general plan.
BASE RATE: The stormwater user fee for a single-family residential property.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE OR BMP: The physical, structural and/or managerial
practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution
of water, that have been approved by Toquerville City, and that have been
incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully set out therein.
CONSTRUCTION: The erection, building, acquisition, alteration, reconstruction,
improvement or extension of stormwater facilities; preliminary planning to
determine the economic and engineering feasibility of stormwater facilities;
the engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal and economic investigations and
studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, procedures,
and other action necessary in the construction of stormwater facilities; and
the inspection and supervision of the construction of stormwater facilities.
DEFICIENT PROPERTY: Real property that does not have adequate stormwater
facilities as required in the latest edition of Toquerville City standards and
specifications.
DEVELOPED PROPERTY: Real property which has been altered from its natural state
by the creation of impervious areas, by the addition of any buildings,
structures, pavement or other improvements.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The average of the total square footage of
the impervious surface areas of developed single-family residential property
within Toquerville City as approved by the city council.
EXEMPT PROPERTY: All public rights of way, public streets and public roads,
public alleys, public sidewalks and public greenways within Toquerville City.
For purposes of this definition, "public" shall mean that which is maintained
by or is dedicated to Toquerville City, Washington County, state of Utah, or
government of the United States.
FISCAL YEAR: July 1 of a calendar year to June 30 of the next calendar year.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface which is compacted or covered with material that
is resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, most
conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking
lots, and any other oiled, graveled, graded, compacted, or any other surface
which impedes the natural infiltration of surface water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA: The number of square feet of horizontal surface
covered by buildings and other impervious surfaces. All building measurements
shall be made between exterior faces of walls, foundations, columns or other
means of support or enclosure.
OTHER DEVELOPED PROPERTY: Developed property other than single-family
residential property. Such property shall include, but not be limited to,
commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots, hospitals, schools,
recreational and cultural properties, hotels, offices and churches. Such
property shall also include single residential dwellings which are attached to
or otherwise are a part of a building housing a commercial enterprise. Any
single-family residential structure which contains more than two (2) attached
dwelling units is specifically included in this definition.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation organized or
existing under the laws of this or any state or country.
PROPERTY OWNER: The property owner of record as listed in the county tax
assessment roll. A property owner includes any individual, corporation, firm,
partnership or group of individuals acting as a unit, and any trustee, receiver
or personal representative.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A developed property which serves the
primary purpose of providing a permanent dwelling unit to a single family. A
single-family detached dwelling, a townhouse, an accessory apartment or second
dwelling unit, a duplex, a condominium, a villa or a garden home is included in
this definition.
STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, surface runoff, infiltration
and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The programs to manage quality and quantity of
stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER SYSTEM: The natural or manmade system that collects, conveys, stores
or otherwise treats or affects stormwater or surface water.
STORMWATER USER FEE: The utility service fee established under this chapter and
levied on owners or users of parcels or pieces of real property to fund the
costs of stormwater management and of operating, maintaining and improving the
stormwater system in Toquerville City.
STORMWATER UTILITY: A management structure that is responsible solely and
specifically for the stormwater management program and system.
STORMWATER UTILITY MANAGEMENT FUND: The fund created by this chapter to
operate, maintain and improve the Toquerville City stormwater system.
SURFACE WATER: Waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally
or artificially, including, but not limited to, streams, other watercourses,
lakes, ponds, wetlands, marshes and sinkholes.
USER: The owner or customer of record of property subject to the stormwater
user fee imposed by this chapter.
VACANT/UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY: Property on which there is no structure for which
a certificate of occupancy has been issued. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-25-4: FUNDING OF STORMWATER UTILITY:
   A.   Funding for the stormwater utility activities may include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Stormwater user fees.
      2.   Civil penalties and damage assessments imposed for or arising from
the violation of this chapter.
      3.   Other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local or private
grants.
   B.   To the extent that the stormwater user fees collected are insufficient
to construct needed stormwater drainage facilities, the cost of the same may be
paid from such city funds as may be determined by the city council. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-25-5: STORMWATER UTILITY MANAGEMENT FUND:
All revenues generated by or on behalf of the stormwater utility shall be
deposited in a stormwater utility management fund and used to fulfill the
purposes of the stormwater utility. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-25-6: OPERATING BUDGET:
The city council shall adopt, based on a recommendation from the stormwater
utility, an operating budget for the stormwater utility management fund each
fiscal year. The operating budget shall set forth for such fiscal year the
estimated revenues and the estimated costs for operations and maintenance,
extension and replacement and debt service. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-25-7: STORMWATER USER FEE ESTABLISHED:
There shall be imposed on each and every developed property in the city, except
exempt property, a stormwater user fee, which shall be set from time to time in
the fee schedule as adopted by the city council and in the manner and amount
prescribed by this chapter. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-25-8: EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU):
   A.   Established: There is established for the purposes of calculating the
stormwater user fees the equivalent residential unit (ERU) as a method of
measurement.
   B.   Defined: The ERU is the average of the total square footage of the
impervious surface areas of developed single-family residential property with
the city, as approved by the city council.
   C.   Setting ERU: The ERU shall be set by the city council in the fee
schedule as adopted by the city council.
   D.   Source Of ERU: The city council shall have the discretion to determine
the source of the data from which the ERU is established, taking into
consideration the general acceptance and use of such source on the part of
other stormwater systems, and the reliability and general accuracy of the
source, including, but not limited to, the property tax assessor's rolls, site
examination, mapping information, aerial photographs and other reliable
information.
   E.   Evaluation Of ERU: The ERU shall be evaluated by the stormwater utility
as necessary, but the ERU shall be evaluated at least every five (5) years.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-25-9: PROPERTY CLASSIFICATION FOR STORMWATER USER FEES:
   A.   Property Classifications: For the purposes of determining the
stormwater user fee, all properties in the city are classified into one of the
following categories:
      1.   Single-family residential property;
      2.   Other developed property;
      3.   Vacant/undeveloped property;
      4.   Agricultural property; or
      5.   Exempt property.
   B.   Single-Family Residential Fee: The city council finds that the
intensity of development of most parcels of real property in the city
classified as single-family residential is similar and that it would be
excessively and unnecessarily expensive to determine precisely the square
footage of the impervious surface of each parcel. Therefore, all single-family
residential properties in the city shall be charged a flat stormwater user fee,
equal to the ERU base rate, regardless of the size of the parcel or the
impervious surface area of the improvements, except as provided herein. Single-
family residential property in which the impervious surface exceeds twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet, including any detached accessory structures,
shall be charged the same as the fee for other developed property.
   C.   Other Developed Property Fee: The fee for other developed property
(i.e., nonsingle-family residential) in the city shall be the base rate
multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious
area (square feet) of the property by one ERU. The minimum stormwater user fee
for other developed property shall equal the base rate for single-family
residential property.
   D.   Vacant/Undeveloped Property Fee: The fee for vacant/undeveloped
property shall be as follows:
      1.   If the property contains less than one thousand eight hundred
(1,800) square feet of impervious surface, then no stormwater user fee shall be
charged;
      2.   If the property contains one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square
feet or more of impervious surface, then the property shall be charged based on
the amount of impervious surface as other developed property, with the minimum
charge being the single-family residential fee.
   E.   Agricultural Property: The fee for agricultural property shall be as
follows:
      1.   If the property contains impervious surface in an amount equal to or
less than the average ERU, then the minimum stormwater user fee for such
property shall be the base rate for a single-family residential property;
      2.   If the property contains impervious surface in an amount greater
than the average ERU, then the property shall be charged in the same manner as
other developed property.
   F.   Exempt Property: There shall be no stormwater user fee for exempt
property or as otherwise provided by state law. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-25-10: BASE RATE:
The city council shall, in the fee schedule as adopted, establish the base rate
for the ERU. The base rate shall be calculated to ensure adequate revenues to
fund the costs of stormwater management and to provide for the operation,
maintenance and capital improvements of the stormwater system in the city.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-25-11: PROPERTY OWNERS TO PAY CHARGES:
   A.   The owner of each property shall be obligated to pay the stormwater
user fee as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that if no water or
sewer service is being provided at the property to the owner as a customer of
record and such service is being provided to a customer of record other than
the owner, it shall be presumed that the owner and such customer of record have
agreed that the customer of record shall be obligated to pay such stormwater
user fee. If the customer of record other than the owner refuses to pay the
stormwater user fee, the owner of each parcel shall be obligated to pay the
"stormwater user fee", as defined in section
10-25-3 of this chapter.
   B.   Nonresidential multi-tenant properties shall be billed according to the
placement of utility meters, i.e., if the property contains individual unit
meters, then billing for the stormwater user fee shall be billed to individual
units based on the unit's pro rata percentage of impervious surface. If the
multi-tenant property contains a master meter, then the stormwater user fee for
the entire impervious surface area shall be billed to the customer of record
for such master meter.
   C.   Each unit of a multi-tenant residential building shall be billed a
minimum charge, the same being the single-family residential fee, to the
customer of record for the unit. If an individual unit is not individually
billed for any water or sewer service and is master metered, then the customer
of record for the master meter shall be billed as other developed property
based on the total impervious surface area. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-25-12: BILLING PROCEDURES AND PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT:
   A.   Rate And Collection Schedule: The stormwater user fee shall be billed
and collected monthly with the monthly utility services bill for those
properties within the corporate limits. The stormwater user fee for those
properties utilizing city utilities is part of a consolidated statement for
utility customers, which is generally paid by a single payment to the city. All
bills for the stormwater user fee shall become due and payable in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the city.
   B.   Delinquent Bills: The stormwater user fee shall be considered
delinquent if not received by the city by the due date stated in the utility
statement and subsequent late fees shall be imposed as set forth in the fee
schedule adopted by the city. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   C.   Penalty For Late Payment; Failure To Pay: Stormwater user fees shall be
subject to a late fee established by the city council. The city shall be
entitled to recover attorney fees incurred in collecting delinquent stormwater
user fees. The city may discontinue utility service to any stormwater user who
fails or refuses to pay the stormwater user fees and may refuse to accept
payment of the utility bill from any user without receiving at the same time,
payment of the stormwater user fee charges owed by such user and further may
refuse to reestablish service until all such fees have been paid in full. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-25-13: APPEAL OF FEES:
   A.   Any person who disagrees with the calculation of the stormwater user
fee, as provided in this chapter, may appeal such fee determination to the city
council within ten (10) days after the date the payment is due. Any appeal not
filed within the time permitted by this section shall be deemed waived.
   B.   All appeals shall be filed in writing and addressed to the mayor and
shall state the grounds for the appeal and the amount of stormwater user fee
the appellant asserts is appropriate.
   C.   The appeal shall provide such information and documentation supporting
the basis of the appeal.
   D.   The city council shall review the appeal and determine whether the
challenged determination is consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
Appeals related to the stormwater user fee shall be decided based on
substantiated evidence with a sound engineering and factual basis. All appeal
determinations shall be applied utilizing a strict interpretation of this
chapter.
   E.   The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive.
   F.   If a refund is due, the mayor shall authorize the refund which will be
provided as a credit against the customer's stormwater user fee billings until
such credit is exhausted. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
CHAPTER 26
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
10-26-1: Purpose
10-26-2: Applicability
10-26-3: Definitions
10-26-4: Small Wind Energy System Requirements
10-26-5: Large Wind Energy System Requirements
10-26-6: Wind Monitoring Tower And Equipment (MET Tower) Requirements
10-26-7: Nonuse And Nonconforming Systems
10-26-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements and
regulations for the placement, construction and modification of small wind
energy systems, large wind energy systems and wind monitoring towers and
equipment, as defined in section
10-26-3 of this chapter, while promoting the safe, effective and efficient use
of such systems. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
10-26-2: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all small wind energy systems
and large wind energy systems proposed after the effective date hereof. Wind
energy systems for which a required permit has been properly issued prior to
the effective date hereof shall not be required to meet the requirements of
this chapter; provided, however, that any such system shall be installed and
functioning within twenty four (24) months of the date of the permit. Any
system that has been installed but not used for two (2) consecutive years may
not be subsequently used without meeting the requirements of this chapter. No
preexisting system shall be altered in any manner that would increase the
degree of nonconformity with the requirements of this chapter and no
alterations shall be made to a nonconforming preexisting system during its life
which exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value. If such system is
destroyed or damaged to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its fair
market value at the time of destruction or damage, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with this chapter. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-26-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
SHADOW FLICKER: Alternating changes in light intensity caused by the moving
blade of a wind energy system casting shadows on an object, such as a window.
TOTAL EXTENDED HEIGHT: The distance measured from ground level to the tip of
the blade, extended at its highest point of travel.
TOWER: The supporting structure on which the turbine is mounted.
TURBINE: That portion of the wind system that is used to capture the energy of
the wind and transform it into electrical or mechanical energy. The turbine
includes a rotor (blades) and nacelle (generator), and on many wind systems a
tail.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE: A wind energy conversion system consisting of one or
more wind turbines and towers, with associated control or conversion
electronics, which will be used for on site and/or off site consumption of
power with a rated capacity in excess of one hundred (100) kW.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL: A wind energy conversion system consisting of one or
more wind turbines, a tower or other support structure, and associated control
or conversion electronics with a rated capacity appropriate to the on site
electric usage of the end use and which will be used primarily to reduce on
site consumption of utility power. A small wind energy system may have a rated
capacity of up to one hundred (100) kW.
WIND MONITORING TOWER AND EQUIPMENT - METEOROLOGICAL (MET) TOWER: A tower that
houses or supports wind measuring equipment, such as an anemometer, for the
purpose of measuring and monitoring wind velocity, duration, intensity,
regularity, air temperature and pressure, etc. MET towers are typically
permitted only on a temporary basis (2 to 5 years) to help determine the
viability of a wind energy system project; although more permanent MET towers
may also be considered.
WIND TURBINE, HORIZONTAL - AXIS (HAWT): A wind turbine designed to have the
axis of rotation aligned with the direction of the wind, such as with the
common propeller type models. These turbines have a rotor revolving about a
horizontal axis. They look like a small airplane with a large propeller and no
wings, and are the most common variety.
WIND TURBINE, VERTICAL - AXIS (VAWT): A wind turbine designed to have the axis
of rotation perpendicular to the wind direction. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-26-4: SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permitted Locations And Number: A small wind energy system that
complies with the provisions of this section is permitted only as described in
this title.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: A horizontal axis small wind energy system may only
be erected on a lot that is capable of meeting the setback requirements of this
section. A vertical axis small wind energy system, whether mounted vertically
or horizontally, may be erected on a lot that is capable of meeting the setback
requirements of this section. The fall zone limits the lot size requirement so
the tower will not cross the property line of the property in which it is
erected in the event the tower falls or collapses.
   C.   Design Standards:
      1.   Pole Or Tower Design: The design of the small wind energy system may
include a monopole/freestanding design, or a guywired tower, whether mounted on
the ground or on a building.
      2.   Total Extended Height: The total extended height of the small wind
energy system shall not exceed thirty five feet (35'). Otherwise, exceptions to
the height limitations are subject to approval by the land use authority as a
conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 20 of this title. Sufficient
clearance to lower and raise the tower and turbine is to be provided and
maintained.
      3.   Safety:
         a.   The minimum height of the lowest extent of a turbine blade/rotor
shall be twenty feet (20') above the ground, if on a horizontal axis turbine.
There is no minimum rotor height for a vertical axis turbine, provided the
blades/rotor must be located or isolated (e.g., fenced) such that they are not
easily accessible to anyone but maintenance personnel.
         b.   No tower shall have an external climbing apparatus within twelve
feet (12') of the ground. All access doors or accessways to towers and
electrical equipment shall be locked when not in use.
         c.   Appropriate warning signage/marking is to be placed on towers,
guywires and electrical equipment.
         d.   All small wind energy systems must have a manufacturer's maximum
RPM (revolutions per minute) rating of less than five hundred (500).
         e.   Small wind turbines that are operating erratically shall be shut
down and/or lowered to the ground. Examples of erratic operation include, but
are not limited to, the following:
            (1)   Unusual noises such as those indicating failure of bearings.
            (2)   Unusual vibrations such as those indicating that the rotor is
out of balance.
            (3)   Falling or loosely hanging parts, such as tail vanes.
      4.   Setbacks:
         a.   In determining the required separation of a small wind energy
system from the uses listed, all applicable setbacks are to be followed. Where
multiple setbacks are applicable, the most restrictive applies.
         b.   For safety purposes, a small wind energy system shall be set back
from the nearest property line, public road right of way, tanks containing
combustible/flammable liquids, and aboveground communication or electrical
lines not less than 1.1 times its total extended height if located on a
freestanding tower or pole, or if mounted on a building, the distance of the
likely fall zone.
         c.   Additional setbacks from neighboring residences and residentially
zoned lots are set forth in subsection C5 of this section.
      5.   Noise Limitations And Additional Setbacks: To reduce noise impacts
to neighboring residential properties, no small wind energy system or
combination of small wind energy systems shall produce noise that exceeds fifty
(50) dBA, as measured at the property line of any neighboring residentially
zoned lot not owned by the small wind energy system developer. (Note: Public
road right of way counts toward the setback.)
         a.   Separation Of Multiple Systems: If more than one small wind
energy system is proposed and the setback from a neighboring residence or
residential property line is applicable, professional documentation (e.g., a
noise study) shall be submitted indicating that the above noise limitations
will be met. A situation with multiple small wind energy systems must consider
the effects of combined noise levels (may add up to 3 dB) and the appropriate
sound propagation calculations (whether line source properties apply to the
situation).
         b.   Single Systems: To establish the minimum setback necessary to
comply with the above noise limitations in situations of single wind energy
systems, the applicant shall provide from a reliable source the noise emission
level (a.k.a., noise rating) of the system, as measured at a specified distance
from the rotor or tower and at a given wind speed (e.g., 52 decibels at 100
feet from the tower, 30 miles per hour wind). Any noise rating must be based on
at least a ten (10) m/s (22.3 miles per hour) wind speed to qualify for use. If
the proposed setback is at least as far as the distance used for the noise
rating, and the noise rating is less than the above noise limits, then no
further calculations are necessary. Otherwise, the following calculations can
be utilized to determine if the proposed setback is sufficient to comply with
the above noise limits:
Step 1: Calculate the difference in decibels (dB) that would occur at the
neighboring residential property line and/or residence, as applicable, versus
the noise level at the distance used for the noise rating statement.
Equation: dB difference = 20 x logic, of (distance A / distance B)
Where "distance A" is the distance from the system used to establish the noise
rating, and "distance B" is the proposed distance between the wind energy
system and the neighboring residential property line and/or residence. Logic
stands for logarithm to the base-10. (Note: Simplified calculators are
available on the internet. The above equation is based on the general rule that
sound in the clearly audible frequency range will reduce 6 dB for every
doubling of distance from the source, assuming a single source of sound.)
Step 2: The result of the above equation is a negative number, which represents
the reduction in decibels from distance A to distance B. Subtract the absolute
value (positive equivalent) of that number from the noise rating of the system
and compare the answer to the applicable maximum allowable noise level (50
dBA). If the result is less than the maximum allowable noise level, the
proposed location is acceptable, provided all other applicable setbacks are
met.
In situations where a noise rating is not available on a specific model, the
city may either require a noise study to be performed by a qualified
professional, or make a conservative estimate based on a wind energy system of
similar characteristics (blade type and size, RPM speed, rated output, rotor
diameter, startup speed, etc.) plus a safety factor of three (3) dB to
establish the required setback.
Compliance with the setbacks established through the above equation shall be
deemed sufficient to comply with the noise limitations of this subsection for
permitting and enforcement purposes; provided, failure of the system to operate
at or below the rated noise emission level due to worn, damaged or broken
parts, shall constitute noncompliance and the system shall be shut down until
repairs are made to bring the system back into compliance. High wind
occurrences may result in noise levels above that calculated, as the noise
ratings are based on high, but not extreme wind speeds. Noise resulting from
such high wind occurrences does not constitute noncompliance with this section.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
If the noise rating is based on one hundred feet (100') from the source, the
following table may be used for quick reference. If the noise rating is based
on fifty feet (50') from the source, simply subtract six (6) dB from the noise
rating and follow the row across to find the setback equivalents. If the noise
rating is based on some other distance, use the equation above. (Note: The
following table is not applicable to situations with multiple small wind energy
systems or to large wind energy systems.)
dB Rating At 100' Setback Equivalent
From Source       Of 50 dB, In Feet
dB Rating At 100' Setback Equivalent
From Source       Of 50 dB, In Feet
65                563
64                501
63                447
62                398
61                355
60                317
59                282
58                242
57                224
56                200
55                178
54                159
53                142
52                130
51                113
50                100
49                89
48                79
47                71
46                63
45                56
44                50
43                45
42                40
41                35
40                31
39                28
38                25
37                22
36                20
35                18
 
   (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
      6.   Visual Standards:
         a.   Small wind energy systems are to be finished and maintained as
manufactured.
         b.   No small wind energy system shall be lighted unless required by
the federal aviation administration (FAA). When lighting is required by the
FAA, it shall be the red, intermittent, glowing style, rather than the white,
strobe style, unless disclosed and justified through the application review
process.
         c.   No advertising signs of any kind or nature whatsoever shall be
permitted on any small wind energy system.
         d.   The design of any accessory buildings or related structures
shall, to the extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening and landscaping that will blend the facility into the natural setting
and existing environment.
         e.   The property owner shall reasonably attempt to site the system at
a location that minimizes the potential for shadow flicker impacts to their own
and neighboring residences.
      7.   Electrical Interconnections: All electrical interconnection or
distribution lines shall be underground and comply with all applicable codes
and public utility requirements.
      8.   Signal Interference: Efforts shall be made to site small wind energy
systems to reduce the likelihood of blocking or reflecting television and other
communication signals. If signal interference occurs, both the small wind
energy system owner and individual receiving interference shall make reasonable
efforts to resolve the problem. No small wind energy system shall cause
permanent and material interference with television or other communication
signals.
      9.   Overspeed Controls: Every small wind energy system is to be equipped
with an automatic overspeed control, braking system or feathering system.
         a.   Small wind turbines must have some positive means of shutdown.
Examples of acceptable means for shutting the turbine down include, but are not
limited to, dynamic braking (usually accomplished by shorting the alternator
phases together); mechanical brakes that slow and then lock the rotor.
         b.   Small wind turbines must have some means of controlling the
rotational speed of the turbine rotor in high winds. Examples of acceptable
means of control include, but are not limited to, furling mechanically forced
yawing, and blade pitch control. VAWT type small wind turbines, which cannot
use the above controls, must still incorporate some other means, such as
braking.
      10.   Fire Protection: All small wind energy systems are to be provided
with a defensible space for fire protection, in accordance with the city
building codes.
   D.   Permit Applications: A building permit is required for a small wind
energy system. The application is to include the following information:
      1.   Site Plan: A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the
proposed small wind energy system; the locations of all existing buildings and
structures, dimensioned to the property lines; the location of any septic
system, well, utility line or easement, access easement, or any tank containing
flammable materials on the property; the area required for raising and lowering
the tower; the defensible space area required by the international building
code; and the applicable setbacks for the small wind energy system.
      2.   Noise Compliance Documentation: Provide the information necessary to
demonstrate that the applicable noise requirements of subsection C5 of this
section will be met.
      3.   Standard Drawings: Engineered plans and calculations shall be
required to obtain a building permit for a small wind energy system. Plans and
calculations shall be stamped, dated and signed in accordance with state codes,
ordinances and laws governing such actions, by an engineer licensed and in good
standing with the state. Plans and calculations must verify that the structure
is designed and capable of withstanding the conditions of the site, including,
but not limited to, wind load, snow load, seismic conditions, and soil
conditions, as required by the building department. Soils testing by a
qualified soils engineer that is licensed by, and in good standing with, the
state may be required.
      4.   Specifications: Specific information on the type, model, size, rotor
material, rated power output, rated rotor speed, overspeed safety features and
survival wind speed, as well as the name and address of the manufacturer, is to
be provided. These items are typically included in a specification sheet
available from the manufacturer.
      5.   Electrical Components: A line drawing of the electrical components
of the system in sufficient detail to establish that the installation conforms
to all applicable electrical codes.
      6.   Net Metering Agreement: If the system will be connected to the
electricity grid, the applicant must provide documentation with the building
permit that the required net metering agreement is being considered by the
utility company (e.g., work order number status). The fully executed net
metering agreement must be provided to the building inspector prior to
operation of a system that will be connected to the grid. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-
2012)
10-26-5: LARGE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
The following standards shall apply to all large wind energy systems: (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   A.   Permitted: A large wind energy system may be permitted as described in
this title. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
   B.   Design Standards: A large wind energy system shall comply with the
design standards set forth below:
      1.   Pole Or Tower Design: The design of the large wind energy system
shall be of monopole or freestanding design with no guywired towers. No open
lattice style towers are permitted, unless they are entirely clad with a
suitable cover, such as an architectural fabric, and engineered to consider the
additional forces related to the covering.
      2.   Minimum Blade Height: The minimum height of the lowest extent of a
turbine blade shall be thirty feet (30') above the ground and fifteen feet
(15') above any structure or obstacle within the fall zone of the tower.
      3.   Safety/Access:
         a.   No tower shall have an exterior climbing apparatus within twelve
feet (12') of the ground. All access doors or accessways to towers and
electrical equipment shall be locked.
         b.   Appropriate warning signage shall be placed on towers, electrical
equipment and wind energy system entrances.
      4.   Setbacks: In determining the required separation of a large wind
energy system from the uses listed, all applicable setbacks are to be followed.
Where multiple setbacks are applicable, the most restrictive applies.
         a.   Project Boundary Lines: A commercial wind energy system tower
shall be set back from all project boundary lines, existing publicly maintained
roads, tanks containing combustible/flammable liquids and aboveground
communication or electrical lines, not less than 1.21 times its total extended
height.
         b.   Other Uses: No large wind energy system shall be located within
one-half (1/2) mile of a park, church, hospital, school, playground or
residentially zoned lot not owned or leased by the wind energy developer.
Additional separation may be required to sufficiently mitigate noise and shadow
flicker resulting from the commercial wind energy system.
         c.   Spacing: Large wind energy system towers shall be spaced on
center no closer than 1.1 times the total extended height.
Additional setbacks from neighboring residences and residentially zoned lots
are set forth in subsections B5 and B7e of this section for noise and shadow
flicker. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
      5.   Noise:
         a.   Except when a professional noise study is submitted that properly
demonstrates that the noise thresholds specified below will not be exceeded
with a lesser setback, all large wind energy turbines shall be located a
minimum of 1.21 miles from all existing inhabitable structures (residences,
places of work, etc.) and residentially zoned lots that are not owned or leased
by the wind energy developer. Provided, in situations of mountainous topography
where the sound could be reflected/channeled toward a residential area, or when
the proposed wind turbines are rated more than 3.0 MW, the land use authority
may determine that a noise study is warranted to ensure sufficient setbacks to
meet the following noise thresholds. With the exception of such an instance,
compliance with the 1.21 miles setback shall be deemed sufficient to be in
compliance with the noise restrictions for large wind energy systems and a
noise study is not needed. A noise study, when required, shall be peer reviewed
by an independent qualified party, with the associated costs borne by the
developer. If a reduced setback is authorized, failure to operate within the
noise limits specified constitutes a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2012.04,
1-18-2012; amd. 2014 Code)
         b.   Thresholds for noise studies. No large wind energy system shall
produce sound at any time, as measured at any neighboring residentially zoned
lot or one hundred feet (100') from any existing inhabitable building that is
not owned or leased by the wind energy developer that exceeds the lesser of:
            (1)   Thirty five (35) dBA (LAeq);
            (2)   Five (5) dB above the preexisting (L90), nighttime background
noise level of the area (measured in contiguous 10 minute intervals), whether
measured as dBA (LAeq) or dBC (LCeq);
            (3)   Fifty five (55) dBC (LCeq) if measured in a rural environment
(outside a tier I, II or III area);
            (4)   Sixty (60) dBC (LCeq) if measured in a suburban environment
(within a tier I, II or III area);
            (5)   Provided, a five (5) dB penalty shall be applied for
amplitude modulation, meaning the maximum sound threshold is five (5) dB less
than the amount specified in subsection B5b(1) of this section.
         c.   All procedures relating to sound measurement are to comply with
standard professional practices, such as ANSI 12.9, part 3, and be conducted by
qualified acoustical consultants. To avoid errors in the estimates and to
properly account for worst case scenarios of sound generation, the calculations
must include the five (5) dBA penalty/addition for amplitude modulation (the
spike above the average noise level as a blade passes the tower, which is a 5
dBA spike when the blades from 2 or more turbines are synchronized), the
addition of three (3) dB for coherent reflection (additional sound reflecting
off the ground) and consideration of the additional sound created by turbulent
inflow (atmospheric turbulence due to wind shear, etc.).
      6.   Setback And Noise Waivers: Voluntary waivers or reductions of the
setback and noise limits established by subsections B4a, B4b and B5 of this
section, may be accepted from those neighboring property owners that otherwise
would be within a setback required by one or more of these sections. The
agreement must specifically state the city setback and/or noise standards being
waived or reduced, the extent of the waiver, and be in the form of a legally
binding contract or easement between the landowner (including assignees in
interest) and the wind energy developer, effective for the life of the project.
Notwithstanding any such voluntary agreement between the landowner and the wind
energy developer, the agreement shall only be effective and reflected in the
city's authorization of the project when it has been reviewed and determined
acceptable to the city. The city shall consider the likely impacts and
consequences of the waiver or reduction of the setback and/or noise limit,
based on the specific circumstances of the situation, in determining whether to
grant the request. Any voluntary waiver or reduction agreement must be
submitted with the conditional use permit application and if authorized by the
city, must be filed with the city recorder upon issuance of the conditional use
permit.
      7.   Visual Appearance:
         a.   Large wind energy systems shall be finished and maintained in
color and material as manufactured.
         b.   No large wind energy system shall be lighted unless required by
the federal aviation administration (FAA). When lighting is required by the
FAA, it shall be the red, intermittent, glowing style, rather than the white,
strobe style, unless disclosed and justified through the application review
process.
         c.   No advertising signs of any kind or nature shall be permitted on
any large wind energy system.
         d.   Accessory buildings or related structures shall, to the extent
reasonably possible, use materials, colors and textures that will blend the
facility into the existing environment.
         e.   Large wind energy systems must be located such that they will not
result in any significant amount of shadow flicker on a major public roadway,
or on any inhabitable structures or residentially zoned lots not owned or
leased by the wind project developer/lessor, unless an easement to do so is
obtained from the affected property owner and presented with the application. A
shadow flicker analysis is required with the application if there are any
inhabitable structures or residentially zoned lots not owned or leased by the
wind energy developer, or major public roadways, within 1.21 miles of the
turbine.
         f.   Appropriate landscaping or screening materials may be required to
shield screen accessory structures from major roads and adjacent residences.
Lighting of accessory structures and substations shall be limited to the
minimum necessary and full cutoff lighting (e.g., dark sky compliant) may be
required for accessory structures when determined necessary to mitigate visual
impacts.
      8.   Electrical Interconnections: All electrical interconnection and
distribution lines within the project boundary shall be underground, unless
determined otherwise by the planning commission because of severe environmental
constraints (e.g., wetlands, cliffs, hard bedrock), and except for power lines
within a substation. All electrical interconnections and distribution
components must comply with all applicable codes and public utility
requirements. Transmission lines (33.5 kV lines and above) coming to or leaving
the project may be overhead.
      9.   Signal Interference: Efforts shall be made to site large wind energy
systems to reduce the likelihood of blocking or reflecting television and other
communication signals. If signal interference occurs, both the commercial wind
energy system owner and the individual receiving interference shall make
reasonable efforts to resolve the problem. No commercial wind energy system
shall cause permanent and material interference with television, cellular or
other communication signals.
      10.   Fire Protection: All wind energy systems shall have a defensible
space for fire protection in accordance with the city building codes. (Ord.
2012.04, 1-18-2012)
   C.   Permit Applications:
      1.   An application for a conditional use permit to establish a
commercial wind energy system shall include a complete description of the
project and documentation to sufficiently demonstrate that the requirements set
forth in subsection B of this section will be met. Supporting documentation for
addressing the review criteria of subsection D of this section is also to be
provided. The land use authority may require any information reasonably
necessary to determine compliance with this section. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012;
amd. 2014 Code)
      2.   It is preferred that any related conditional use permit applications
for substations or transmission lines be considered in conjunction with the
conditional use permit application for the large wind energy system; however,
if the details of those improvements are not available at the time of
application for the large wind energy system, they may be considered later,
through subsequent conditional use permit review. At a minimum, the intended
route for connecting to the power grid and the alternative locations of any
substation shall be disclosed with the application for the large wind energy
system.
      3.   Due to the complexity of large scale large wind energy projects, the
city may require a development agreement or other appropriate instrument to
address taxing, land use, property assessment and other issues related to the
project. For example, the city is interested in preventing large tax shifts
that may otherwise be incurred by city residents each year the centrally
assessed wind energy project is depreciated; therefore, cooperation to
establish an agreement for payment in lieu of taxes (PILT), or other acceptable
solutions, may be necessary. A development agreement or substitute agreement
may be required as a condition of the permit, and must be approved by the city
council prior to commencing construction.
   D.   Conditional Use Permit: Following the provisions of chapter 20 of this
title, additional or more thorough consideration shall be given to the
following as the city determines whether the project needs to be approved,
denied or conditionally approved:
      1.   Project rationale, including estimated construction schedule,
project life, phasing, and likely buyers or markets for the generated energy.
      2.   Siting considerations, such as avoiding areas/locations with a high
potential for biological conflict, such as wilderness study areas, areas of
critical environmental concern, city and state parks, historic trails, special
management areas or important wildlife habitat; avoiding visual corridors that
are designated by the city after analyzing the applicant's wind energy system
proposal and considering public hearing comments; avoiding areas of erodible
slopes and soils, where concerns for water quality, landslide, severe erosion
or high stormwater runoff potential have been identified; and, avoiding known
sensitive historical, cultural or archeological resources.
      3.   Site and development plans, which locate and describe the project
boundaries, all existing and proposed structures, setbacks, access routes,
proposed road improvements, existing inhabitable structures and residentially
zoned lots within 1.21 miles of the project, existing utilities, pipelines,
transmission lines, proposed utility lines/structures, existing topography,
existing and proposed drainageways, proposed grading, natural vegetation
removal, revegetation actions, dust and erosion control, any floodplains or
wetlands, and other relevant items identified by city staff or planning
commission. All maps and visual representations need to be drawn at an
appropriate scale.
      4.   Analysis of local economic benefits, describing estimated project
cost, generated property taxes and local sales taxes, percent of construction
dollars to be spent locally, and the number of local construction and permanent
jobs.
      5.   Visual impacts, appearance and scenic viewsheds. Potential visual
impacts include, but are not limited to, wind towers, rotors, aboveground
electrical lines, accessory structures, access roads, utility trenches and
installations, and alteration of vegetation. The applicant must provide a
viewshed analysis of the project, including visual simulations of the wind
energy systems and any significant planned structures or improvements, such as
new roads on a hillside or substations. The number of visual simulations shall
be sufficient to provide adequate analysis of the visual impacts of the
proposal, which shall be from no less than four (4) vantage points that
together provide a view from all sides of the project. More visually sensitive
proposals may require analysis from significantly more vantage points, such as
different distances and sensitive locations. The planning commission may also
require a zone of theoretical visibility/zone of visual impact (ZVI) analysis,
which is a three hundred sixty degree (360°) computer analysis to map the lands
within a defined radius of a location that would likely be able to see an
objection this case the proposed wind energy system (or a portion thereof).
      6.   Wildlife habitat areas and migration patterns, including avian and
bat data for the project area. Specifically include information on any use of
the site by endangered or threatened species and whether the project is in a
biologically significant area. If threatened or endangered species exist,
consultation with U.S. fish and wildlife service will be necessary. A plan for
ongoing monitoring after the project is operational for bird, bat or other
wildlife impacts may be required.
      7.   Environmental analysis. The applicant shall meet all state and
federal guidelines, laws and regulations.
      8.   Solid waste or hazardous waste. The application must include plans
for the spill prevention, cleanup and disposal of fuels, oils and hazardous
wastes, as well as collection methods for solid waste disposal. Verification
that all construction waste generated from the project has been removed from
the area will be required before a certificate of occupancy may be issued.
      9.   Height restrictions and FAA hazard review. Compliance with any
applicable airport overlay zoning requirements and the ability to comply with
FAA regulations pertaining to hazards to air navigation must be demonstrated.
      10.   Transportation plan, for construction and operation phases.
Indicate by description and map what roads the project will utilize during the
construction and operation/maintenance phases of the project, along with their
existing surfacing and condition. Specify any new roads and proposed upgrades
or improvements needed to the existing road system to serve the project (both
the construction and O&M periods); remember to identify needed bridges,
culverts, livestock fence crossings (gates and cattle guards), etc. Also,
identify all areas where modification of the topography is anticipated
(cutting/filling) to construct or improve the roadways. Address road
restoration or maintenance needs associated with the construction, ongoing
maintenance/repair and potential dismantling of the project. Provide projected
traffic counts for the construction period, broken down by the general type/
size of vehicles, and identify approximately how many trips will have oversized
or overweight loads. The city may require financial guarantees to ensure proper
repair/restoration of roadways or other infrastructure damaged or degraded
during construction or dismantling of the project. To provide a proper
reference for restoration, the "before" conditions of the roadways and other
infrastructure must be documented through appropriate methods, such as videos,
photos and written records.
      11.   Public safety. Identify and address any known or suspected
potential hazards to adjacent properties, public roadways, communities,
aviation, radar systems, etc., that may be created by the project.
      12.   Noise limitations. Submit sufficient information regarding noise,
so as to demonstrate compliance with subsection B5 of this section.
      13.   Shadow flicker. Identify the potential of any shadow flicker
effects from the project and provide sufficient documentation to demonstrate
compliance with subsection B7e of this section.
      14.   Telecommunications interference. Demonstrate that the potential for
adverse electromagnetic fields and communications interference generated by the
project has been evaluated and determined unlikely. Conduct a licensed
microwave search and worst case fresnel zone (WCFZ) analysis, including
consultations with the National Telecommunications Information Administration
(NTIA), Interdepartmental Radio Advisory Committee (IRAC) and the national
weather service.
      15.   a. Agreement/easement for life of the project and final
reclamation. If the land on which the project is proposed is to be leased,
rather than owned, by the wind development company, all property within the
project boundary must be included in a recorded easement, lease or consent
agreement specifying the applicable uses for the duration of the project.
         b.   Also, describe the decommissioning and final land reclamation
plan to be followed after the anticipated useful life, or abandonment, or
termination of the project, including evidence of an agreement or other
commitment (i.e., bond and/or sinking fund) with affected parties (city, any
lessor or property owner, etc.) that ensures proper final reclamation of the
wind energy project, as well as repairing any road impacts associated with the
work. All required leases, easements, bonds or other agreements between the
wind development company and the affected parties must be in place prior to
commencing construction, unless specified otherwise by the conditional use
permit.
      16.   Other probable and significant impacts, as identified through the
review process. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-26-6: WIND MONITORING TOWER AND EQUIPMENT (MET TOWER) REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permissible Locations: A wind monitoring tower may be located as
described in this title; provided, a wind monitoring tower may be permitted
only when it is for the purpose of investigating the feasibility of a small
wind energy system, and when the monitoring tower complies with the height and
setback requirements for small wind energy systems, as identified in
subsections 10-26-4C2 and C4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012; amd.
2014 Code)
   B.   Permit Application: A wind monitoring tower and associated equipment
may be permitted subject to the following:
      1.   Owner Consent: Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the
property, or has written permission of the owner to make such application.
      2.   Use Duration: Typically permitted for a maximum of five (5) years,
as specified in the permit, and as determined by evidence given at the time of
application regarding known wind source data.
      3.   Height: The allowable height of a monitoring tower not otherwise
limited by subsection A of this section will be established through the
conditional use permit review.
      4.   Setbacks: The setbacks for a MET tower from the exterior property
lines of the project, publicly maintained road rights of way, aboveground
communication or electrical lines, and tanks containing combustible/flammable
liquids shall be at least 1.1 times its total height.
      5.   Tower Security: Any climbing apparatus must be located at least
twelve feet (12') above the ground and the tower must be designed to prevent
climbing within the first twelve feet (12'); or, the tower must be protected by
an eight foot (8') tall security fence. The tower is recommended to be enclosed
with an appropriate fence when there is OHV or livestock use in the area.
      6.   Other: As determined by city staff and/or planning commission, other
significant health, safety and general welfare issues may need to be addressed.
(Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
10-26-7: NONUSE AND NONCONFORMING SYSTEMS:
   A.   Nonuse: Any small wind energy system or large wind energy system that
has been permitted by this chapter which is not used for one year, excluding up
to six (6) months for repairs, shall be removed within the following six (6)
months. Failure to remove the system shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
   B.   Nonconforming: Any small wind energy system or large wind energy system
which is nonconforming with this chapter and which is not operable for one year
shall be removed within the following six (6) months. Failure to remove the
system shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2012.04, 1-18-2012)
CHAPTER 27
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION
SECTION:
10-27-1: Title And Purpose
10-27-2: Administration
10-27-3: Definitions
10-27-4: Groundwater Protection Zones Established
10-27-5: Permitted Uses
10-27-6: Prohibited Uses
10-27-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
   A.   This chapter shall be known as the GROUNDWATER PROTECTION ORDINANCE.
   B.   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the provision of a safe and
sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of groundwater
protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells and springs which are
the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and
regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such
zones. (Ord. 2-12-98-A, 3-12-1998, eff. 3-12-1998)
10-27-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The policies and procedures for administration of any groundwater protection
zone established under this chapter, including, without limitation, those
applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall
be the same as provided in this title, as the same is presently enacted or may
from time to time be amended. (Ord. 2-12-98-A, 3-12-1998, eff. 3-12-1998; amd.
2014 Code)
10-27-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given in this section:
GROUNDWATER: Water source appurtenant to or directly used as culinary water.
HAZARDOUS WASTE OR MATERIAL: Any waste or material, which is determined
presently or in the future by the environmental protection agency, the state of
Utah or Toquerville City, because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may:
   A.   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
   B.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible
wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover
thereon.
SPRING BOX: The spring collection box and/or area where water is being captured
for culinary use.
WELLHEAD: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals,
valves and other attachments. (Ord. 2-12-98-A, 3-12-1998, eff. 3-12-1998)
10-27-4: GROUNDWATER PROTECTION ZONES ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a use district, which is divided into three (3)
zones. These zones are determined by the water time of travel through
geographical stratum indigenous to the area of the water source to be protected
and must be established by a qualified geologist. These zones are as follows:
   A.   Zone 1: One hundred foot (100') radius from wellhead, spring box or
collection area of culinary water.
   B.   Zone 2: Two hundred fifty (250) day groundwater time of travel to
wellhead or spring box.
   C.   Zone 3: Fifteen (15) year groundwater time of travel to wellhead or
spring box. (Ord. 2-12-98-A, 3-12-1998, eff. 3-12-1998)
10-27-5: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted within groundwater protection zones:
   A.   Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single- family
residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot,
any portion of which lies within the groundwater protection zone, shall not be
less than one acre; and
   B.   Any other open land use where any building located on the property is
incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. (Ord. 2-12-98-A, 3-12-
1998, eff. 3-12-1998)
10-27-6: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within
groundwater protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may
otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section
10-27-5 of this chapter. Prohibited uses for each zone are defined separately
as follows:
   A.   Zones 1 and 2:
      1.   Septic tanks or drainfields appurtenant thereto;
      2.   Sanitary sewer lines within one hundred fifty feet (150') of
wellhead or collection box;
      3.   Underground storage tanks;
      4.   Stormwater infiltration basins;
      5.   Impervious surfaces, other than roofs of building and streets,
driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section
10-27-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Zone 3:
      1.   Surface use or storage of material defined as hazardous, as defined
in section
10-27-3 of this chapter, expressly including commercial use of agricultural
pesticides;
      2.   Sanitary landfills;
      3.   Hazardous waste disposal sites. (Ord. 2-12-98-A, 3-12-1998, eff. 3-
12-1998)
CHAPTER 28
NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES
SECTION:
10-28-1: Nonconforming Uses And Noncomplying Structures
10-28-1: NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES:
   A.   1. Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming use or
noncomplying structure may be continued by the present or a future property
owner.
      2.   A nonconforming use may be extended through the same building,
provided no structural alteration of the building is proposed or made for the
purpose of the extension.
      3.   For purposes of this section, the addition of a solar energy device
to a building is not a structural alteration.
   B.   The city council may provide for:
      1.   The establishment, restoration, reconstruction, extension,
alteration, expansion or substitution of nonconforming uses upon the terms and
conditions set forth in this title;
      2.   The termination of all nonconforming uses, except billboards, by
providing a formula establishing a reasonable time period during which the
owner can recover or amortize the amount of his investment in the nonconforming
use, if any; and
      3.   The termination of a nonconforming use due to its abandonment.
   C.   1. The city may not prohibit the reconstruction or restoration of a
noncomplying structure or terminate the nonconforming use of a structure that
is involuntarily destroyed in whole or in part due to fire or other calamity
unless the structure or use has been abandoned.
      2.   The city may prohibit the reconstruction or restoration of a
noncomplying structure or terminate the nonconforming use of a structure if:
         a.   The structure is allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the
structure is rendered uninhabitable and is not repaired or restored within six
(6) months after written notice to the property owner that the structure is
uninhabitable and that the noncomplying structure or nonconforming use will be
lost if the structure is not repaired or restored within six (6) months; or
         b.   The property owner has voluntarily demolished a majority of the
noncomplying structure or the building that houses the nonconforming use.
      3.   a. Notwithstanding a prohibition in this title, the city may permit
a billboard owner to relocate the billboard within the city's boundaries to a
location that is mutually acceptable to the city and the billboard owner.
         b.   If the city and billboard owner cannot agree to a mutually
acceptable location within ninety (90) days after the owner submits a written
request to relocate the billboard, Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-513(2)(a)
(iv) applies.
   D.   1. The property owner shall have the burden of establishing the legal
existence of a noncomplying structure or nonconforming use.
      2.   Any party claiming that a nonconforming use has been abandoned shall
have the burden of establishing the abandonment.
      3.   Abandonment may be presumed to have occurred if:
         a.   A majority of the primary structure associated with the
nonconforming use has been voluntarily demolished without prior written
agreement with the city regarding an extension of the nonconforming use;
         b.   The use has been discontinued for a minimum of one year; or
         c.   The primary structure associated with the nonconforming use
remains vacant for a period of one year.
      4.   The property owner may rebut the presumption of abandonment under
subsection D3 of this section and shall have the burden of establishing that
any claimed abandonment under subsection D2 of this section has not in fact
occurred.
   E.   The city may terminate the nonconforming status of a school district or
charter school use or structure when the property associated with the school
district or charter school use or structure ceases to be used for school
district or charter school purposes for a period established by ordinance.
   F.   A city ordinance adopted under Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-203.5
shall not:
      1.   Require physical changes in a structure with a legal nonconforming
rental housing use unless the change is for:
         a.   The reasonable installation of:
            (1)   A smoke detector that is plugged in or battery operated;
            (2)   A ground fault circuit interrupter protected outlet on
existing wiring;
            (3)   Street addressing;
            (4)   Except as provided in subsection G of this section, an egress
bedroom window if the existing bedroom window is smaller than that required by
current state building code;
            (5)   An electrical system or a plumbing system, if the existing
system is not functioning or is unsafe as determined by an independent
electrical or plumbing professional who is licensed in accordance with Utah
Code Annotated title 58, occupations and professions;
            (6)   Hand or guard rails; or
            (7)   Occupancy separation doors as required by the international
residential code; or
         b.   The abatement of a structure; or
      2.   Be enforced to terminate a legal nonconforming rental housing use.
   G.   The city may not require a change described in subsection F1a(4) of
this section if the change:
      1.   Would compromise the structural integrity of a building; or
      2.   Could not be completed in accordance with current building codes,
including setback and window well requirements.
   H.   A legal nonconforming rental housing use may not be terminated under
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-203.5. (2014 Code)
CHAPTER 29
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE RESORTS
SECTION:
10-29-1: Purpose
10-29-2: RV Resort Application
10-29-3: General Standards For RV Resorts
10-29-4: Prohibitions
10-29-5: RV Resort Management
10-29-6: Time Limit On Occupancy
10-29-7: Utilities
10-29-8: Landscaping And Recreation
10-29-9: Individual RV Site Design Standards
10-29-10: Accessory Facilities
10-29-1: PURPOSE:
To direct the development of facilities for a recreational vehicle resort (“RV
Resort”), to set forth development requirements necessary to ensure that the RV
Resort is developed as a “resort”, rather than as an “RV park”: or
“campground”, providing Guests with a relatively higher quality experience than
found in an RV park or campground, and to protect the integrity,
characteristics and values of the districts and land uses contiguous to or near
the location of the RV Resort, and to ensure that they city collects transient
room tax on the rental of spaces within the RV Resort. (Ord. 2023.06, 6-12-
2023)
10-29-2: RV RESORT APPLICATION:
An applicant shall submit a written application for approval for the
development of an RV Resort on an application form provided by the City.
Accompanying the RV Resort application shall be the following:
   A.   Application fee;
   B.   Property address, acreage, boundary, and tax identification number;
   C.   Proposed name of the project;
   D.   Property owner of record and Developer;
   E.   Vicinity map showing the project location relative to city boundaries,
major roads and minor roads that serve the property;
   F.   Date, scale and north arrow;
   G.   Existing streets, rights of way widths, major utilities, easements,
fencing, parks, trails, open space and infrastructure on or adjacent to the
property;
   H.   Site layout including, proposed open space, amenities, space sizes and
gross density;
   I.   Traffic impact study, as required by the transportation master plan, in
both paper copy and electronic format;
   J.   Geotechnical report in accordance with the standard specifications, in
both paper copy and electronic format;
   K.   Preliminary hydrology report in accordance with standard
specifications, in both paper copy and electronic format;
   L.   Preliminary Title report verifying ownership;
   M.   Recent list of names and addresses, and two (2) sets of address labels
and postage, for owners of record at the Washington County recorder’s office of
the subject property and properties within three hundred feet (300') of the
boundary line of the subject property;
      1.   List must be no older than thirty (30) days from date of submission.
      2.   Developer is responsible for the completeness and accuracy of the
list of owners of record but is entitled to rely upon the records in the
Washington County Recorder’s office.
      3.   Failure to provide an accurate list may delay the approval of the
project;
   N.   Plan for continued maintenance of the project amenities;
   O.   Proposed site plan: Provide two (2) twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch
(24" x 36") or larger copies of the proposed project, ten (10) eleven inch by
seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduced copies of the proposed project, and one copy
of the proposed project in electronic format, including the names, addresses
and phone numbers of the applicant, engineer, surveyor and/or architect;
   P.   Existing streets (with names) and right of way widths, buildings,
culverts, bridges, waterways, irrigation ditches and systems, wells, springs,
utilities, fencing, easements, rights of way, flood boundary, surface
watercourse features, geologic hazards, parks, trails, open space, storm drain
and sanitary sewer systems, topography (contours at maximum 2 foot intervals),
survey monuments, section lines, other features and infrastructure on or
adjacent to the property or as requested by the City engineer or other
appropriate City Staff member;
   Q.   Proposed grading plan in accordance with the standard specifications;
   R.   Proposed landscaping plan that meets the requirements of Section
10-21-5 of this Title;
   S.   Proposed lighting plan that meets the lighting standards set forth in
Chapter 24 of this Title;
   T.   Proposed traffic circulation and parking plan within the RV Resort;
   U.   All property lines of adjacent properties within one hundredfifty feet
(150') of the boundary of the proposed subdivision with the names of the owners
and the parcel tax identification numbers. (Ord. 2023.06, 6-12-2023)
10-29-3: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR RV RESORTS:
   A.   Conditionally, RV Resorts may contain no more than ten percent (10%) of
the total RV rental spaces as Cabin sites.
   B.   Once a property has been developed as an RV Resort it may not be
subdivided. It must remain as a single parcel for property tax purposes and to
continue to meet all the requirements of this Chapter.
   C.   The minimum parcel size on which an RV Resort may be developed is
twenty (20) acres, and one common owner.
   D.   All streets within an RV Resort shall be paved and all pads on RV sites
shall be concrete or gravel.
   E.   All RV Resorts are considered lodging facilities for tourists and are
subject to the transient room tax.
   F.   RV Resorts shall be designed by appropriate licensed professionals,
such as architects, landscape architects, engineers, or land use planners. All
plans and drawings for buildings, structures, grading, utilities, etc., shall
be signed and stamped by the professional who prepared them.
   G.   All exterior boundaries shall be screened from surrounding streets and
abutting uses by a minimum of a solid, six-foot four inch (6'4") colored
masonry or colored stucco covered concrete/block privacy wall, unless it is a
portion of property that due to topography is not used for RV sites, tent
sites, cabins or is not visible from surrounding streets and abutting uses.
Whatever material is used for the front wall must be used for the side walls as
well. The privacy wall along a public street shall be modulated by 1.5 to four
feet (4') every forty (40) linear feet;
   H.   A minimum buffer of thirty feet (30') shall be required between any RV
site and any property boundary. The minimum buffer for cabin sites, however may
be reduced to twenty feet (20‘) if they are located along boundaries abutting
private property.
   I.   RV Resorts shall provide streets in such a pattern as to provide
convenient and safe traffic circulation and emergency access within the RV
Resort. Two-way streets shall be a minimum of twenty-six feet (26') and one-way
streets shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide.
   J.   RV Resorts shall have a traffic study done by a registered professional
and shall install any necessary improvements found therein.
   K.   RV sites, tent sites and cabin sites shall each provide one concrete or
gravel space suitable for automobile parking, which may either be a separate
parking space within the site or may be added to the minimum dimensions for an
RV pad. Additional parking spaces shall be placed throughout the park at a
ratio of one parking space per every ten (10) RV, tent, and cabin sites. All
parking spaces must be at least nine feet (9') wide and twenty feet (20') long.
   L.   Pets (dogs/cats) traveling with guests shall be kept inside the RV
overnight. If kept outside during daytime hours, they shall be kept on a leash
or tethered. No more than two (2) pets shall be allowed per guest site. No
other animals are allowed to be brought onto the RV Resort premises by any
guest of the RV Resort.
   M.   The RV Resort shall include a designated storage area for utility
trailers (tow dollies, “toy haulers“, etc.), motorized vehicles
(excludingprimary car/truck), bicycles, etc. This storage area shall occupy no
more than five percent (5%) of the gross area of the resort. Such storage shall
be for the exclusive use of registered guests only during the period the guest
is a registered and paying occupant of an RV site. Storage areas shall be fully
screened.
   N.   Equestrian RV sites are allowed when the RV Resort is directly adjacent
to BLM managed property with equestrian use permitted and the RV Resort has
written permission to access BLM property. Equestrian RV sites shall be located
a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from any property line other than abutting
BLM equestrian use property. All equestrian stalls shall be cleaned daily. No
more than five (5%) of the total sites in an RV Resort may be equestrian RV
sites. (Ord. 2023.06, 6-12-2023)
10-29-4: PROHIBITIONS:
The following are prohibited within an RV Resort:
   A.   No separate mailboxes, street address designations, or other similar
accessories which could give the appearance of permanence to occupants within
the resort.
   B.   No freestanding fuel tanks permitted within an RV site, tent site or
cabin site. All fuel tanks within any site must be securely mounted upon or
attached to the RV they serve, unless used solely for cooking purposed.
   C.   No open storage of personal property, accessory building, shed or
cabinet within any RV site, tent site or cabin site.
   D.   Campfires are allowed only in designated fire pits. Fire pits are
subject to the approval of the Hurricane Valley Fire District.
   E.   Other than operating the RV Resort itself, no employee or guest of the
RV Resort may operate any type of business within the RV Resort.
   F.   Camping outside of an RV or cabin is only allowed on a tent site.
   G.   Removal of axles, wheels, or tires from an RV within the RV Resort,
except in the case of an emergency repair. If the repair cannot be completed
within twenty-four (24) hours, then the RV shall be removed from the RV Resort.
   H.   Parking RVs anywhere within the RV Resort other than a designated RV
space is prohibited. No “on street” parking is permitted for any vehicle.
   I.   RVs shall not be stored, displayed for sale, or sold within the RV
Resort.
   J.   No RV space shall have direct access from a public street. (Ord.
2023.06, 6-12-2023)
10-29-5: RV RESORT MANAGEMENT:
   A.   A resort manager, or another employee of the resort, must be on duty
within the resort at all times. RV Resort management shall maintain a patron
log consisting of names, dates of occupancy, and number of spaces used. Upon
request, patron logs shall be made available to inspection by representatives
of the City during reasonable business hours. Representatives of the City shall
also be allowed to drive through the RV Resort during reasonable business hours
to verify compliance with this Chapter.
   B.   RV Resort management shall, at all times, maintain the resort and its
facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. Management shall only
allow independent RVs that are in good condition to stay at the RV Resort,
i.e., no visible rust, no leaking fluids, visible license plate with current
registration sticker, no significant damage, no visible patching material or
primer paint, no chipping paint that appears to have been applied by spray can
or brush. Management shall enforce quiet times between the hours of ten o’clock
(10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M., although arriving guests may be
allowed to check into the RV Resort up until twelve o‘clock (12:00) midnight.
   C.   RV Resort management shall be responsible for the regular and proper
collection and disposal of all refuse, garbage, and litter accumulated within
the R V Resort. Collection shall be no less than once a week. Garbage shall be
placed in central dumpsters only that are set back from public streets and
neighboring properties by at least fifty feet (50') from inside the buffer.
Dumpsters shall be screened so they are not visible from public streets or
neighboring properties. (Ord. 2023.06, 6-12-2023)
10-29-6: TIME LIMIT ON OCCUPANCY:
Seventy percent (70%) of the total RV Resort sites shall be limited to a
maximum occupancy period of twenty-eight (28) consecutive days or the time
specified by Utah statutes to qualify for transient room tax, whichever period
is shorter. Thirty percent (30%) of the total RV Resort sites may be occupied
by up to a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days in a one-year
period beginning on the initial date of occupancy. Note: Only independent RVs
are allowed occupancy longer than twenty-eight (28) days. After a time limit is
reached, a renter cannot re-register for a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours.
(Ord. 2023.06, 6-12-2023)
10-29-7: UTILITIES:
   A.   RV Resorts shall be connected to the applicable utility having a
franchise agreement with the City for water, sewer (wastewater), storm drain
(if applicable) and electricity. All utilities shall be located underground.
   B.   RV Resorts shall provide adequate water supply hookups to each RV site.
Culinary water shall also be provided to all tent sites and cabins. All water
supply lines shall be installed with an approved backflow prevention device per
code.
   C.   RV Resorts shall provide wastewater disposal hookup to each RV site and
shall also provide a sanitary dumping station for RV Resort users. Traditional
septic systems are prohibited in RV Resorts.
   D.   RV Resorts shall provide electrical outlets of appropriate voltage to
each RV site, tent site, and cabin sites. The use of a generator within the RV
Resort is prohibited.
   E.   All lighting within the RV Resort shall comply with the City’s outdoor
lighting Chapter. (Ord. 2023.06, 6-12-2023)
10-29-8: LANDSCAPING AND RECREATION:
   A.   The following landscape requirements shall apply to RV Resorts:
      1.   Provide a minimum of one tree for each RV site, tent site and cabin
site.
      2.   Provide a minimum of three (3) trees clustered every thirty (30)
linear feet along all property boundaries of the RV Resort. Each cluster of
trees shall include a mixture of trees so that each cluster provides adequate
screening year-round.
      3.   All open areas, except undisturbed sensitive lands, driveways,
parking areas, walking paths, utility areas or patios shall be improved and
maintained with landscaping with plants that are approved by the parks and
recreation director.
      4.   All landscaping must comply with the City’s current landscaping
ordinance. Should there be an conflict between this Chapter and the City’s
current landscaping ordinance, the current landscaping ordinance shall
supersede the requirements found in this landscaping and recreation section 1.
   B.   RV Resorts shall provide a minimum offive percent (5%) of the
developable acreage as common recreational/open space. This excludes any
required landscape buffer areas, recreational facilities, offices, storage
facilities, garbage areas, bathrooms, laundry facilities, guest parking areas,
or other structures. At a minimum, an RV Resort must also provide the following
recreation amenities:
      1.   Clubhouse;
      2.   Pool; and
      3.   Playground. (Ord. 2023.06, 6-12-2023)
10-29-9: INDIVIDUAL RV SITE DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Each RV site shall be plainly marked and numbered for identification.
   B.   Each RV site shall be a minimum of thirty-five feet (35') in width and
(80') in length. Shorter sites may be accepted but are subject to approval.
   C.   All RVs shall be able to park in designated spaces, and no portion of a
driveway or roadway may be used for RV parking.
   D.   RVs shall be separated from each other and from other structures by at
least twenty feet (20'). Any accessory, such as attached awnings, steps or pop
outs, shall be considered part of the RV.
   E.   No more than one RV shall be placed on an individual RV site. (Ord.
2023.06, 6-12-2023)
10-29-10: ACCESSORY FACILITIES:
   A.   Office: RV Resorts shall include a permanent building for office use.
The building may also include a small store and/or a single-family dwelling for
the exclusive use of the owner or manager. The building must comply with the
design guidelines setforth in Chapter 18 of this Title. The single-family
dwelling area shall not exceed one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet of
floor space.
   B.   Laundry Room: RV Resorts shall have one or more laundry rooms providing
sufficient washing machines and dryers for the number of sites developed within
the RV Resort. The use of laundry drying lines is prohibited.
   C.   Restroom and Shower Facilities: Communal restrooms, including toilets,
showers, and lavatories, shall be provided to conveniently and adequately serve
the number of sites developed within the RV Resorts. Restroom and Shower
facilities shall comply with the minimum standards for “Service Buildings”
pursuant to R392-301-7(3) of the Utah Administrative Code. The following are
the minimum quantity requirements for these facilities:
 
Number of RV Sites Toilets Urinals Lavatories Showers
                   M F     M       M F        M F
1 to 40            1 2     1       1 1        1 1
41 to 80           2 4     2       2 2        2 2
81 to 120          3 6     3       3 3        3 3
121 to 160         5 8     3       4 4        4 4
161 to 200         6 10    4       4 4        4 4
 
(Ord. 2023.06, 6-12-2023)
TITLE 11
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Statutory Authorization
11-1-2: Findings Of Fact
11-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
11-1-4: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
11-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state has delegated the responsibility of local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
(Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009; amd. 2014 Code)
11-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created, in part, by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains, which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-
2009)
11-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-1-4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this title uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: General Definitions
11-2-1: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this title shall be
interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
title its most reasonable application.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition;
and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH or VO zone on the city's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within the city which
is subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for
publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO,
A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: a) built, in the case of a building
in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor or, in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and b) adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of
up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by
means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-30,
VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of section
60.3(e)(5) of the national flood insurance program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM, or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
"Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of the city on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the city.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure"; provided, that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this title when
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this title. Any request for a variance from any provision of this title may
only be approved in compliance with Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 9a,
and the requirements of section 60.6 of the national flood insurance program
regulations (as amended).
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Applicable Lands
11-3-2: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
11-3-3: Development Permit Established
11-3-4: Compliance Required
11-3-5: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
11-3-6: Interpretation
11-3-7: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
11-3-1: APPLICABLE LANDS:
This title shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
municipal boundaries of the city. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-3-2: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study For The City Of Toquerville, Utah", dated April 9, 2009, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM
and FBFM), and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this title. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-3-3: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT ESTABLISHED:
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-3-4: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this title and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-3-5: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This title is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this title and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2009.03,
3-26-2009)
11-3-6: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this title, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the city; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-3-7: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this title is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This title does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This title shall
not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this title or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
CHAPTER 4
ADMINISTRATION, PERMITS, VARIANCES
SECTION:
11-4-1: Floodplain Administrator
11-4-2: Duties And Responsibilities
11-4-3: Permit Procedures
11-4-4: Variance Procedures
11-4-1: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The city council shall hereby appoint a floodplain administrator to administer
and implement the provisions of this title and other appropriate sections of 44
CFR (national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009; amd. 2014 Code)
11-4-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this title.
   B.   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
   C.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this title.
   D.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
   E.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
   F.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and any
coordinating agency within the county and the state, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
federal emergency management agency.
   G.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   H.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
section
11-3-2 of this title, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
chapter 5 of this title.
   I.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the city's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot (1') at any point within the city.
   J.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12 of the national
flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE or AH, on the city's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'); provided,
that the city first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision). (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-4-3: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of subsection 11-5-2B of this title;
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      5.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection 11-4-2A of this chapter.
   B.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this title and the
following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-4-4: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   The Appeal Authority shall be the "Appeal Board" established by the
City and shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this title. (Ord. 2018.07, 12-13-2018)
   B.   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this title.
   C.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may
appeal such decision to the District Court in and for the County.
   D.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
   E.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
   F.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 11-4-3B of this
chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-
half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
   G.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
title, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this title.
   H.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   I.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   J.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and
         d.   A showing of compliance with all requirements set forth in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-9a-702.
      3.   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   K.   Variances may be issued by the city for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use; provided, that:
      1.   The criteria outlined in subsections A through J of this section are
met; and
      2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
CHAPTER 5
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
SECTION:
11-5-1: General Standards
11-5-2: Specific Standards
11-5-3: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
11-5-4: Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
11-5-5: Floodways
11-5-6: Penalty
11-5-1: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   G.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-5-2: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title, subsection
11-4-2H of this title, or subsection
11-5-3C of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in
subsection
11-4-3A3 of this title, is satisfied.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification, which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed, shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
   C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
   D.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on
the city's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      2.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the city's FIRM on sites: a) outside
of a manufactured home park or subdivision; b) in a new manufactured home park
or subdivision; c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      3.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-
30, AH and AE on the city's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this
subsection be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base
flood elevation; or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the city's FIRM either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days;
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      3.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection
11-4-3A of this title, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-5-3: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections
11-1-2,
11-1-3 and
11-1-4 of this title.
   B.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development
permit requirements of sections
11-3-3 and
11-4-3 of this title and the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5)
acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
11-3-2 or subsection 11-4-2H of this title.
   D.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   E.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-5-4: AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES):
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
11-3-2 of this title, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three
feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
   A.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the city's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
   B.   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
      1.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the city's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
      2.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   C.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in subsection 11-4-3A3 of this title, are satisfied.
   D.   Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord.
2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-5-5: FLOODWAYS:
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
11-3-2 of this title, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
shall apply:
   A.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the city during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12 of the national
flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood
elevations; provided, that the city first applies for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009)
11-5-6: PENALTY:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this title and
other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this title by
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2009.03, 3-26-2009; amd. 2014 Code)
