CITY CODE
of
WASHINGTON CITY, UTAH
2007
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-25, passed 8-13-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Washington City, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-25, passed 8-13-2025. Ordinances
of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code
to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code
has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-34
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WASHINGTON CITY CODE:
TITLE 9 CHAPTER 7 SECTION 2(A) - AGRICULTURAL (A) ZONE, USE REGULATIONS
 
   WHEREAS, Washington City desires to regulate land uses to ensure compliance
with applicable laws, maintain neighborhood integrity, and uphold the health,
safety, and welfare of residents and visitors; and
 
WHEREAS, the Washington City Council finds it necessary to amend the permitted
uses within certain municipal zoning codes to comply with Utah Code 4-41-1105
(1) which contains the Utah State requirement that medical cannabis pharmacy be
a permitted use in municipal zones; and
 
WHEREAS, the Washington City Council has conducted a duly noticed public
hearing in accordance with Utah State law and received input from residents and
stakeholders regarding the proposed amendments of Washington City Code.
 
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Washington City Council as follows:
 
SECTION 1 AMENDMENTS:
 
Title 9, Chapter 7, Section 2(A) of the Washington City Code:
 
Title 9, Chapter 7, Section 2(A) - Use Regulations of Washington City
Agricultural Zone Code is hereby amended to add the following use:
 
Medical Cannabis Pharmacy, as defined by Utah Code 26B-4-201(33) and any
amendments thereto, and as such a Medical Cannabis Pharmacy is licensed and
regulated by the State of Utah.
 
SECTION 2 SEVERABILITY: If any provision of this Ordinance or application
thereof to any person or entity or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional
or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity
shall not affect other sections, provisions, clauses or applications thereof
which can be implemented without the invalid provision(s), clause(s) or
application(s) hereof.
 
SECTION 3 EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon
publication or posting in the manner required by law.
 
PASSED AND ORDERED POSTED on this 22nd day of October, 2025.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3052_2772x2721.jpg]
 
 
                        Washington City
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3055_4185x1035.jpg]
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3058_3345x1500.jpg]
 
Attest by:                     
                        _______________________________                        Kress
Staheli, Mayor
______________________________
Tara Pentz, City Recorder
 
 
 
 
 
COUNCIL MEMBERS OF WASHINGTON CITY, UTAH:
      
Troy Belliston      [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay
 
Kim Casperson      [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay
 
Craig Coats         [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay   
   
Bret Henderson      [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay
 
Kurt Ivie         [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay   
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-35
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WASHINGTON CITY CODE:
TITLE 9 CHAPTER 9 SECTION 2(A) - ADMINISTRATIVE AND
PROFESSIONAL (AP) ZONE, USE REGULATIONS
 
   WHEREAS, Washington City desires to regulate land uses to ensure compliance
with applicable laws, maintain neighborhood integrity, and uphold the health,
safety, and welfare of residents and visitors; and
 
WHEREAS, the Washington City Council finds it necessary to amend the permitted
uses within certain municipal zoning codes to comply with Utah Code 4-41-1105
(1) which contains the Utah State requirement that medical cannabis pharmacy be
a permitted use in municipal zones; and
 
WHEREAS, the Washington City Council has conducted a duly noticed public
hearing in accordance with Utah State law and received input from residents and
stakeholders regarding the proposed amendments of Washington City Code.
 
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Washington City Council as follows:
 
SECTION 1 AMENDMENTS: 
 
Title 9, Chapter 9, Section 2(A) of the Washington City Code:
 
Title 9, Chapter 9, Section 2(A) - Use Regulations of Washington City
Administrative and Professional Zone Code is hereby amended to add the
following permitted use:
 
Medical Cannabis Pharmacy, as defined by Utah Code 26B-4-201(33) and any
amendments thereto, and as such a Medical Cannabis Pharmacy is licensed and
regulated by the State of Utah.
 
SECTION 2 SEVERABILITY: If any provision of this Ordinance or application
thereof to any person or entity or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional
or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity
shall not affect other sections, provisions, clauses or applications thereof
which can be implemented without the invalid provision(s), clause(s) or
application(s) hereof.
 
SECTION 3 EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon
publication or posting in the manner required by law.
 
PASSED AND ORDERED POSTED on this 22nd day of October, 2025.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3061_2772x2721.jpg]
 
 
                        Washington City
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3064_4185x1035.jpg]
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3067_3345x1500.jpg]
 
Attest by:                     
                        _______________________________                        Kress
Staheli, Mayor
______________________________
Tara Pentz, City Recorder
 
 
 
 
 
COUNCIL MEMBERS OF WASHINGTON CITY, UTAH:
      
Troy Belliston      [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay
 
Kim Casperson      [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay
 
Craig Coats         [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay   
   
Bret Henderson      [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay
 
Kurt Ivie         [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO 2025-36
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING A PORTION OF TITLE 8 CHAPTER 7
PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES
 
WHEREAS, the federal and state governments have established criteria for
control of the introduction of pollutants into local municipal storm sewer
systems; and
 
WHEREAS, the federal and state governments have mandated that each municipality
adopt regulations in order to establish and control the introduction of
pollutants into the local municipal storm sewer system; and
 
WHEREAS, the federal and state governments have mandated that each municipality
adopt regulations in order to require long-term maintenance of post
construction stormwater facilities including low impact development features;
and
 
WHEREAS, Washington City acknowledges the federal and state mandates to adopt
the regulations pertaining to the long-term maintenance of post construction
stormwater facilities including low impact development features consistent
with, and in compliance with, the federal and state mandates and regulations;
and
 
WHEREAS, the Utah Department of Environmental Quality has mandated that each
MS4 municipality adopt regulations in order to prevent the off-site discharge
of the precipitation from all rainfall events less than or equal to the 80th
percentile rainfall event, unless technically infeasible, by way of a Low
Impact Development approach; and
 
WHEREAS, Washington City is desirous to comply with the federal and state
mandates to adopt the regulations pertaining to the introduction of pollutants
into the storm sewer systems consistent with, and in compliance with, the
federal and state mandate and regulations; and
 
WHEREAS, Washington City desires to continue providing uniform and safe
standards and guidelines for such construction projects and adopts the Grading,
Erosion, and Sediment Control (GESC) Manual as amended in March 2022, which
standards promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of
the Washington City as well as the efficient and orderly growth of the
Washington City; and
 
WHEREAS, the Washington City Council finds that it is in the best interest of
the public, and that it promotes the health, safety, and well being of the
community, and is in the best interest of the public to remain in compliance
with the mandated federal and state requirements.
 
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Washington City Council as follows:
 
 
SECTION 8-7-7: ILLICIT DISCHARGES
 
A.   Scope
1.   This section shall apply to all water generated on developed or
undeveloped land entering the city’s separate storm sewer system.
 
B.   Prohibition of Illicit Discharges:
1.   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal
separate storm sewer system any discharge that is not composed entirely of
stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any non-stormwater,
uncontaminated discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is
prohibited except as described as follows:
a.   Water line flushing or other potable water sources,
b.   Landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
c.   Diverted stream flows,
d.   Rising groundwater,
e.   Groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
f.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
g.   Foundation or footing drains,
h.   Crawl space pumps,
i.   Air conditioning condensation,
j.   Springs,
k.   Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
l.   Swimming pools (if dechlorinated – typically less than one (1) ppm
chlorine),
m.   Firefighting activities,
n.   Irrigation water,
o.   Individual residential car washing,
p.   Residual street wash water
q.   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges, and
r.   Any other uncontaminated water source.
s.   Discharges specified in writing by Washington City as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
t.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge if Washington City has so specified
in writing.
u.   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted
under a UPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger
and administered under the authority of the State of Utah, Division of Water
Quality; provided, that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations; and provided, that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
 
 
SECTION 8-7-11: SEVERABILITY
 
If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or
entity or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other
sections, provisions, clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented
without the invalid provision(s), clause(s) or application(s) hereof.
 
 
SECTION 8-7-12: Effective Date
 
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon publication or posting in the
manner required by law.
 
PASSED AND ORDERED POSTED on this 22nd day of October, 2025.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3070_2772x2721.jpg]
 
 
                        Washington City
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3073_4185x1035.jpg]
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3076_3345x1500.jpg]
 
Attest by:                     
                        _______________________________                        Kress
Staheli, Mayor
______________________________
Tara Pentz, City Recorder
 
 
 
 
 
COUNCIL MEMBERS OF WASHINGTON CITY, UTAH:
      
Troy Belliston      [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay
 
Kim Casperson      [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay
 
Craig Coats         [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay   
   
Bret Henderson      [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay
 
Kurt Ivie         [_X_] Aye      [___] Nay   
 
 
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2007-34
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
   THE WASHINGTON CITY, UTAH CITY CODE
   BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the Washington City, Utah,
as follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city
code of Washington City, Utah prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc. containing
the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes
made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the city,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law
of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the city recorder, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 14th day of November, 2007.
      Washington City
      Roger Bundy, Mayor Pro-Tem
Attest:
Danice B. Bulloch, City Recorder
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
WASHINGTON CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Washington City. This code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the WASHINGTON CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2007 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2007 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the city
code. (2007 Code)
1-1-4: ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city recorder shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city
recorder. Any person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every
effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the city recorder. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and
shall be returned to the office of the city recorder when directed so to do by
order of the city council. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the city passed prior
to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included
in this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal
(subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances.
   B.   Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided
in subsection A of this section shall not affect any debt or fee which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded. (2007 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2007 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Scope Of Section: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2007 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees: Whenever any officer or employee is referred by
title, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of
Washington City".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection", or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2007 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Washington City, Utah.
CODE: The city code of Washington City.
COUNTY: The county of Washington, state of Utah.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation or other activity subject to city regulation,
authorization or limitation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Utah.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (2007 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2007
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Sentencing
1-4-2: Offenses Designated; Classified
1-4-1: SENTENCING:
   A.   Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance 1 :
      1.   Criminal: The city council may impose a minimum criminal penalty for
the violation of any municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum
class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a
term of imprisonment up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of
imprisonment.
      2.   Civil:
         a.   Except as provided in subsection A2b of this section, the city
council may prescribe a minimum civil penalty for the violation of any
municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor
fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301.
         b.   A municipality may not impose a civil penalty and adjudication
for the violation of a municipal moving traffic ordinance. (1989 Code § 1-321;
amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors 2 : A person who has been
convicted of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
      1.   In the case of a class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six
(6) months;
      2.   In the case of a class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days. (1989 Code § 1-322)
   C.   Infractions 3 :
      1.   A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be
subject to a fine, forfeiture and disqualification, or any combination.
      2.   Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is
specified, the person may be fined an amount not to exceed the class C
misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301.
   D.   Fines Of Persons 4 : A person who has been convicted of an offense may,
in addition to any term of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not
to exceed:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the
conviction is of a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: Seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) when the conviction is of a class C misdemeanor conviction or
infraction conviction.
   E.   Fines Of Corporations 5 : The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon
a corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an
offense defined in this code, or the ordinances of the city, or for an offense
defined outside of this code over which this city has jurisdiction, for which
no special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by the
court, not exceeding:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the
conviction is for a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
when the conviction is for a class C misdemeanor conviction or for an
infraction conviction. (Ord. 92-9, 4-22-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-3-703.
2 2. UCA § 76-3-204.
3 3. UCA § 76-3-205.
4 1. UCA § 76-3-301.
5 2. UCA § 76-3-302.
1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED:
   A.   Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter:
      1.   A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this code or the
ordinances of this city shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   Ordinances enacted after the effective date hereof which involve an
offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance with this
chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided. (1989 Code § 1-311)
   B.   Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or
infractions. (1989 Code § 1-312)
   C.   Misdemeanors Classified 1 :
      1.   Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
         a.   Class B misdemeanors;
         b.   Class C misdemeanors. (1989 Code § 1-313)
      2.   An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful in this code or any ordinance of this city when no
other specification as to punishment or category is made, is a class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 92-8, 4-22-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Infractions:
      1.   Infractions are not classified.
      2.   Any offense which is made an infraction in this code or other
ordinances of this city, or which is expressly designated an infraction, and
any offense designated by this code or other ordinances of this city which is
not designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified, is an
infraction. (1989 Code § 1-314)
   E.   Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this code
or any ordinance hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation
occurs or continues to occur. (1989 Code § 1-315)
 
Notes
1 3. UCA § 76-3-104.
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Eligibility And Residency Requirements
1-5-2: Election, Terms; Vacancies
1-5-3: Mayor As Member Of City Council
1-5-4: Municipal Administration
1-5-5: Meetings; Procedure And Conduct
1-5-6: Ordinances And Resolutions; Procedures
1-5-7: Ethical Standards
1-5-1: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Declaration Of Candidacy: A person filing a declaration of candidacy
for a city office shall:
      1.   Have been a resident of the city in which the person seeks office
for at least three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days immediately before
the date of the election; and
      2.   Meet the other requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-
203.
   B.   Annexed Areas: A person living in an area annexed to the city meets the
residency requirement of this section if that person resided within the area
annexed to the city for at least three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive
days before the date of the election.
   C.   Registered Voter: Any person elected to city office shall be a
registered voter in the city.
   D.   Residency Maintained: Each elected officer of the city shall maintain
residency within the boundaries of the city during the officer's term of
office.
   E.   Residence Outside City: If an elected officer of the city establishes a
principal place of residence as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-2-
105 outside of the city during the officer's term of office, the office is
automatically vacant.
   F.   Continuous Absence From City: If an elected city officer is absent from
the city any time during the officer's term of office for a continuous period
of more than sixty (60) days without the consent of the city council, the city
office is automatically vacant. (1989 Code § 3-301; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-2: ELECTION, TERMS; VACANCIES:
   A.   Election; Terms: The election and terms of office shall be as follows:
      1.   The offices of mayor and approximately half the council members
shall be filled in municipal elections held in 1977. The terms shall be for
four (4) years. These offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal
elections.
      2.   The offices of the remaining council members shall be filled in a
municipal election held in 1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These
offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal elections. (1989 Code
§ 3-205; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Vacancy In Office: Mayor or city council vacancies shall be filled as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510. (1989 Code § 3-303; amd.
2007 Code)
1-5-3: MAYOR AS MEMBER OF CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Administration Vested In Mayor: The administrative powers, authority
and duties are vested in the mayor. (1989 Code § 3-808; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Presiding Officer; Mayor Pro Tempore: The mayor shall be the
chairperson and preside at the meetings of the city council. In the absence of
the mayor or because of his inability or refusal to act, the city council may
elect a member of the city council to preside over the meeting as mayor pro
tempore, who shall have all the powers and duties of the mayor during his
absence or disability. The election of a mayor pro tempore shall be entered in
the minutes of the meeting. (1989 Code § 3-403; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The mayor is the chief executive officer.
      2.   The mayor shall:
         a.   Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the city;
         b.   Remit fines and forfeitures;
         c.   Report remittances under subsection C2b of this section to the
city council at its next regular session;
         d.   Perform all duties prescribed by law, resolution or ordinance;
         e.   Ensure that all the laws and ordinances and resolutions are
faithfully executed and observed;
         f.   Report to the city council the condition of the city and
recommend for city council consideration any measures that the mayor considers
to be in the best interests of the city;
         g.   When necessary, call on the residents of the city over the age of
twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state and
ordinances of the city;
         h.   Appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, persons
to fill city offices or vacancies on commissions or committees of the city; and
         i.   Report to the city council any release granted under subsection
C3b of this section.
      3.   The mayor may:
         a.   At any reasonable time, examine and inspect the official books,
papers, records or documents of the city or of any officer, employee or agent
of the city; and
         b.   Release any person imprisoned for violation of any city
ordinance. (1989 Code § 3-809; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   No Veto: The mayor shall have no power to veto any act of the city
council, unless otherwise specifically authorized by statute. (1989 Code § 3-
404; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-4: MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Prescribe Additional Powers And Duties: The city council may, by
resolution, prescribe additional duties, powers and responsibilities for any
elected or appointed official which are not prohibited by any specific statute,
except that the mayor may not serve as city recorder and neither the mayor nor
the city recorder may serve as city treasurer. A justice court judge may not
hold any other city office or position of employment with the city. (1989 Code
§ 3-810; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Members Of Council May Be Appointed To Administration: The mayor may,
with the advice and consent of the majority of the city council, assign or
appoint any member or members of the city council to administer one or more
departments of the city and shall by ordinance provide the salary of the
administrator. (1989 Code § 3-811; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Change Of Duties: The mayor may, with the concurrence of a majority of
the city council, change the administrative assignment of any member of the
city council who is serving in any administrative position in the city
government. (1989 Code § 3-812; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   General Administrative Powers: The city council shall, from time to
time, prescribe the powers and duties to be performed by the superintendents,
supervisors, department directors and all of its officers and employees. (1989
Code § 3-813; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Personnel Assigned To One Or More Departments: The city council may
assign any individual to one or more positions in one or more departments.
(1989 Code § 3-814; amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Rules And Regulations For Administration: The city council shall
prescribe rules and regulations which are not inconsistent with the laws of
this state, as it deems best for the efficient administration, organization,
conduct and business of the city. (1989 Code § 3-815; amd. 2007 Code)
   G.   Appointed Officers; Residency Requirements: The city council may
require by ordinance that any or all appointed officers reside in the city.
(1989 Code § 3-816; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-5: MEETINGS; PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The governing body shall hold its regular meetings on
the second and fourth Wednesday of each month at six o'clock (6:00) P.M.,
according to a published yearly schedule, unless otherwise specified. Meetings
shall be held in the council chamber at Washington City office, 111 North 100
East, Washington, Utah, unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 2010-03, 2-10-2010)
   B.   Special Meetings: If at any time the business of the city requires a
special meeting of the governing body, such meeting may be ordered by the mayor
or any two (2) members of the governing body. The order shall be entered in the
minutes of the governing body. The order shall provide at least three (3)
hours' notice of the special meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the
city recorder on each member who did not sign the order by delivering the
notice personally or by leaving it at the member's usual place of abode. The
personal appearance by a council member at any specially called meeting
constitutes a waiver of the notice required in this subsection. (1989 Code § 3-
503; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the governing body shall be held in
compliance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 4, open
and public meetings. (1989 Code § 3-601; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-6: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Power Exercised By Ordinance: The city council may pass any ordinance
to regulate, require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity,
business, conduct or condition authorized by statute or any other provision of
law. An officer of the city shall not be convicted of a criminal offense where
he relied on or enforced an ordinance he reasonably believed to be a valid
ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive damages that the
official acted in good faith in enforcing an ordinance or that he enforced an
ordinance on advice of legal counsel. (1989 Code § 3-702; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the city council shall
contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
      1.   A number;
      2.   A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the
ordinance;
      3.   A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
      4.   An ordaining clause which states: "Be it ordained by Washington
City:";
      5.   The body or subject of the ordinance;
      6.   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of
the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance
which prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of the
city ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and
refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
      7.   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the
date when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as
required by this section;
      8.   A line for the signature of the mayor or acting mayor to sign the
ordinance;
      9.   A place for the city recorder to attest the ordinance and affix the
seal of the city;
      10.   Where the mayor may disapprove an ordinance passed by the city
council, the ordinance must show that it was passed with the mayor's approval
or that if the mayor disapproved the ordinance, that it was passed over his
disapproval. If the mayor neither approves or disapproves an ordinance, the
ordinance should show that it became effective without the approval or
disapproval of the mayor. (1989 Code § 3-704; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
      1.   Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed by
the mayor, or if he is absent, by the mayor pro tempore, or by a quorum of the
city council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be
void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-704(1), (2), (3) or (4). (1989 Code § 3-705; amd.
2007 Code)
      2.   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication
or posting or thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council,
whichever is closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become
effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so
provided in the ordinance. (1989 Code § 3-712; amd. 2007 Code)
      3.   Ordinances which do not have an effective date shall become
effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty (30) days
after final passage by the city council, whichever is sooner. (1989 Code § 3-
705; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Publication And Posting Of Ordinances:
      1.   Before an ordinance may take effect, the legislative body of the
city adopting an ordinance, except an ordinance enacted under Utah Code
Annotated sections 10-3-706 through 10-3-710, shall:
         a.   Deposit a copy of the ordinance in the office of the city
recorder; and
         b.   (1) Publish a short summary of the ordinance at least once:
               (A)   In a newspaper published within the city; or
               (B)   If there is no newspaper published within the city, in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city; or
            (2)   Post a complete copy of the ordinance in three (3) public
places within the city.
      2.   a. Any ordinance, code or book, other than the state code, relating
to building or safety standards, municipal functions, administration, control
or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further
publication or posting, if reference is made to the code or book, and at least
one copy has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of
the city recorder prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the governing body.
         b.   Any state law relating to building or safety standards, municipal
functions, administration, control or regulations, may be adopted and shall
take effect without further publication or posting if reference is made to the
state code.
         c.   The ordinance adopting the code or book shall be published in the
manner provided in this subsection. (1989 Code § 3-711; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage: The city recorder
shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose, all ordinances
passed by the city council. The city recorder shall give each ordinance a
number, if the city council has not already so done. Immediately following each
ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the city recorder shall make or cause
to be made a certificate stating the date of passage and of the date of
publication or posting, as required. The record and memorandum, or a certified
copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage and
publication or posting of the ordinance or codification. (1989 Code § 3-713;
amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Resolutions:
      1.   Purpose: Unless otherwise required by law, the city council may
exercise all administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited
to: a) establishing water and sewer rates; b) charges for garbage collection
and fees charged for city services; c) establishing personnel policies and
guidelines; and d) regulating the use and operation of the city property.
Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution. (1989 Code §
3-717; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Form: Any resolution passed by the city council shall be in a form
and contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
(1989 Code § 3-718; amd. 2007 Code)
      3.   Publication; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective
without publication or posting and may take effect on passage or at a later
date as the city council may determine, but resolutions may not become
effective more than three (3) months from the date of passage. (1989 Code § 3-
719; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-7: ETHICAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Specified: Any member of the governing body who is required by the
Municipal Officers’ and Employees’ Ethics Act to make disclosure of any matter,
or who has a conflict of interest over any matter which is before the city
council for action, or shall realize a personal financial gain or have a
personal conflict over any matter which is before the city council, shall make
public disclosure of such matter as required by Utah law, but in all
circumstances, public disclosure must be made at a time which is no later than
consideration of the agenda for a meeting in which the city council shall
consider the matter from which the duty to disclose arises.
   B.   Suspension Of Rule: This rule of procedure may be suspended by the city
council upon a vote of at least three (3) members present at the meeting if
they find the conflict insignificant. (Ord. 2000-16, 8-23-2000; amd. Ord. 2021-
31, 7-14-2021)
CHAPTER 6
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Creating Offices; Filling Vacancies
1-6-2: Compensation
1-6-3: Bond Requirements
1-6-4: Oaths
1-6-5: City Recorder And City Treasurer
1-6-6: City Attorney
1-6-1: CREATING OFFICES; FILLING VACANCIES:
   A.   Offices Created By Council: The city council may create any office
deemed necessary for the government of the city and provide for filling
vacancies in elective and appointive offices. (1989 Code § 3-901; amd. 2007
Code)
   B.   Mayor To Appoint And Fill Vacancies: The mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council, may appoint and fill vacancies in all offices
provided for by law or ordinance.
   C.   Continuation In Office: All appointed officers shall continue in office
until their successors are appointed and qualified. (1989 Code § 3-916; amd.
2007 Code)
1-6-2: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Specified: The compensation of the officers and employees of the city
shall be as established by ordinance of the city council and as provided by
Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-818.
   B.   Benefits: In addition to the salary paid the officers and employees of
the city, they shall receive the following benefits:
      1.   The employee's share of the social security tax.
      2.   Health and accident insurance for themselves and their families on
such basis and cost to the employee or officer as the governing body may from
time to time establish by motion or resolution.
      3.   Vacation and sick leave on such basis as the governing body may from
time to time establish by motion or resolution.
      4.   Participation in the state retirement program on such basis and cost
as the governing body may from time to time by resolution establish.
   C.   Serving Two Or More Positions: Whenever any person serves in two (2) or
more positions either as officers or employees of the city, unless otherwise
specifically provided in the employment agreement, by ordinance or resolution,
the person shall receive the salary or compensation of the office or employment
paying the greater amount.
   D.   Travel Expenses: In addition to all other compensation or salaries any
officer or employee of the city may receive, following the submission of a
travel expense request form to the department head for a claim, travel expenses
and per diem established by the state department of finance for expenses
actually incurred by the person attending any meeting, conference, seminar or
training session, shall be approved by the department head. (1989 Code § 3-818;
amd. 2007 Code)
1-6-3: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Specified: Before taking the oath of office and entering on the duties
of their respective office, municipal officials, as prescribed by Utah Code
Annotated section 10-3-819 or as designated by the governing body, shall each
have a bond with good and sufficient securities, payable to the city,
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their office and the
payment of all monies received by such officers according to law and the
ordinances of the city in such amounts as will be established by ordinance of
the governing body.
   B.   City Treasurer: The city treasurer's bond shall be superseded by any
rules, regulation or directive of the state money management council when such
rule, regulation or directive is binding on the city.
   C.   Premium Paid By City: The premium charged by any corporate surety for
any bond required in this section shall be paid by the city.
   D.   Blanket Bond: The bond required in this section may be a blanket bond.
(1989 Code § 3-819; amd. 2007 Code)
1-6-4: OATHS:
   A.   Constitutional Oath Of Office: All officers, whether elected or
appointed, before entering on the duties of their respective offices shall
take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office. (1989 Code § 3-827;
amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Filing: The oath of office required under this section shall be
administered by any judge, notary public or by the city recorder. Elected
officials shall take their oath of office at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
first Monday in January following their election or as soon thereafter as is
practical. Appointed officers shall take their oath at any time before entering
on their duties. All oaths of office shall be filed with the city recorder.
(1989 Code § 3-828; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Acts Of Officials Not Voided: No official act of any city officer shall
be invalid for the reason that he failed to take the oath of office. (1989 Code
§ 3-829; amd. 2007 Code)
1-6-5: CITY RECORDER AND CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment: On or before the first Monday in February following a city
election, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall
appoint a qualified person to each of the offices of city recorder and city
treasurer.
   B.   Ex Officio Auditor: The city recorder is ex officio the city auditor
and shall perform the duties of that office. (1989 Code § 3-916; amd. 2007
Code)
   C.   City Recorder Duties:
      1.   Location Of Office: The office of the city recorder shall be located
at the place of the governing body, or at some other place convenient thereto
as the governing body may direct.
      2.   Papers And Transcripts; Certification: Copies of all papers filed in
the city recorder's office and transcripts from all records of the governing
body, if certified by the city recorder under the corporate seal, are
admissible in all courts as originals.
      3.   Generally: The city recorder shall:
         a.   Attend meetings of the city council, keep the record of its
proceedings, and perform such other duties of a like nature as may be required
by the city council.
         b.   Be responsible for the recording, filing, indexing, making
available for public inspection and safekeeping of all proceedings of the city
council and other records of the city.
         c.   Record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances and
authenticate the same. The city recorder shall record, in a book used
exclusively for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council. The
city recorder shall give each ordinance a number, if the city council has not
already done so. Immediately following the passage of each ordinance, or
codification of ordinances, the city recorder shall make or cause to be made a
certificate stating the date of passage and of the date of publication or
posting, as required. The record and memorandum, or a certified copy thereof,
shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage and publication or
posting of the ordinance or codification.
         d.   Post or publish, as required by law, ordinances and resolutions
adopted by the city council, and all legal notices.
         e.   Supervise all municipal elections in accordance with state law
and municipal ordinances, and keep and maintain all election records and have
custody of all property used in connection therewith, according to law.
         f.   Countersign all contracts made on behalf of the city and maintain
a properly indexed record of all such contracts.
         g.   Notify the appointing authority of the impending expiration of
the term of office of a member of any board or commission, said notice to be
given at least thirty (30) days before such expiration.
         h.   Be the custodian of the official seal of the city.
         i.   Act as the city records officer to oversee and coordinate records
access and management and city archives activities as required by local, state
and federal law.
            (1)   As the records officer, the city recorder shall:
               (A)   Make annual reports of records service activities to the
city council, as requested;
               (B)   Provide training relative to records management,
maintenance and access to the various city departments, as necessary;
               (C)   Establish and maintain an active, continuing program for
the economical and efficient management of the city records;
               (D)   Submit to the state archivist proposed schedules of
records;
               (E)   Cooperate with the state archivist in conducting surveys
made by the state archivist;
               (F)   Evaluate all record series that the city uses or creates
and report to the state archivist the classification of each record series that
is classified;
               (G)   Establish and report to the state archivist, retention
schedules for objects that the city determines are not records, but that have
historical or evidentiary value; and
               (H)   Designate those record series as required by law and
report the designations of its record series to the state archivist.
            (2)   As the records officer, the city recorder may:
               (A)   Classify a particular record, record series or information
within a record at any time, but is not required to classify a particular
record, record series or information until access to the record is requested;
               (B)   Redesignate a record series or reclassify a record, record
series or information within a record at any time.
         j.   Perform such other duties assigned by the city manager.
         k.   Perform such other duties as are or may be prescribed by state
law or the provisions of this code.
      4.   Certification Of Annual Tax Levy: The city recorder shall certify
the ordinance or resolution setting the levy to the county auditor before June
15 of each year.
      5.   License Assessor And Collector: The city recorder shall act as the
license assessor and collector as provided in section
3-1-3 of this code. (2007 Code)
1-6-6: CITY ATTORNEY:
The city attorney:
   A.   May prosecute violations of city ordinances;
   B.   May prosecute, under state law, infractions and misdemeanors occurring
within the boundaries of the city;
   C.   Has the same powers in respect to violations as are exercised by a
county attorney or district attorney, except that a city attorney's authority
to grant immunity shall be limited to:
      1.   Granting transactional immunity for violations of city ordinances;
and
      2.   Granting transactional immunity under state law for infractions and
misdemeanors occurring within the boundaries of the city;
   D.   Shall represent the interests of the state or the city in the appeal of
any matter prosecuted in any trial court by the city attorney; and
   E.   May cooperate with the office of the attorney general during
investigations, including those described in Utah Code Annotated section 67-5-
18(3)(f). (1989 Code § 3-928; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE A. CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Office Created
1-6A-2: Appointment
1-6A-3: Residency
1-6A-4: Eligibility Of Council Members
1-6A-5: Compensation
1-6A-6: Powers And Duties
1-6A-7: Removal Procedure
1-6A-8: Agreements On Employment
1-6A-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of the city manager is hereby created and established. (1989 Code §
16-110)
1-6A-2: APPOINTMENT:
The city manager shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city
council. Appointment shall be based upon administrative and executive
abilities. His term of office shall be for an indefinite period. (1989 Code §
16-111)
1-6A-3: RESIDENCY:
Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be
required as a condition of the appointment, but within one hundred eighty (180)
days after reporting for work, the city manager must become and remain a
resident of the city during the term of such employment. (1989 Code § 16-112)
1-6A-4: ELIGIBILITY OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager
until one year has elapsed after such council member shall have ceased to be a
member of the city council. (1989 Code § 16-113)
1-6A-5: COMPENSATION:
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from
time to time determine. In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for
all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of his
official duties. (1989 Code § 16-114)
1-6A-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The city manager shall be the administrative head of the
government of the city under the direction and control of the mayor and city
council, except as otherwise provided in this article. He shall be responsible
for the efficient administration of all affairs of the city which are under his
control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a
limitation thereon, he shall have the powers set forth in this section. (1989
Code § 16-115)
   B.   Law Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce
all laws and ordinances of the city. (1989 Code § 16-116)
   C.   Authority Over Employees: It shall be the duty of the city manager, and
he shall have the authority, to control, order and give directions to all heads
of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his
jurisdiction through their department heads. (1989 Code § 16-117)
   D.   Power Of Appointment And Removal: It shall be the duty of the city
manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and
employees of the city, subject to all applicable personnel ordinances, rules
and regulations, except the city recorder, city treasurer and city attorney.
The city manager's recommendations on the appointment or removal of said
department heads will be considered on the basis of merit by the city council.
(1989 Code § 16-118; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Administrative Reorganization Of Offices: It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such
administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his
direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and
economical conduct of the city's business. (1989 Code § 16-119)
   F.   Ordinances: The city manager shall recommend to the mayor and city
council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary. (1989
Code § 16-120)
   G.   Attendance At City Council Meetings: It shall be the duty of the city
manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless at his request he is
excused therefrom by the mayor or the city council, except when his removal is
under consideration. (1989 Code § 16-121)
   H.   Financial Reports: It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the
mayor and the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial
condition and needs of the city. (1989 Code § 16-122)
   I.   Budget And Salary Plan: It shall be the duty of the city manager to
prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary
plan to the mayor and city council for their approval. (1989 Code § 16-123)
   J.   Expenditure Control And Purchasing: It shall be the duty of the city
manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the
mayor and the city council except on approval of the city manager or his
authorized representative. The city manager or his authorized representative
shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments
or divisions of the city. Compliance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this
title is required. (1989 Code § 16-124; amd. 2007 Code)
   K.   Investigations And Complaints: It shall be the duty of the city manager
to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or
division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations
of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate
all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city
government. (1989 Code § 16-125)
   L.   Public Buildings: It shall be the duty of the city manager to exercise
general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other
public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the mayor and
city council. (1989 Code § 16-126)
   M.   Additional Duties: It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform
such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him
from time to time by ordinance or resolution, or other official action of the
mayor and city council. (1989 Code § 16-127)
1-6A-7: REMOVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Specified: The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by a
majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a
regular council meeting, subject to the provisions of the next succeeding
subsections. In case of his intended removal by the city council, the city
manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's
intention to remove him, at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of
his removal. If the city manager so requests, the city council shall provide in
writing reasons for the intended removal, which shall be provided to the city
manager within seven (7) days after the receipt of such request from the city
manager, and at least fifteen (15) days prior to the effective date of such
removal. (1989 Code § 16-131)
   B.   Hearing: Within seven (7) days after the delivery to the city manager
of such notice of intention to remove, he may, by written notification to the
city recorder, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter the city
council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual
meeting place, at which time the city manager may appear and be heard with or
without counsel. (1989 Code § 16-132)
   C.   Suspension Pending Hearing: After furnishing the city manager with
written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him from duty,
but his compensation shall continue until his removal by action of the city
council passed subsequent to the hearing. (1989 Code § 16-133)
   D.   Discretion Of Council: In removing the city manager, the city council
shall use its uncontrolled discretion, and its action shall be final and shall
not depend upon any particular showing of cause or degree of proof at the
hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to said
city council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to its action.
(1989 Code § 16-134)
   E.   Limitation On Removal: Notwithstanding the provisions of this section,
the city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in
office, during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any
general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the
city council is elected or when a new city council member is appointed. After
the expiration of said ninety (90) day period aforementioned, the provisions of
this section, as to the removal of said city manager, shall apply and be
effective. (1989 Code § 16-135; amd. 2007 Code)
1-6A-8: AGREEMENTS ON EMPLOYMENT:
Nothing stated in this article shall be construed as a limitation of the power
and authority of the mayor and city council to enter into any supplemental
agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of
employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this article. (1989 Code §
16-136)
ARTICLE B. CHIEF OF POLICE
SECTION:
1-6B-1: Authority, Duties And Responsibilities Of Chief Of Police
1-6B-1: AUTHORITY, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
The chief of police shall have the authority, duties and responsibilities as
specified in Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-918 and 10-3-919, as amended
from time to time. As amendments are made by the state legislature to the
duties and responsibilities of the chief of police as found in Utah Code
Annotated sections 10-3-918 and 10-3-919, or otherwise, such amendments shall
be automatically adopted and become effective at the time such statute becomes
effective. (Ord. 2005-30, 8-24-2005)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Conduct
1-7-1: CONDUCT:
Election for Mayor and City Council Members shall be conducted according to the
municipal election section of Utah State Code. (2007 Code; amd. Ord. 2023-22,
5-24-2023)
CHAPTER 8
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Request For Hearing
1-8-2: Form Of Request
1-8-3: Procedure
1-8-4: Not Additional Remedy
1-8-1: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in any ordinance of the city or any code
adopted by reference, a hearing before the city council may be requested by any
person:
   A.   Who is denied or refused a permit or license by any officer, agent or
employee of this city.
   B.   Whose permit or license is revoked, restricted, qualified or limited
from that for which it was first issued. (1989 Code § 1-411)
1-8-2: FORM OF REQUEST:
The request for hearing must be made in writing to the mayor or city recorder
and made within thirty (30) days following the date notice denying, refusing,
revoking, qualifying or restricting the license or permit is mailed by the city
to the applicant or license holder at his address as it appears on the
application or license. (1989 Code § 4-412)
1-8-3: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Time And Place: Following receipt of a request for hearing, the city
council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and place the
hearing is to be held.
   B.   Witnesses; Evidence: At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have the
right to hear and examine any witnesses the city may produce to support its
decision and to present his own evidence in support of his contention.
   C.   Decision Of City Council: The city council shall, within ten (10) days
following the conclusion of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who
requested the hearing of the decision of the city council. (1989 Code § 1-413)
1-8-4: NOT ADDITIONAL REMEDY:
This chapter shall not be construed so as to afford any aggrieved party more
than one hearing before the city council, nor shall the hearing provided in
this section apply to any criminal complaint or proceeding. (1989 Code § 1-414)
CHAPTER 9
PURCHASING POLICY
SECTION:
1-9-1: Purchasing Power And Authority
1-9-2: Bid Procedure
1-9-3: Exception To Bid Requirements
1-9-1: PURCHASING POWER AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   Department Head: The department head is vested with the power and
authority to approve all purchases of materials, supplies, equipment and public
improvements as outlined in the annual budget or up to a limit of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), if the item does not cause an overage to the department
budget.
   B.   City Manager Or Mayor: The city manager or mayor is vested with the
power and authority to approve all purchases of materials, supplies, equipment
and public improvements as outlined in the annual budget or up to a limit of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), if the item does not cause an overage to the
department budget.
   C.   Governing Body: The governing body is vested with the power and
authority to approve all purchases of material, supplies, equipment and public
improvements in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) that are not
already specified and approved in the department budget, if the item does not
cause an overage to the department budget. (Ord. 2006-18, 6-28-2006)
1-9-2: BID PROCEDURE:
   A.   Bids Required: Bids shall be required on all building improvements or
public works projects pursuant to the limits established by current state law.
   B.   Advertising: The advertisement for bid for all public improvements
(construction projects) shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of
general circulation, or posted in at least five (5) public places within the
city, no less than five (5) calendar days prior to the appointed time for the
opening of such bids.
   C.   Invitation To Dealers: The governing body (using its own discretion)
shall invite only reputable dealers to bid on materials, supplies and
equipment.
   D.   Bid Specifications: Under the discretion of the city manager, the
appropriate department shall prepare bid specifications for all materials,
supplies and equipment to be purchased under this section. The bid
specifications shall then be given to the dealers at least five (5) calendar
days prior to the appointed time for the opening of such bid.
   E.   Right Of Rejection: The governing body shall have the right to reject
any and all bids, and all notices calling for bids shall so state. If all bids
are rejected, the governing body may advertise anew in the same manner as
before. With improvements (construction projects), if, after twice advertising
as herein provided, no bid received shall be deemed satisfactory, the governing
body may proceed under its own direction to make the improvements.
   F.   Waiver Of Procedure: The governing body may waive the bidding
requirements where it determines, in its discretion, that a waiver is in the
best interest of the city, and bidding is not otherwise required by state law.
The waiver of bidding shall be based on a finding that it is unlikely the city
could find a lower bidder, there is an emergency that does not allow time for
bidding, or there is only one likely bidder. (Ord. 2006-18, 6-28-2006)
   G.   Local Vendor Preference:
      1.   In awarding bids for public work or for the procurement of supplies
or services, preference shall be given to local vendors unless such preference
is prohibited by federal law or by the terms of a federal grant or loan, the
proceeds of which are used to fund the public work or procurement of supplies
and services.
A "local vendor" is defined as a business having:
         a.   A commercial office, store, distribution center or other place of
business located within the boundaries of Washington City, with an intent to
remain on a permanent basis;
         b.   A current Washington City business license; and
         c.   At least one employee physically present at the local business
outlet.
      2.   All three (3) criteria must be met in order to qualify as a local
vendor. If there are no bidders who qualify as a local vendor, the same
preference may then be extended to Washington County under the conditions
below. If a low bid is submitted by a nonpreferred (nonlocal vendor) bidder,
the bid may be awarded to a local vendor, if the local vendor's bid is within
five percent (5%) of the low nonpreferred bid, and if the local vendor agrees,
in writing, within seventy two (72) hours after notification that it is the
qualified preferred bidder, to meet the low bid. Such notice shall contain the
exact bid submitted by the nonpreferred bidder, and the purchasing agent shall
enter into no contract until seventy two (72) hours have elapsed after
notification to the local vendor. The principal place of business of a local
vendor may be elsewhere as long as a local branch meeting the above criteria is
present. The domicile of one or more partners, owners, associates, directors,
employees or agents shall not qualify for constituting a local vendor in the
absence of an actual local business outlet. (Ord. 2011-02, 2-9-2011)
1-9-3: EXCEPTION TO BID REQUIREMENTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require bids to be called for or
contracts let for the conduct or management of any of the departments, business
or property of the city, or for lowering or repairing water and sewer mains, or
making connections with water and sewer mains, or for grading, repairing or
maintaining streets, sidewalks, bridges, culverts or conduits within the city.
(Ord. 2006-18, 6-28-2006)
CHAPTER 10
RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
1-10-1: Records Access And Management Act Adopted By Reference
1-10-1: RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah government records access and management act, Utah Code
Annotated section 63-2-101 et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by the city.
Any and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of this chapter
and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to penalty
provisions under this chapter if proceeded hereunder. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 11
CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE
SECTION:
1-11-1: Definitions
1-11-2: Filing Of Disclosure Statements
1-11-3: Time Of Filing
1-11-4: Contents Of Disclosure Statements
1-11-5: Public Information
1-11-6: Penalty
1-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
 
                      Any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an
                      elective office of the city; or received contributions,
CANDIDATE:            made expenditures, or consents to another person
                      receiving contributions or making expenditures, to bring
                      about the person's nomination or election to such office.
                      A gift, subscription, donation, loan, advance, or deposit
CONTRIBUTION:         of money or anything of value given to a candidate; a
                      loan made by a candidate deposited to the candidate's own
                      campaign; and in-kind contribution.
ELECTION:             Both primary and general elections.
                      Any disbursement from contributions; a purchase, payment,
EXPENDITURE:          distribution, loan, advance, deposit, gift of money, or
                      anything of value made for political purpose.
                      Anything of value other than money, that is accepted by
IN-KIND CONTRIBUTION: or coordinated with a candidate. (Ord. 2001-08, 8-8-2001;
                      amd. Ord. 2023-22, 5-24-2023)
 
1-11-2: FILING OF DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS:
Each candidate for elective office shall file with the city recorder dated,
signed and sworn financial reports which comply with this chapter. (Ord. 2001-
08, 8-8-2001; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2023-22, 5-24-2023)
1-11-3: TIME OF FILING:
The reports required by this chapter shall be filed in accordance with Utah
State Code. (Ord. 2001-08, 8-8-2001; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2023-22, 5-24-2023)
1-11-4: CONTENTS OF DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS:
   A.   Each candidate shall deposit a contribution in a separate campaign
account in a financial institution and may not deposit or mingle any campaign
contributions received into a personal or business account.
   B.   The statement filed shall include:
      1.   Each contribution, including in-kind and any other non monetary
contributions, of more than fifty dollars ($50.00) received by the candidate,
up to five days before the campaign finance statement is due, excluding a
contribution previously reported, and the name of the donor if known.
      2.   An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or
less received by the candidate; and
      3.   Each expenditure for political purposes made up to and including
five days before the campaign finance statement is due, excluding an
expenditure previously reported; the amount thereof, and the recipient of each
expenditure.
      4.   The total amount of all contributions and expenditures if the
candidate receives five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less in contributions and
spends five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less on the candidate's campaign.
   C.   Within thirty (30) days after receiving a contribution that is cash or
a negotiable instrument, greater than fifty dollars ($50.00), from an anonymous
donor, the candidate shall disburse the amount of the contribution to: the
treasurer of the state of a political subdivision for deposit into the state's
or political subdivision's general fund; or an organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under Section 501(c)3, Internal Revenue Code. (Ord.
2001-08, 8-8-2001; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2023-22, 5-24-2023)
1-11-5: PUBLIC INFORMATION:
The statements required by this chapter shall be public documents and shall be
available for public inspection and copying during all regular city business
hours. (Ord. 2001-08, 8-8-2001; amd. Ord. 2023-22, 5-24-2023)
1-11-6: PENALTY:
If a candidate fails to file a campaign finance statement:
   A.   The City Recorder may send and electronic notice to the candidate that
states:
      1.   The Candidate failed to timely file the campaign finance statement;
and
      2.   That, if the candidate fails to file the report within twenty-four
(24) hours after the deadline for filing the report, the candidate will be
disqualified; and
      3.   May impose a fifty dollars ($50.00) fine.
   B.   The City Recorder shall disqualify a candidate and inform the
appropriate election official that the candidate is disqualified if the
candidate fails to file a campaign finance statement within twenty-four (24)
hours after the deadline for filing the report.
   C.   If a candidate is disqualified, the election official shall:
      1.   Notify every opposing candidate for the municipal office that the
candidate is disqualified; and
      2.   Send an email notification to each voter within the municipality for
whom the election official has an email address informing the voter that the
candidate is disqualified, and the votes cast for the candidate will not be
counted; and
      3.   Post a notice of the disqualification on the Utah Public Notice
Website and the City's Website; and
      4.   If practicable, remove the candidate's name from the ballot; and
      5.   May not count any votes for that candidate. (Ord. 2001-08, 8-8-2001;
amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2023-22, 5-24-2023)
CHAPTER 12
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
SECTION:
1-12-1: Short Title
1-12-2: Definitions
1-12-3: Franchise Grant
1-12-4: Franchise Purposes
1-12-5: Nonexclusive Franchise
1-12-6: Application
1-12-7: Duration
1-12-8: Police Powers
1-12-9: Use Of Rights Of Way
1-12-10: Pole Or Conduit Agreements
1-12-11: Franchise Fees
1-12-12: Taxes
1-12-13: Customer Service Standards
1-12-14: Access
1-12-15: Financial And Insurance Requirements
1-12-16: Other Authorizations
1-12-17: Liquidated Damages
1-12-18: Rules And Regulations Of The City
1-12-19: Delegation Of Powers
1-12-20: Design, Functionality And Technical Standards
1-12-21: Provision Of Cable Service
1-12-22: Construction Standards
1-12-23: Street Cut Or Repair
1-12-24: Safety Requirements
1-12-25: Regulation Of Rates And Charges
1-12-26: Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
1-12-27: Equal Employment Opportunity
1-12-28: Reimbursement
1-12-29: Franchise Renewal
1-12-30: Franchise Revocation
1-12-31: Miscellaneous Provisions
1-12-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE ORDINANCE. (Ord.
2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein where capitalized. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural. Words otherwise not defined shall be given their common and
ordinary meaning. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
ACCESS: Includes public, educational and governmental access and means the
availability for noncommercial use by various public, educational and
governmental agencies, institutions and organizations in the community,
including the city and its designees, of a particular channel on the cable
system to receive and distribute video programming to subscribers, including,
but not limited to:
   A.   "Public access" means access where local institutions or residents are
the primary users having editorial control over programming and services.
   B.   "Educational access" means access where schools are the primary users
having editorial control over programming and services.
   C.   "Governmental access" means access where governmental institutions or
their designees are the primary users having editorial control over programming
and services.
ACCESS CHANNEL: Channel capacity designated for public, educational or
governmental access use, or otherwise made available to facilitate access
programming.
APPLICANT: Any person or entity that applies for an initial franchise.
CABLE SERVICE: The one-way transmission to customers of video programming or
other programming service, and customer interaction, if any, which is required
for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming
service.
CABLE SYSTEM: Any facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple customers within a community, but such term does not
include: a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations; b) a facility that serves customers
without using any public right of way; c) a facility of a common carrier which
is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the
communications act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable
system other than for purposes of section 621(c) of the communications act to
the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to customers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on demand services; d) an open video system that complies with
federal statutes and regulations; or e) any facilities of any electric utility
used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
CITY: Washington City, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah, and all of
the area within its boundaries, as such may change from time to time.
CITY COUNCIL: The Washington City council, or its successor, the governing body
of the city.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT: The communications act of 1934, as amended by, among other
things, the cable communications policy act of 1984, the cable consumer
protection and competition act of 1992, and the telecommunications act of 1996,
as it may be further amended from time to time.
CUSTOMER: Any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose,
cable service provided by a franchisee by means of or in connection with the
cable system and whose premises are physically wired and lawfully activated to
receive cable service from franchisee's cable system.
CUSTOMER SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE OR CSR: Any person employed by the franchisee
to assist or provide service to customers, whether by answering public
telephone lines, answering customers' questions or performing other customer
service related tasks.
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS: Those customer service standards set forth herein
and as hereafter amended that are applicable to franchisees.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
FRANCHISE: An agreement that authorizes a person or entity to construct,
operate, maintain or reconstruct a cable system. Upon the written acceptance by
a franchisee, the agreement constitutes a contract between the city and
franchisee.
FRANCHISE AREA: The area within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city to be
served by a franchisee as specified in the franchise.
FRANCHISEE: The person, firm, corporation or entity to whom or which a
"franchise", as hereinabove defined, is granted by the city council under this
chapter and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm,
corporation or entity.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Those hours during which most similar businesses in the
city are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must
include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend
hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions that are within the
control of the franchisee. Those conditions that are not within the control of
the franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those
conditions that are ordinarily within the control of the franchisee include,
but are not limited to, special promotions, pay per view events, rate
increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade
of the cable system.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: All of the following which have been dedicated
to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under
public authority or by others and are located within the city: streets,
roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, sidewalks, easements and
similar public property and areas.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
channels. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-3: FRANCHISE GRANT:
It is unlawful to engage in or commence construction, operation or maintenance
of a cable system in the city without a franchise issued under this chapter.
The city council may, by ordinance, issue a nonexclusive franchise to
construct, operate and maintain a cable system within the city to any person or
entity, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who applies for
authority to furnish cable service which complies with the terms and conditions
of this chapter, and provided that such person or entity also agrees to comply
with all of the provisions of the franchise. However, this shall not be deemed
to require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or entity. The
city council may restrict the number of franchises should it determine such a
restriction would be in the public interest. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-4: FRANCHISE PURPOSES:
A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall:
   A.   Permit the franchisee to engage in the business of operating a cable
system and providing cable service within the city;
   B.   Permit the franchisee to erect, install, construct, repair,
reconstruct, replace and retain wires, cables, related electronic equipment,
conduits and other property in connection with the operation of the cable
system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across rights of way within the
city; and
   C.   Set forth the obligations of the franchisee under the franchise. (Ord.
2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-5: NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive and not
preclude the city from granting other or future franchises or permits. (Ord.
2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-6: APPLICATION:
   A.   An applicant for an initial franchise shall submit to the city a
written application on a form provided by the city, at the time and place
specified by the city for accepting applications, and accompanied by the
designated application fee. An application fee, as set in the master fee
schedule, shall accompany the application to cover costs associated with
processing the application, including, without limitation, costs of
administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the
applicant, notice and publication requirements, and document preparation
expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the applicant
shall pay the difference to the city within thirty (30) days following receipt
of an itemized statement of such costs. Conversely, if such costs are less than
the application fee, the city shall refund the difference to the applicant.
   B.   An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall
contain, at a minimum:
      1.   The legal name and business address of the applicant;
      2.   The name and contact information of the applicant's contact person;
      3.   A statement as to the proposed franchise and information relating to
the characteristics and location of the proposed cable system;
      4.   A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise
of the applicant in the cable system field;
      5.   Information demonstrating the applicant's legal, technical and
financial ability to construct and operate the proposed cable system;
      6.   A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a
partnership, members, if a limited liability company, or the percentage of
stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five percent (5%) or
greater interest, if a corporation;
      7.   A list of officers, directors and key employees of the applicant,
together with a description of the background and experience of all such
persons;
      8.   The names and addresses of any parent entity or subsidiary of the
applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in
whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant;
      9.   A proposed construction and service schedule, designating the
proposed geographic areas within the franchise area to be constructed and
served by the applicant during the franchise term, and setting forth specific
benchmarks for determining when such construction shall be completed and
service commenced;
      10.   A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications
of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges
as to each of any said classifications, including installation charges, service
charges, and special, extraordinary or other charges. The purchase price,
terms, and nature of any optional or required equipment, device, or other thing
to be offered for sale to any subscriber shall be described and explained in
detail;
      11.   A specific description of applicant's planned system technical
design, upstream and downstream capacity and speed, provision for analog or
digital services or packages, distribution of fiber, planned count of
households per residential node, and any other information necessary to
demonstrate that the applicant's technology will be deployed so as to be able
to successfully offer cable services in the proposed locations;
      12.   The applicant's proposed access channel capacity and capital
support;
      13.   The requested term of the franchise;
      14.   A statement whether the applicant holds an existing authorization
to access the rights of way and the basis for such authority or asserted
authority; and
      15.   Any other reasonable information that the city may request.
The city shall be allowed the opportunity to ask relevant follow up questions
and obtain further information from whatever source. A refusal by an applicant
to cooperate or provide requested information is sufficient grounds for the
city to deny an application.
   C.   Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise and after
obtaining any additional information the city in its sole discretion deems
appropriate from any source, a hearing shall be scheduled to allow public
comment. At the hearing, the city council shall receive public comment
regarding the following:
      1.   Whether the public will benefit from granting a franchise to the
applicant;
      2.   Whether the applicant appears to have adequate legal, financial and
technical qualifications and capabilities to build, operate and maintain a
cable system in the city;
      3.   Whether the applicant has any conflicting interests, either
financial or commercial, that will be contrary to the interests of the city;
      4.   Whether the applicant will comply with all of the terms and
conditions placed upon a franchisee by the franchise, this chapter and other
lawfully applicable local laws and regulations; and
      5.   Whether the applicant will comply with all relevant federal and
state laws and regulations pertaining to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the cable system.
   D.   Within the time frame prescribed by applicable law, the city council
shall decide whether to grant a franchise and on what conditions. The city
council's decision shall be based upon the application, any additional
information submitted by the applicant or obtained by the city from any source
and public comments. The city council may grant one or more franchises or may
decline to grant any franchise. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-7: DURATION:
The term of any franchise, and all rights, privileges, obligations and
restrictions pertaining thereto, shall be specified in the franchise. The
effective date of any franchise shall be as specified in the franchise. (Ord.
2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-8: POLICE POWERS:
In accepting any franchise, the franchisee acknowledges that its rights
thereunder are subject to the police powers of the city to adopt and enforce
ordinances necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public, and it
agrees to comply with all applicable laws enacted by the city pursuant to such
power. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-9: USE OF RIGHTS OF WAY:
For the purposes of operating and maintaining a cable system in the city, a
franchisee may place and maintain within the rights of way such property and
equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable
system. Prior to construction of the cable system in the rights of way, the
franchisee shall procure all necessary permits, pay all applicable fees in
connection therewith and comply with all applicable laws, regulations,
resolutions and ordinances, including, but not limited to, land use and zoning
requirements. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-10: POLE OR CONDUIT AGREEMENTS:
No franchise shall relieve franchisee of any of its obligations involved in
obtaining pole or conduit agreements from any department of the city, any
utility company or from others maintaining facilities in the rights of way.
(Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-11: FRANCHISE FEES:
The franchisee shall pay the city franchise fees in accordance with the terms
of the franchise and applicable law. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-12: TAXES:
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the franchisee's obligation to pay
applicable local, state and federal taxes. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-13: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS:
   A.   Policy: A franchisee will first resolve customer inquiries and
complaints without delay and without involvement of the city. Where a given
complaint is not addressed by the franchisee to the customer's satisfaction,
the city may intervene.
These standards are intended to be of general application. A franchisee is free
to exceed these standards for the benefit of its customers. However, the
franchisee shall be relieved of obligations hereunder if it is unable to
perform due to a force majeure event affecting a significant portion of the
franchise area.
   B.   Customer Service:
      1.   Courtesy: All employees of the franchisee shall be courteous,
knowledgeable and helpful and shall provide effective and satisfactory service
in all contacts with customers.
      2.   Availability And Accessibility, In Person: The franchisee must
maintain, at a minimum, one customer service center located in Washington
County, Utah. This customer service location shall at all times allow customers
to make payments, return equipment or get assistance from knowledgeable staff.
The customer service center shall be open Monday through Saturday, excluding
legal holidays, with sufficient hours necessary to meet customer demand. The
customer service center will be staffed to meet all customer needs with on site
customer service representatives. If, however, the customer service center is
required to relocate, the franchisee shall be allowed a reasonable period of
time to establish a new location.
      3.   Availability And Accessibility, On The Telephone: A CSR will be
available to respond to customer inquiries during normal business hours. The
franchisee shall maintain local or toll free telephone access lines that shall
be available during normal business hours for service/repair requests and
billing inquiries.
The franchisee shall retain sufficient CSRs and telephone line capacity to
ensure that, during normal operating conditions, telephone calls to service/
repair and billing inquiry lines are answered within thirty (30) seconds or
less, and that any transfers are made within thirty (30) seconds. This standard
shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time, measured on a
quarterly basis under normal operating conditions. Under normal operating
conditions, the total number of calls receiving busy signals shall not exceed
three percent (3%) of the total telephone calls.
The franchisee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to
measure compliance with any of the telephone answering standards above unless
and until the city requests such actions based on a historical record of
customer complaints indicating a clear failure to comply.
   C.   Responsiveness:
      1.   The franchisee shall complete all standard aerial installations
within seven (7) days after an order has been placed, unless otherwise
requested by the customer. The franchisee shall schedule all standard
underground installations within seven (7) days after an order has been placed,
unless otherwise requested by the customer. "Standard" installations shall
include those that are located within one hundred fifty (150) aerial feet or
seventy five (75) underground trench feet of the franchisee's distribution
system. This standard must be met ninety five percent (95%) of the time under
normal operating conditions as measured on a quarterly basis. If the customer
requests a nonstandard installation, or the franchisee determines that a
nonstandard installation is required, the franchisee shall provide the customer
in advance with a total installation cost estimate and an estimated date of
completion.
      2.   Under normal operating conditions, all temporary cable drops shall
be converted to a permanent drop within no more than three (3) calendar weeks
from the initial installation or at a time mutually agreed upon between the
franchisee and customer.
      3.   Customers requesting installation of cable service or repair service
to an existing installation may choose any available four (4) hour block of
time for the appointment during normal business hours.
      4.   The franchisee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for
service under the provisions of this subsection when a technician arrives
within the agreed upon time. If the customer is absent when the technician
arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of timely arrival. A
record that notice was provided shall be kept by the franchisee.
      5.   If a franchisee representative fails to keep an installation or
service appointment for any reason, the franchisee will contact the customer
before the end of the scheduled appointment and reschedule the appointment at a
time convenient for the customer.
      6.   The franchisee shall respond to a customer's letter in writing
within two (2) weeks of receipt of the letter. The franchisee shall initiate
resolution to a customer's inquiry, complaint, general question or comment made
by telephone or e-mail within forty eight (48) hours.
      7.   Any difficulties that cannot be resolved by the CSR shall be
referred to the appropriate supervisor who shall use his/her best efforts to
contact the customer within twenty four (24) hours of initial contact and
resolve the problem within a mutually agreeable time frame.
   D.   Repairs And Outages:
      1.   The franchisee shall interrupt service only for good cause and for
the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions that the franchisee
anticipates will last more than four (4) hours shall occur during periods of
minimum use of the cable system as reasonably determined by the franchisee.
      2.   If a customer calls to report poor signal quality or interruptions
attributable to the franchisee's equipment, the franchisee shall begin working
on the problem no later than the next day following the customer's call,
provided that the customer is available or at such later time as is convenient
for the customer. If an appointment is necessary, the customer may choose a
four (4) hour block of time during normal business hours.
      3.   Upon discovery of an outage affecting three (3) or more customers,
the franchisee shall initiate its outage repair process within two (2) hours,
under normal operating conditions.
      4.   A franchisee shall initiate repairs to customer reported service
interruptions, for any cause beyond the control of the franchisee, within
twenty four (24) hours after the conditions beyond its control have been
corrected.
      5.   Under normal operating conditions, if after twenty four (24) hours
service is not restored to a customer, a franchisee shall, upon a customer's
request, provide a refund or credit or other compensation of equal or greater
value.
      6.   The franchisee will track and record all outages and service
interruptions that occur within the franchise area.
   E.   Bills, Credits, Refunds And Deposits: If a customer requests
disconnection of any or all services, billing for affected services shall end
on the same day as the request, or on the future date for which the disconnect
is ordered. However, the customer may continue to be billed for equipment until
returned to the franchisee. The franchisee shall issue a credit or refund to a
customer within thirty (30) business days after the close of the billing cycle
following the return of the equipment and request for disconnection. If a
customer was required to provide a deposit, that deposit must be returned when
appropriate.
   F.   Treatment Of Property:
      1.   Removal or trimming of trees and shrubs in the right of way will be
subject to the regulations of the city.
      2.   The franchisee shall repair any damage or restore any property to as
good a condition as before the work causing such damage or disturbance was
initiated. The franchisee shall repair, replace or compensate all property
owners for damages resulting from the franchisee's installation, construction,
service or repair activities.
      3.   Except in the case of an emergency involving public safety or
service interruption to a large number of customers, the franchisee shall give
reasonable notice to property owners or legal tenants prior to entering upon
private premises, and the notice shall specify the work to be performed;
provided that, in the case of planned construction operations, such notice
shall be delivered or provided at least twenty four (24) hours prior to entry.
All work done in the right of way shall be subject to time requirements of the
permit.
      4.   Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing access or entry to
private property, or any other property, where such right to access or entry is
not otherwise provided by law.
      5.   For major construction or installation projects, the franchisee
shall notify by mail or door hanger the adjacent property owners/legal tenants
in advance of the right of way work. In the case of an emergency, the
franchisee shall attempt to contact the property owner or legal tenant in
person, and in the event personal contact is not made, the franchisee shall
leave a door hanger notice.
      6.   The franchisee shall clean all areas surrounding any work site of
debris caused by the franchisee's activities.
   G.   Services For Customers With Disabilities:
      1.   For any customer with a disability, the franchisee shall upon a
customer request and at no charge deliver and/or pick up converters at the
customer's home.
      2.   The franchisee shall provide TDD/TTY service with trained operators
who can provide assistance for hearing impaired customers at no charge.
      3.   The franchisee shall comply with the Americans with disabilities
act.
   H.   Customer Information:
      1.   The franchisee shall provide to customers an accurate, comprehensive
service agreement and customer installation packet upon installation, including
the following information:
         a.   Products and services offered by the franchisee, including
channel positions of programming carried on the cable system.
         b.   The franchisee's complete range of service options and the prices
for those services and conditions of subscription to programming and other
services.
         c.   Installation and service maintenance policies, including the
customer's and franchisee's responsibilities for equipment.
         d.   Billing and complaint procedures for investigation and resolution
of customer service complaints, including the address and telephone number of
the franchisee's office(s), the franchisee's policies on deposits, credit
balances and returned check charges.
         e.   Policies concerning protection of customer privacy as required
under law.
         f.   The availability of a parental control/lock out device and the
procedures for channel blocking.
         g.   Service termination procedure.
         h.   A description of the manner that will be used to provide notice
of changes in rates, services or service terms and conditions.
         i.   The phone number of the customer service department that is
responsible for handling cable questions and complaints for the franchisee.
This information shall be prominently displayed in the installation packet.
      2.   The franchisee shall provide customers with written notification of
any changes in rates, programming, services or channel positions as soon as
possible in writing. Customers shall be given a description of the changes, a
phone number for questions and the effective date. Notice must be given to
customers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the
change is within the control of the franchisee.
      3.   All officers, agents and employees of the franchisee, its
contractors and subcontractors who are in personal contact with customers shall
have visible identification cards bearing their name and photograph.
      4.   Every vehicle of the franchisee, its contractors and subcontractors,
shall be clearly identified to the public as a vehicle of the franchisee.
   I.   Safety:
      1.   The franchisee shall install and locate its facilities, cable system
and equipment in compliance with all federal, state, local and company safety
standards, and in such manner as shall not endanger persons or property.
      2.   Whenever the franchisee receives notice that an unsafe condition
exists with respect to its equipment, the franchisee shall investigate such
condition immediately, and shall take such measures as are necessary to remove
or eliminate any unsafe condition.
   J.   Complaints To The City:
      1.   Any customer shall be entitled to lodge any complaint directly with
the city. The customer may lodge the complaint either by calling the city or by
filing a written complaint, by letter or in electronic form.
      2.   If the city decides that further action is warranted, the city may
intercede and attempt to help reach a resolution and/or require the franchisee
to address the inquiry in a timely manner. Upon request by the city, the
franchisee shall notify the city of the status of the inquiry and any
subsequent resolution.
      3.   The franchisee shall maintain, in a manner consistent with the
privacy rights of customers, an accurate and comprehensive file of complaints
regarding the cable system or the franchisee's operation of the cable system,
by number and type and their disposition; service requests, identifying the
number and nature of the requests and their disposition; and outages, service
interruptions and their disposition.
   K.   Remedying Violations: If the city has reason to believe that the
franchisee has failed to comply with any of these standards, or has failed to
perform in a timely manner, or if similar complaints repetitively arise, the
city may require in writing that the franchisee remedy the noncompliance. If
the noncompliance is not remedied to the satisfaction of the city, the city may
opt to follow the liquidated damages procedures or seek other remedies set
forth in the franchise, or pursue any other remedies at law or in equity. (Ord.
2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-14: ACCESS:
   A.   The city supports the production of access programming dedicated to the
educational, civic and recreational needs and interests of the city's
residents. In connection therewith, the city desires to encourage the
production of quality local programming meeting the following objectives:
      1.   Create a community telecommunications network for the purpose of
disseminating public, educational and governmental information and events to
the city's residents;
      2.   Coordinate production of programming in cooperation with the city's
public, educational and governmental entities;
      3.   Produce quality programming that will inform, educate, entertain and
enlighten the city's residents and keep them apprised of events and issues in
the community; and
      4.   Foster community spirit and identity by utilizing cable
communications as a vehicle for sharing skills, talents and knowledge of the
city's residents.
   B.   Consistent with the foregoing policy, and to the fullest extent
permitted by applicable law, the city may require a franchisee to provide,
support and/or accommodate access programming through such means as the city
deems suitable. The terms of such provision, support, and/or accommodation of
access programming shall be set forth in the franchise. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-
2011)
1-12-15: FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Franchisee shall comply with the financial and insurance requirements set forth
in the franchise. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-16: OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS:
Franchisee shall comply with and obtain, at its own expense, all permits,
licenses and other authorizations required by federal, state and local laws,
rules, regulations and applicable resolutions and ordinances which now exist or
are hereafter lawfully adopted. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-17: LIQUIDATED DAMAGES:
Because it may be difficult to calculate the harm to the city in the event of a
breach of a franchise by a franchisee, the city may agree to liquidated damages
as a reasonable estimation of the actual damages to the city. The scope and
amount of any such liquidated damages shall be set forth in the franchise.
(Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-18: RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE CITY:
The right and power is reserved by the city to promulgate such additional rules
and regulations as it may find necessary in the exercise of its lawful police
powers and in furtherance of the terms and conditions of a franchise and this
chapter, and as permitted by applicable state and federal law. In the event of
a conflict between a franchise and this chapter, the franchise shall govern.
(Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-19: DELEGATION OF POWERS:
Any right or power of the city may be delegated by the city to any officer,
employee, department or board of the city, or to such other person or entity as
the city may designate to act on its behalf. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-20: DESIGN, FUNCTIONALITY AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
Franchisee shall design, construct, install, operate and maintain its cable
system in a manner consistent with all applicable federal, state and local laws
and regulations, FCC technical standards and the franchise. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-
22-2011)
1-12-21: PROVISION OF CABLE SERVICE:
Franchisee shall offer and extend cable service to customers in accordance with
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and the franchise.
(Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-22: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   All facilities constructed or operated under this chapter shall be
installed and maintained at such places in or upon such rights of way and
public places as shall not interfere with the free passage of traffic, and
shall conform to federal standards, state requirements and city regulations.
   B.   Franchisee shall be subject to any and all requirements established by
the city with regard to the placement of franchisee's facilities and equipment
located in the rights of way and on other public property. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-
2011)
1-12-23: STREET CUT OR REPAIR:
The franchisee shall guarantee the durability and structural integrity of any
street cut or repair made by it or its agents which is necessary for the
construction, installation, operation, repair or maintenance of franchisee's
facilities, provided that no action by an unrelated third party materially
affects the integrity of franchisee's street cut or repair. Franchisee shall
repair or replace, at no expense to the city, any failed street cut or repair
which was completed by franchisee or franchisee's agent(s). (Ord. 2011-04, 6-
22-2011)
1-12-24: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
The franchisee shall, at all times, install, maintain and use commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to
cause damage or injuries to the public. In furtherance thereof, the franchisee
must comply with the city's traffic control requirements, including, for
example, but without limitation, the use of signal devices, warning signs and
flaggers when appropriate. All of franchisee's structures, cables, lines,
equipment and connections in, over, under and upon the rights of way and public
ways or other places in the franchise area, wherever situated or located, shall
at all times be kept and maintained in a safe condition. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-
2011)
1-12-25: REGULATION OF RATES AND CHARGES:
The city may regulate franchisee's rates and charges to the full extent
permitted by law. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-26: DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   The franchisee shall not deny cable service or otherwise discriminate
against customers or others on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, age, disability or other protected classes.
   B.   Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential
residential cable customers because of the income of the residents of the local
area in which such group resides. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-27: EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY:
The franchisee shall strictly adhere to and comply with the equal employment
opportunity requirements of federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-
2011)
1-12-28: REIMBURSEMENT:
To the extent allowed by applicable law, the city may require a franchisee to
reimburse the city for the city's reasonable processing and review expenses in
connection with a sale or transfer of a franchise or a change in control of a
franchise or franchisee. In connection with the foregoing, the city will send
franchisee an itemized description of all such charges, and franchisee shall
pay such amount within thirty (30) days after the receipt of such description.
(Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-29: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
Franchise renewals shall be conducted in accordance with applicable law. The
city and franchisee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at
any time during the term of a franchise. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-30: FRANCHISE REVOCATION:
Any franchise granted by the city may be revoked during the period of such
franchise, as provided in the franchise, subject to the procedural requirements
provided for therein. A failure by the franchisee to comply with any of the
material provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this code.
(Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
1-12-31: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all
applicable federal, state and local laws, and shall apply to any franchise
hereafter accepted by a franchisee.
   B.   This chapter supersedes or repeals the provision(s) of any ordinance(s)
or resolution(s) that is(are) inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   The captions throughout this chapter are intended to facilitate the
reading hereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of
any part of this chapter.
   D.   A franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligations to comply with
any or all of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the
city to demand prompt compliance.
   E.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all franchisees and cable
systems as permitted under applicable law. (Ord. 2011-04, 6-22-2011)
CHAPTER 13
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Corporate Seal
1-13-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
   A.   Described: The seal heretofore provided and used, by and for the city,
is described as follows: circular in form, one and three-fourths inches (13/4")
in diameter, and the impression of which represents a cotton blossom graphic as
approved in the "Washington City Image & Brand Standards Manual", adopted March
14, 2007, and the inscription "The Great Seal of Washington City, Utah", and
two (2) stars in the margin, is hereby declared to be the corporate seal of the
city.
   B.   Facsimile: A facsimile of the corporate seal is on file in the city.
(Ord. 2010-04, 2-10-2010)
CHAPTER 14
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND RENEWAL AGENCY
SECTION:
1-14-1: Creation
1-14-2: Official Name
1-14-3: Geographic Boundaries
1-14-4: Powers
1-14-5: Governing Body
1-14-6: Notice
1-14-7: Certificate Of Creation
1-14-1: CREATION:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 17C-1-201(1) of the act, the city creates
a community development and renewal agency (the "agency"), contingent upon the
issuance by the Utah lieutenant governor of a certificate of creation under
section 67-1a-6.5 of the Utah code. (Ord. 2012-08, 5-23-2012)
1-14-2: OFFICIAL NAME:
The official name of the agency is the "Washington City community development
and renewal agency". (Ord. 2012-08, 5-23-2012)
1-14-3: GEOGRAPHIC BOUNDARIES:
The geographic boundaries of the agency are and shall always be coterminous
with the geographic boundaries of the unincorporated area of the city. Any
change in the boundaries of the city after the effective date hereof will
automatically, and without any further action required, constitute a similar
change in the boundaries of the agency. (Ord. 2012-08, 5-23-2012)
1-14-4: POWERS:
Upon creation, the agency will be vested with all the powers set forth in the
act and as otherwise provided by law. The agency and all of its officers and
employees will be governed by bylaws as adopted and amended from time to time
by the governing body of the agency. The bylaws will be available for public
review upon reasonable request. (Ord. 2012-08, 5-23-2012)
1-14-5: GOVERNING BODY:
The governing body of the agency will be a board consisting of the members of
the city council. Any change in the composition of the city council will
automatically, and without any further action required, constitute a similar
change in the composition of the agency board. (Ord. 2012-08, 5-23-2012)
1-14-6: NOTICE:
Following the adoption of this chapter, the city recorder will cause to be
prepared and filed with the Utah lieutenant governor's office a notice of
impending boundary action (the "notice") in substantially the form attached to
the ordinance codified herein. The appropriate officials of the city are
authorized and directed to sign and seal the notice. (Ord. 2012-08, 5-23-2012)
1-14-7: CERTIFICATE OF CREATION:
Upon the issuance by the Utah lieutenant governor's office of a certificate of
creation under Utah Code Annotated section 67-1a-6.5, the agency will be
created and incorporated, and the city recorder will submit or cause to be
submitted to the county recorder the original notice, the original certificate
of creation, and a certified copy of ordinance 2012-08. (Ord. 2012-08, 5-23-
2012)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Purpose
2-1-2: Established
2-1-3: Duties Of Commission
2-1-4: Historic Places
2-1-5: Historic Sites List
2-1-6: Historic Landmark Register
2-1-1: PURPOSE:
The city recognizes that the historical heritage of the community is among its
most valued and important assets. It is therefore the intent of the city to
identify, preserve, protect and enhance historic areas and sites lying within
the city limits.
   A.   The role of the Washington City Historic Preservation Commission is to
serve as an advisory group to encourage, educate and assist in establishing a
local landmark register which provides historical recognition, and links that
recognition to ascertain benefits.
   B.   The Historic Preservation Commission shall establish and utilize
nationally accepted rehabilitation guidelines to assist the city and owners of
historic property in preserving important features of their buildings. (Ord.
2023-33, 12-6-2023)
2-1-2: ESTABLISHED:
A Historic Preservation Commission is hereby established by the city with the
following provisions:
   A.   The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of five (5) voting
members, each of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, and one (1) current member of the City Council as
a non-voting member appointed by the Mayor. No person shall be appointed or
serve as a voting member of the Historic Preservation Commission, unless he/she
shall be a resident of the City.
   B.   Professional Members: To the extent available in the community, two (2)
Commission Members shall be professionals, as deemed by national park service
regulations, for the disciplines of history, archaeology, planning,
architecture or architectural history.
   C.   Meetings: The Commission shall meet twice each year as established by
the City Council, which meetings shall comply with applicable noticing and/or
advertising provisions of Utah Public Meeting Laws.
   D.   Minutes: Written minutes of each Commission meeting shall be prepared
and made available for public inspection.
   E.   Term: The term of office of a voting member of the Historical
Preservation Commission shall be four (4) years and shall be filled in
staggered terms every 2 years. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
City Council, may reappoint Commission Members for any number of subsequent
terms.
   F.   The Historic Preservation Commission functions as an advisory board to
the City Council and as such, is a recommending body only. (Ord. 2023-33, 12-6-
2023)
2-1-3: DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following duties:
   A.   Survey And Inventory Community Historic Resources: The Historic
Preservation Commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of the
historic, architectural and archaeological resources within the community. The
survey shall be compatible with the state inventory of historic and
archaeological sites. Survey and inventory shall be maintained and shall be
open to the public. The survey shall be updated at least every ten (10) years.
   B.   Review Proposed Nominations To National Register Of Historical Places:
The Historic Preservation Commission shall review and comment to the state
historic preservation officer on all proposed national register nominations for
properties within the boundaries of the city. When the Historic Preservation
Commission considers a national register nomination which is not normally
evaluated by professionals in a specific discipline and that discipline is not
represented on the Commission, the Commission shall, with prior approval of the
City Council, seek expertise in that area before rendering its decision.
      1.   Public Hearing: Upon recommendation by the commission that property
be nominated for inclusion on the national register, or upon recommendation by
the planning commission that a site be designated as a landmark site pursuant
to this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing preceded by
giving sufficient written notice to the owners and occupants of the affected
property and neighbors within 300 feet at least 14 days before the meeting. The
notice shall designate whether the subject property is nominated for inclusion
on the national register or whether it is being proposed as a landmark site
because of its historical, architectural and cultural significance. The owners,
occupants and any party known to be affected by a proposed historic landmark
shall be given written notification of such recommendation or nomination as
herein provided by utilizing the most current city and county records to obtain
current addresses.
   C.   Provide Advice And Information: The Historic Preservation Commission
shall act in an advisory role to other officials and governmental departments
regarding the identification and protection of local historic and
archaeological resources.
      The Historic Preservation Commission shall work toward the continuing
education of citizens regarding historic and community history. (Ord. 2023-33,
12-6-2023)
2-1-4: HISTORIC PLACES:
   A.   Notice of Alteration: While a site nominated for the National Register
of Historic Places shall be subject to federal and state regulations affecting
the same, properties designated as landmark sites pursuant to this chapter may
be demolished, materially altered, remodeled, relocated or put to a different
use only after one hundred twenty (120) days’ written notice of the owner’s
proposed action has been given to the commission. During this one hundred
twenty (120) day period, the commission may negotiate with the owner of the
landmark and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving
the property. The commission may reduce the waiting period required by this
section in any case where the owner would suffer extreme hardship, not
including loss of profit, unless a reduction in the required period were
allowed. On the other hand, where application for landmark site designation has
been submitted to the planning commission and before decision by the city
council, the commission may cause an additional waiting period to be imposed
prohibiting demolition, material alteration, remodeling or relocation until
there has been action of non-recommendation by the planning commission or
action by the city council.
   B.   Maintenance: Neither the owner nor occupant of a structure nominated
for inclusion on the national register or designated as a landmark site
pursuant to this chapter shall permit such structure or landmark to fall into a
state of disrepair which may result in the deterioration of any exterior
appurtenance or architectural feature so as to produce or tend to produce, in
the judgment of the commission, a detrimental effect upon the life and
character of the landmark or structure in question, including, but not limited
to:
      1.   The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
      2.   The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
      3.   The deterioration of exterior chimneys;
      4.   The deterioration or crumbling of exterior plaster or mortar;
      5.   The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and
foundations, including broken windows or doors; or
      6.   The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the
creation of any hazardous or unsafe conditions.
   C.   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a class C misdemeanor or lesser offense, as determined by the city
attorney and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1. Any person who filed with the commission and who refused to furnish,
upon demand by the commission, any information relating to such application or
request, or who willfully makes any false statement in such application or
request, shall be also liable for such misdemeanor or lesser offense. For the
purpose of this chapter, each day during which there exists any violation of
any provision herein shall constitute a separate violation of such provision.
(Ord. 2023-33, 12-6-2023)
2-1-5: HISTORIC SITES LIST:
The Historic Preservation Commission may designate historic properties to the
historic sites list as a means of providing recognition to and encouraging the
preservation of historic properties in the community.
   A.   Criteria For Designating Properties To City Historic Sites List: Any
district, building, structure, object or site may be designated for the
historic sites list if it meets all the criteria outlined below:
      1.    It is located within the official boundaries of the city.
      2.    It is at least fifty (50) years old.
      3.   It retains its historic integrity, in that there are no major
alterations or additions that have obscured or destroyed the significant
historic features. Major alterations that would destroy the historic integrity
include, but are not limited to, changes in pitch of the main roof, enlargement
or enclosure of windows on the principle facades, addition of upper stories or
the removal of original upper stories, covering the exterior walls with non-
historic materials, moving the resource from its original location to one that
is dissimilar to the original, or additions which significantly detract from or
obscure the original form or appearance of the structure when viewed from the
public way.
      4.   It has been documented according to the state historic preservation
office standards for intensive local surveys (January 1990 version or
subsequent revisions) and copies of this documentation have been placed in the
local and state historic preservation files.
   B.   Designation Procedure: Any person, group or government agency may
nominate a property for its listing in the city historic sites list. The
nomination and listing procedures are as follows:
      1.   Completed intensive level survey documentation for each nominated
property must be submitted in duplicate to the Historic Preservation
Commission.
      2.   The Commission will review and consider properly submitted
nominations at its next scheduled meeting. The Commission will notify the
nominating party, either orally or in writing, one week prior to the meeting
that the nomination will be considered and will place that item on the agenda
posted for the meeting. The one week notification may be waived at the
nominating party’s option in order to accommodate “last minute” submittals,
though no nomination will be reviewed if it is submitted to the Commission less
than forty eight (48) hours prior to the meeting.
      3.   The Historic Preservation Commission will review the documentation
for completeness, accuracy and compliance with the criteria for designating
historic properties to the city historic sites list and will make its decision
accordingly.
   C.   Results Of Designation To Historic Sites List:
      1.   Owners of officially designated historic sites may obtain a historic
sites certificate from the Historic Preservation Commission. The certificate
contains the historic name of the property, the date of designation, and
signatures of the mayor and the Historic Preservation Commission chairperson.
      2.   If a historic site is to be demolished or extensively altered,
efforts will be made to document its physical appearance before action takes
place.
         a.   The city will delay issuing a demolition permit for a maximum of
one week and will notify a member of the Historic Preservation Commission which
will take responsibility for the documentation.
         b.   Documentation will include, at a minimum, exterior photographs of
all elevations of the historic structure. When possible, both exterior and
interior measurements of the structure will be made in order to provide an
accurate floor plan or other plan drawing of the structure.
         c.   The demolition permit will be issued one week after the initial
application, whether or not the Commission has documented the building. The
permit may be issued earlier if the Commission completes its documentation
before the one week deadline. The time limit may also be waived in the event of
extreme damage by an earthquake or act of God.
         d.   A structure, object or place of national, state or local
significant integrity, or vital historic value, shall not be issued a
demolition permit for a period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, for
negotiations for maintenance or preservation of said item; by an agreement to
preserve said item by the current owners, or of its purchase by historically
sympathetic persons and/or organizations.
         e.   Documentation will be kept in the Commission’s historical site
files, which are open to the public.
   D.   Removal Of Properties From Historic Sites List: Properties which, in
the opinion of the Historic Preservation Commission, no longer meet criteria
for eligibility may be removed from the historic sites list after review and
consideration by the Commission. (Ord. 2023-33, 12-6-2023)
2-1-6: HISTORIC LANDMARK REGISTER:
Significant historic properties may be designated to the historic landmark
register for the purposes of recognizing their significance and providing
incentives and guidelines for their preservation.
   A.   Criteria For Designating Properties To City Historic Landmark Register:
Any district, building, structure, object or site may be designated to the
historic landmark register if it meets all the criteria outlined below:
      1.   It is located within the official boundaries of the city.
      2.   It is currently listed in the National Register of Historical
Places, or it has been officially determined eligible for listing in the
National Register of Historical Places. Properties listed on or determined
eligible for the national register must, in addition to retaining their
integrity, meet at least one of the following national register criteria. The
property must:
         a.   Be associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
         b.   Be associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
or
         c.   Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction or that represent the work of a master, or possess high
artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinction; or
      3.   Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history (archeological sites, for example).
      4.   The owner of the property approves of the action to designate his/
her property to the historic landmark register and has submitted to the
Commission a written statement to that effect.
   B.   Designation Procedure:
      1.   Official designation proceedings must begin with the submission of a
written request for designation by the property owner to the Commission
chairperson. The letter must identify the property by its address and historic
name, give the date the property was listed in the national register or
officially determined eligible, and include a statement verifying that the
property owner is indeed the owner of the legal record of the property proposed
for designation. This official request may be preceded by informal contact with
the property owner by Commission Members, private citizens, legal officials or
others regarding designation of the property.
      2.   Upon receipt of the written request for designation, the Commission
Chairperson shall arrange for nomination to be considered at the next
Commission meeting, which shall be held at a time not to exceed thirty (30)
days from the date the request was received.
      3.   The decision by the Commission shall be based on eligibility of the
property in terms of meeting the criteria for designating properties to the
city historical landmark register. The Commission shall forward its
recommendation in writing to the City Council within fourteen (14) days.
      4.   The City Council may, by approval and passage of an appropriate
resolution, designate properties to the historic landmark register. Following
designation, a notice of such shall be mailed to the owners of record, together
with a copy of this chapter.
      5.   After property has been formally designated to the historical
landmark register, the designation may be amended or rescinded in the same
manner as the original designation was made.
      6.   Upon official designation, the property owner shall record the
designation with the county recorder’s office to indicate such designation as
the official title thereof.
   C.   Results Of Designation To Historic Landmark Register:
      1.   Properties designated to the historic landmark register may receive
special consideration in the granting of zoning variances or conditional use
permits in order to encourage their preservation.
      2.    In the event of rehabilitation of the property, local building
officials will consider waiving certain code requirements in accordance with
the building code, which deals with national buildings, or the code for
building conservation, a special code for existing buildings.
      3.   Owners of historic landmarks may seek assistance from the Historic
Preservation Commission in applying for grants or tax credits for
rehabilitating their properties.
      4.   Proposed repairs, alterations or additions to historic landmarks are
subject to the review of the Historic Preservation Commission and the
subsequent review and approval of the City Council. The purpose of this review
is to ensure the preservation of historic materials and features to the
greatest degree possible.
         a.   Applications for permits pertaining to historical landmark
properties shall be forwarded by the building official to the Commission prior
to their issuance.
         b.   At its next scheduled meeting, the Commission shall review the
applications and proposed work for compliance with the standards for
rehabilitation.
         c.   The Commission’s recommendation shall be forwarded to the Mayor
and City Recorder within three (3) days for consideration by the City Council.
The recommendation must indicate which of the “standards” the Commission’s
decision was based on and, where appropriate, a brief explanation. Copies of
the recommendation shall be sent to the building official and the property
owner at the same time.
         d.   The City Recorder shall schedule the matter for a public hearing
by the City Council at its next regular scheduled for the next available
Regular City Council Meeting. After the hearing, the City Council shall make a
decision regarding the appropriateness of the proposed action. Approved
projects will be issued a certificate of historical appropriateness which
authorizes the building permit to be issued.
   D.   Enforcement: The provisions of this section are subject to the
enforcement provision established in the building code. (Ord. 2023-33, 12-6-
2023)
CHAPTER 2
EMPLOYEE APPEALS BOARD
SECTION:
2-2-1: Creation And Composition Of Appeals Board
2-2-2: Right To Appeal
2-2-3: Informal Grievance Procedure
2-2-4: Filing The Appeal
2-2-5: Procedure For Conducting Hearing
2-2-6: Standard Of Review And Burden Of Proof
2-2-7: Decision; Time Frame For Decision
2-2-8: Review Of Appeals Board Decision
2-2-1: CREATION AND COMPOSITION OF APPEALS BOARD:
   A.   Appointment; Membership: There is hereby created an appeals board to be
known as the Washington City employee appeals board ("board"). The board shall
consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed as follows:
      1.   City Council Members: The mayor shall appoint two (2) members of the
city council to the board. The mayor shall appoint one alternate member of the
city council to serve on the board. Appointments by the mayor are subject to
confirmation by a majority of the city council.
      2.   City Employee Members: The city manager shall appoint three (3)
members who are either appointed officers or employees of the city (excluding
the city manager and city recorder). The city manager shall appoint at least
four (4) alternate members who are either appointed officers or employees of
the city to serve on the board. The alternates shall sit on the board in place
of the regular members in accordance with the numerical designation assigned to
them by the city manager. There shall be no more than one department head
sitting on the board during any hearing. Appointments by the city manager are
subject to confirmation by a majority of the city council.
   B.   Terms Of Office: Terms of office for all members of the board,
including alternates, shall be two (2) years. Nothing shall prevent any member
of the board from being appointed to successive terms of office. If any member
is unable to complete his or her term of office or is unwilling to serve, then
a new member shall be appointed as provided for herein to serve the remaining
term.
   C.   Vacancy; Emergency Appointments: In the event that there is a vacancy
on the board when an appeal has been filed, the city manager shall have
authority to appoint an interim board member or members to serve on the board
and hear the appeal. The appointment shall be for that specific appeal only
unless the interim board member is thereafter confirmed by the city council.
Any vacancy that the city manager fills on an interim basis must maintain the
balance between city council members and city employee members as specified in
subsections A1 and A2 of this section. For purposes of this section, a
"vacancy" may also occur when a conflict of interest prevents appointed board
members and alternates from serving on any particular appeal.
   D.   Secretary: The city recorder shall act as secretary to the board.
   E.   Administrative Law Judge; Board Attorney: The board shall have the
authority to retain an individual to act as the administrative law judge and
attorney and counselor to the board ("ALJ"). The ALJ must be an attorney duly
licensed to practice law in the state of Utah. The ALJ shall have the authority
to: 1) meet and confer with the board as its attorney; 2) conduct the public
hearing; 3) make rulings on any procedural or evidentiary matters that arise at
the public hearing; 4) assist the board in preparing findings and conclusions
to the extent deemed necessary; and 5) assist or otherwise prepare for the
board any procedural rules or regulations that the ALJ, with the approval of
the board, deems necessary to aid in the conduct of the public hearing. (Ord.
2014-24, 10-8-2014)
2-2-2: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
If an employee to which Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1105(1)(a) applies is
discharged, suspended for more than two (2) days without pay, or involuntarily
transferred from one position to another with less remuneration for any
disciplinary reason, the employee may appeal the final decision to discharge,
suspend without pay, or involuntary transfer to the board. There is no right of
appeal for any discharge or involuntary transfer that results from a layoff,
reorganization, or budgetary constraints. The right to appeal shall be subject
to the employee's compliance with and exhaustion of the informal grievance
process set forth and established in section
2-2-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-24, 10-8-2014)
2-2-3: INFORMAL GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
   A.   City Manager: An employee who is subject to any disciplinary action
described in section
2-2-2 of this chapter and desires to appeal that action must request a meeting
with the city manager to review the matter within ten (10) business days
(excluding holidays and weekends) of the date disciplinary action is taken. The
city manager may consider the facts and conduct any investigation that the city
manager deems appropriate under the circumstances. The city manager will
respond to the employee within ten (10) business days (excluding holidays and
weekends) of the meeting with the employee. An employee may not bypass the
grievance procedure and the city manager is not disqualified from conducting a
grievance review if the city manager was involved in the decision on which the
grievance is based.
   B.   Referral To Appeals Board: If the employee is not satisfied with the
city manager's decision or the city manager does not respond to the employee
within ten (10) business days as set forth in subsection A of this section, the
employee may request that the matter be heard by the board. This request shall
be made pursuant to and in compliance with section
2-2-4 of this chapter.
   C.   Application Of Procedure: The grievance procedure outlined in this
chapter applies only to matters arising under Utah code sections 10-3-1105 and
10-3-1106. It does not apply to other processes, whether formal or informal,
which are labeled "grievances" in other city ordinances or the provisions of
any employee handbook or personnel policies and procedures distributed by the
city. (Ord. 2014-24, 10-8-2014)
2-2-4: FILING THE APPEAL:
   A.   Each appeal to the board shall be taken by filing written notice of the
appeal with the city recorder within ten (10) calendar days after final
disposition of the grievance process. Upon the filing of an appeal, the city
recorder shall refer the matter to the board by providing the board with the
notice of appeal.
   B.   Upon receipt of the appeal from the city recorder, the board shall
forthwith commence its investigation, take and receive evidence, and fully hear
and determine the matter which relates to the reason for the discharge,
suspension, or involuntary transfer. To the extent prior disciplinary history
or conduct factored into the reason for the discharge, suspension, or
involuntary transfer, the board may take and hear that evidence. (Ord. 2014-24,
10-8-2014)
2-2-5: PROCEDURE FOR CONDUCTING HEARING:
   A.   Rights Of Employee: An employee who is the subject of the discharge,
suspension, or transfer may: 1) appear in person and be represented by counsel;
2) have a public hearing; 3) confront the witness whose testimony is to be
considered; and 4) examine the evidence to be considered by the board.
   B.   Rules Of Procedure And Evidence: Hearings shall be conducted with
appropriate formality and decorum, so that the due process rights of the
appellant are protected. The Utah rules of evidence and Utah rules of civil
procedure should serve as guidelines and may but need not be strictly followed
or applied. The board, however, may determine how much weight to give to such
evidence and may discount or reject evidence that it deems not credible or
which is otherwise inadmissible under the rules of evidence, even if received.
On stipulation of both the city and employee, the board may receive evidence
through proffer, and may determine how much weight to give proffered evidence.
   C.   Administrative Record: The city recorder shall be responsible for
keeping and assembling the record of the appeal. The record shall consist of
any documents considered by the board, any documents received into evidence at
the hearing, and any recording of the appeal that is: 1) taken by the city
recorder or 2) recorded by an officer as defined in rule 28 of the Utah rules
of civil procedure who is retained by the board to make a record of the
hearing. (Ord. 2014-24, 10-8-2014)
2-2-6: STANDARD OF REVIEW AND BURDEN OF PROOF:
The board shall presume the action of the city that is the subject of the
appeal is valid and uphold such action unless it is shown and the board finds
that the action was arbitrary and capricious or otherwise illegal. For purposes
of this chapter, an action is "arbitrary and capricious" if it has no basis in
fact and is otherwise not supported by any established personnel policies and
procedures. An "illegal" action is one that violates state or federal law. The
burden of proof shall at all times remain with the employee taking the appeal
and the board shall at all times defer to the discretion exercised by the city
in its employment and disciplinary decisions. It shall take an affirmative vote
of three (3) board members to overturn the action which is the subject of the
appeal. (Ord. 2014-24, 10-8-2014)
2-2-7: DECISION; TIME FRAME FOR DECISION:
Decisions of the board shall be by secret ballot and shall be certified to the
city recorder within fifteen (15) days from the hearing date. For good cause,
the board may extend the fifteen (15) day period to a maximum of sixty (60)
days, if the employee and the city both consent. If a majority of the board
finds in favor of the employee and overturns the disciplinary decision, the
employee shall receive the amounts specified in Utah code section 10-3-1106(5)
(b). (Ord. 2014-24, 10-8-2014)
2-2-8: REVIEW OF APPEALS BOARD DECISION:
If any party to the appeals board proceeding desires to appeal the final action
or order of the board, that party shall do so by filing a petition for review
with the Utah court of appeals in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section
10-3-1106(6). (Ord. 2014-24, 10-8-2014)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Applicability
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: Compliance Requirements
3-1-4: License Officer
3-1-5: Fees, Rates, And Charges
3-1-6: Tax Requirements
3-1-7: Renewal Of License
3-1-8: Display Of License Required
3-1-9: Transferability
3-1-10: Acceptance Of Conditions
3-1-11: Criminal History Checks
3-1-12: Denial, Suspension, Revocation Of A Business
3-1-13: Licensing After Revocation
3-1-14: Penalty
3-1-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all business licenses
required or granted by Washington City, including alcohol licenses described in
chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings herein prescribed:      
APPEALS     The City Manager, as designated by the City Council, is responsible for receiving
OFFICER:    the information from the City and appellant regarding the denial or suspension of
            a certificate and issuing a decision as required by this article.
            Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises,
            establishments and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all
BUSINESS:   devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are
            conducted for private profit, or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any
            premises in the City.
CITY:       The City of Washington.
            The operator, owner, or manager of a place of business; any person or persons
            employed by an operator, owner, or manager in the operation of a place of business
            in any capacity, whether part time or full time; and any sales persons, agents, or
EMPLOYEE:   independent contractors engaged in the furtherance of a business activity in any
            capacity, regardless of the method of compensation. As used herein, the term
            “employee” is intended to include everyone engaged in the operation of the
            business, including all owners if there be more than one.
            Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible personal property at retail
            or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or property and the rendering of personal
ENGAGING IN services for others for a consideration by persons engaged in any profession,
BUSINESS:   trade, craft, business, occupation or other calling, except the rendering of
            personal services by an employee to his employer under any contract of personal
            employment.
HOME        The conducting of any business, transaction or activity for which consideration of
OCCUPATION: any nature is received that is conducted in accordance with chapter 4 of this
            title.
            The certificate or document issued by the City evidencing permission or authority
LICENSE:    from the City to the holder named therein to carry on a particular business or to
            pursue a particular operation or occupation. To be valid, a license must be signed
            by the License Officer and the Mayor.
LICENSE     The City Recorder and/or Deputy Recorder are designated and appointed as the
OFFICER:    License Officers.
            The person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this
            title, and shall include individual persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
LICENSEE:   associations, clubs, trusts, corporations or any other entity qualified by law to
            carry on any of the business activities referred to herein. The term “person,” as
            used herein, is either an applicant or “licensee,” as herein defined.
            The effects on the neighborhood and community which are created as a result of the
OFFSITE     business, where the combined effects of the home-based business and the primary
IMPACT:     residential use, materially exceeds the offsite impact of the primary residential
            use alone.
PLACE OF    Each separate location maintained or operated by the licensee within the City from
BUSINESS:   which a business activity is conducted or transacted.
            A sale of tangible personal property by wholesalers to retail merchants, jobbers,
WHOLESALE:  dealers or other wholesalers for resale, and does not include a sale by
            wholesalers or retailers to users or consumers not for resale, except as otherwise
            specified.
WHOLESALER: A person doing a regularly organized wholesale business and selling to retail
         merchants, dealers or other wholesalers, for the purpose of resale. (Ord. 2022-64,
            12-14-2022)
 
3-1-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: All businesses based or physically located within
Washington City are required to obtain the class of license required. No
license shall be required for a business that is operated only occasionally by
an individual who is under eighteen (18) years of age or as otherwise provided
in this title. Businesses, physically located outside of Washington City
boundaries, who desire to offer services within the City may be required to
obtain a license in order to comply with Zoning, Public Works, Public Safety
and/or other City Requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person, either
directly or indirectly, to continue a business or nonprofit enterprise when a
license pertaining thereto has been suspended or revoked.
   B.   Compliance With Other Laws: No license shall be issued to a person
required to comply with any other law, regulation or licensing requirement in
the conduct of his business or nonprofit enterprise until the applicant
demonstrates the fact of such compliance. Compliance with zoning laws is
required in all cases.
   C.   Applicable To Single Act Of Business: For the purpose of this title,
any person shall be deemed to be in business or to be engaging in a nonprofit
enterprise, and thus subject to the requirements of subsection A of this
section, when he/she does one act of:
      1.   Selling any goods or services;
      2.   Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire;
or
      3.   Acquiring or using any real or personal property in the City for a
business purpose.
   D.   Responsibility For Obtaining License: It shall be the responsibility of
a person engaging in business within the City to voluntarily apply for and
maintain in full force and effect a valid license. The agents or other
representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in this City shall be
personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the
businesses they represent with the terms of this title.   
   E.   Application For License: The application shall be made to the License
Officer on a form provided by the City and shall contain the following
information: business name; general description of business to be engaged in,
business mailing address and telephone number, owner’s name, residence address
and phone number, state tax number if applicable, federal tax number if
applicable, state contractor’s number if applicable, proof that the business is
state and/or federally licensed and registered, and complies with all
applicable state and federal laws, signature of applicant or applicant’s
authorized agent provided under penalty of law that all information contained
in the application is true, and such other information as the City License
Officer shall deem reasonable and necessary to determine the fee amount or if
the applicant’s business will place additional burdens on City services,
utilities, or the provision of public safety.
   F.   Separate License For Branch Establishment: A separate license must be
obtained for each branch established or each separate place of business in
which the business activities of a licensee are carried on, except that
warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a
business licensed under the provisions of this title shall not be deemed to be
separate places of business or branch establishments.
   G.   Nature And Location Of Business To Be Specified: Each license shall
authorize the person obtaining it to carry on, pursue or conduct only that type
of general business described in the license and only at the location which is
indicated thereon. The carrying on of a different type of general business
activity shall require issuance of a separate license, and carrying on of the
business at a location different from that indicated on the license shall be
considered a branch establishment and require a separate license.    
   H.   Joint License: A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses at the
same location shall be required to obtain separate licenses.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the City from requiring that a
person obtaining a license under chapter 3 of this title for the sale of beer
must obtain both the applicable business license required by this chapter and
the beer license required by chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-
2022)
3-1-4: LICENSE OFFICER:
The License Officer is designated and appointed as ex officio assessor of
license fees for the City. On receipt of any completed and acceptable
application for a license, the License Officer shall assess the amount due
thereon and shall collect all license fees based upon the rate established by
the City Council. The License Officer shall enforce all provisions of this
title, and shall cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any
of the provisions of this title. All information furnished to or secured by the
License Officer under the authority of this title shall be subject to the
provisions of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, Utah Code
Annotated section 63-2-101 et seq. The License Officer shall have the power to:
   
   A.   Adopt Forms: Adopt all forms and prescribe the information required
therein as to all matters relevant for the issuance of a license
hereunder.       
   B.   Investigate: Investigate, or cause the applicant or licensee to be
investigated, and determine the eligibility of any applicant or licensee either
at the time of issuance of a license or at any time after its issuance in such
manner as may be reasonable and necessary for the proper administration and
enforcement of this title. In the case of persons licensed by an agency of the
state, verification of such licensure may suffice without further inquiry into
the qualifications.       
   C.   Inspection Of Premises And Records: Inspect, or cause to be inspected,
prospective or existing places of business to ensure compliance with building,
safety and health codes, and inspect books and records of any applicant, or any
other information reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of
this title; provided, that all such inspections shall be at reasonable times,
upon advance notice to the applicant or licensee, and in full compliance with
all laws affecting the right to inspect.      
   D.   Good Standing Of Applicant Or Licensee: Require that the applicant or
licensee not be in default or violation of the provisions of any City
ordinance, nor indebted nor obligated in any manner to the City or the
utilities operated by it, to not be in violation of any City zoning regulations
by reason of the condition of business premises or the use to be made thereof.
(Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-1-5: FEES, RATES, AND CHARGES:
   A.   Due And Payable: Annual license fees shall be due the day after the
expiration date on the license. Annual fees shall be payable before each
calendar year in advance.
   B.   Levied; Exemptions:
      1.   General Business License Fee: The license fee for all businesses
shall be in such amount as established by the City Council.
      2.   Applicability: The general business license fee shall apply to all
businesses and the fee for such licenses shall be determined in accordance with
the specific sections pertaining to their specific business.
      3.   Exemptions: Nonprofit enterprises shall not be exempt from the
payment of a fee in connection with licenses issued to them.
   C.   Late Fee: Any business license fee due on January 1 that is paid later
than January 31 of any license year shall be considered to be late, and a late
fee of fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the fee shall be added to the
original amount due. If the fee is still not paid by April 1 of each year, the
business shall be considered to be operating without a business license,
subject to criminal prosecution for every day of operation after April 1.
   E.   Rebate Of Fee: No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof
shall be made by reason of the non-use of such license or by reason of a change
of location or type of business rendering the use of such license ineffective,
except in the following instances:
      1.   When a license fee is collected in error;
      2.   When a licensee is rendered unable to conduct business because
they’ve entered the armed services of the United States. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-
2022)
3-1-6: TAX REQUIREMENTS:
All individuals and businesses seeking licensure within the City shall comply
with Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-101 et seq as amended, regarding sales
and use tax. All applicable businesses shall also conform to the State
Transient Room Tax Act contained in Utah Code Annotated section 59-28-101 et
seq as amended. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-1-7: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
All licenses are valid from January 1st to December 31st. After December 31st
all businesses desiring to continue business in the following year must apply
for renewal. The applicant for renewal of a license shall submit an application
for renewal of such license to the License Officer on such form as that officer
may direct, and shall disclose thereon such information concerning the conduct
and operation of such licensee’s business during the preceding licensing period
as may be reasonably required by the License Officer and may be reasonably
necessary for determination of the licensee’s eligibility for a renewal license
and possible adjustment of the license fee. Unless otherwise notified by the
licensee, the License Officer is entitled to presume the continued operation of
any business licensed in the preceding year. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-1-8: DISPLAY OF LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every licensee shall display and exhibit the license while the same is in force
in some conspicuous part of the premises where business activities are
conducted. Every licensee not having a fixed place of business shall carry the
license with him at all times while carrying on the business for which the
license is issued, producing the same for inspection when requested to do so by
any person at a reasonable time. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-1-9: TRANSFERABILITY:
A business license issued hereunder shall not be transferable to a new owner of
any licensed business, to a new entity owning or operating such business, or to
a new business location within the City. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-1-10: ACCEPTANCE OF CONDITIONS:
As a condition of their right to do business in the City, each applicant and
licensee accepts all regulations and provisions of the ordinances of the City
as they may apply to any aspect of the applicant or licensee’s business and
agrees to comply with the same. The applicant or licensee shall permit all
lawful and reasonable inspections of business operations and premises as
provided hereunder for the purpose of ascertaining such compliance with the
laws and regulations of the City in areas of health, fire prevention, safety
and consumer protection, together with such examination of their business books
and records as allowed by State Law. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-1-11: CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS:
Wherever in this title there is a requirement for review of the criminal
history of an applicant for a license or an employee of such applicant, the
applicant must submit a BCI background check along with the completed license
application. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-1-12: DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF A BUSINESS:
The following procedures for denial, suspension, and revocation will apply to
all businesses listed in this title.
   A.   Reasons For Denial, Suspension, Or Revocation Of A Business: After a
person has made application to, or has obtained from, the City a business
license, the application or license may be denied, suspended or revoked for any
of the following reasons:
      1.   Does not meet the qualifications for a licensee as provided under
this title.
      2.   For a new application, nonpayment of a returned check for the
required license fees at the time the application is made. For a license
renewal application, nonpayment of the required license fees plus penalty three
(3) months after it is due;
      3.   One (1) of the reviewing departments or divisions of the City has
disapproved the application pursuant to any applicable provision of the City
code.
      4.   False or incomplete information given on the application or renewal
form;
      5.   Noncompliance with any requirement or condition set by the City.
Specifically, failure to comply with any requirement within three (3) days of
receiving a noncompliance notice;
      6.   Noncompliance with any City, state or federal statutes or any health
department regulations governing the applicant/licensee’s business;
      7.   The license was obtained by deceit, fraud or misrepresentation or
other crime;
      8.   The applicant/licensee is more than sixty (60) days past due on any
debt owed to the City;
      9.   The applicant/licensee has refused authorized representatives of the
City to make an inspection or has interfered with such representatives while in
the performance of such inspection.
      10.   Violation of this title by the agents or employees of a licensee
and violations of any other laws by the agents or employees committed while
acting as an agent or employee of the licensee;
      11.   The licensee attempts to, or does, assign, transfer or sell a
license in violation of this chapter;
      12.   Any other reason expressly provided for in this title.
   B.   Enforcement:
      1.   Authority: The License Officer may, without a hearing, deny, suspend
or revoke a license for the reasons provided in this title. However, if a
license is suspended or revoked, the suspension or revocation shall not take
effect until the time for appealing the decision has passed.
      2.   Procedure For Denial, Suspension Or Revocation: The License Officer
shall cause written notice to be personally served upon the person affected or
deposited in the United States mail addressed to the address provided to the
business license office by the licensee, which shall advise the licensee of the
specific violation, that the license has been denied, suspended or revoked, the
licensee’s right to appeal the Licensing Officer’s decision and have a hearing
and the appeal procedure. For suspensions and revocations, the notice shall
include that operation of the business after the effective date shall be
penalized as outlined in section
3-1-14 of this title.
      3.   Appeal Procedure: Appeals of the License Officer’s decision may be
made by filing a written notice of appeal to the City Manager within fifteen
(15) calendar days after personal service or mailing of the notice. The written
notice of appeal shall set forth with specificity the reasons why the
applicant/licensee believes the denial, suspension or revocation was in error
and how the applicant/licensee is in compliance with all requirements in this
title. If an appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall not take
effect until after the time for appealing the decision of the hearing officer
has expired. If an appeal is withdrawn, the suspension or revocation shall take
effect immediately.
      4.   Hearing:
         a.   The City Manager shall schedule the hearing as soon as possible
but no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of appeal, then
advise the licensee of the hearing date.
         b.   The City Manager, after hearing all the evidence, shall make a
factual determination, based on the preponderance of the evidence, whether the
alleged grounds for enforcement have been proven. The decision shall be
rendered in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the
hearing. The City Manager may either affirm or reverse the decision of the
licensing officer or modify the order of the licensing officer. The decision of
the hearing officer shall be final for purposes of appeal.
      5.   Appeal Of City Manager’s Decision: Either party may file a petition
with the district court for review of the decision. The petition must be filed
within thirty (30) calendar days after the decision is rendered. The district
court’s review is limited to the record of the decision that is being appealed.
The court shall not accept or consider any evidence that is not part of the
record of that decision. The district court shall presume that the City
Manager’s decision and orders are valid and review the record to determine
whether or not the decision was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal.
   C.   Civil Suit: The City Attorney may institute a civil suit to enjoin the
operation of any business being operated without the license required
hereunder, or they may seek the criminal sanctions provided in section
3-1-14.   
   D.   State Law Applicability: Enforcement provisions hereunder shall not
apply to any aspect of regulation where enforcement is preempted by state law.
(Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-1-13: LICENSING AFTER REVOCATION:
Persisting in running a business that has had its license denied or revoked is
prohibited. No person whose license has been revoked under the provisions of
this title shall be granted a license under the provisions of this title for a
period of six (6) months following such revocation. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-1-14: PENALTY:
In addition to the denial, suspension, revocation, or refusal to renew a
license, the licensee and any person who shall violate the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject
to penalty as provided in Washington City Code section
1-4-1. Each day or incident of violation shall constitute a separate offense
hereunder. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
ARTICLE A. BUSINESS LICENSE FEES
SECTION:
3-1A-1: Definitions
3-1A-2: Powers And Duties Of License Assessor And Collector
3-1A-3: Issuance Of Receipt
3-1A-4: Renewal License Procedure
3-1A-5: Doing Business Previously Without License
3-1A-6: Determination Of License Fee
3-1A-7: Rebate Of Fee
3-1A-8: Acceptance Of Duties
3-1A-9: Enforcement
3-1A-10: Expiration Of License
3-1A-11: License Debt To City
3-1A-12: Penalty
3-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
EMPLOYEE: The operator, owner or manager of a place of business; any person or
persons employed by an operator, owner or manager in the operation of a place
of business in any capacity, whether part time or full time; and any
salespersons, agents or independent contractors engaged in the furtherance of a
business activity in any capacity, regardless of the method of compensation. As
used herein, the term "employee" is intended to include everyone engaged in the
operation of the business, including all owners if there be more than one.
LICENSE: The certificate or document issued by the city evidencing permission
or authority from the city to the holder named therein to carry on a particular
business or to pursue a particular occupation. To be valid, a license must be
signed by the city recorder.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the
provisions of this article, and shall include individual persons, partnerships,
joint ventures, associations, clubs, trusts, corporations or any other entity
qualified by law to carry on any of the business activities referred to herein.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES: The average number of employees engaging in the
furtherance of licensee's business from a base within the city during each
regular working day of the preceding calendar year. In computing such a number,
a part time employee shall be counted as that fraction formed by using the
total number of hours worked by such employee as the numerator and the total
amount of hours regularly worked by a full time employee as the denominator.
(1989 Code § 9-311; amd. 2007 Code)
3-1A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES OF LICENSE ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR:
The license assessor and collector shall issue licenses in the name of the city
to all persons qualified under the provisions of this article and this chapter,
and shall remit all license fees collected to the city treasurer. All
information furnished to or secured by the license assessor and collector under
the authority of this article shall be kept in strict confidence, shall not be
subject to public inspection, and shall be kept in such manner as to prevent
disclosure to persons other than those charged with the inspection provided for
herein.
   A.   Give Notice: Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of his
application and, in the event of rejection, upon request of the applicant,
state in writing the reasons for rejection; notify a licensee of an infraction
of city building, fire or health codes disclosed by the inspection provided for
herein, together with notice of the revocation by the city license assessor and
collector of the license unless correction of the infraction is effected within
five (5) days after such notification.
   B.   Request Enforcement: Request the city attorney to file a complaint
against any applicant or any licensee who conducts a business without the
license required by this article and this chapter.
   C.   Good Standing Of Applicant Or Licensee: Determine that the applicant or
licensee is not in default under the provisions of any city ordinance, or
indebted or obligated in any manner to the city or the utilities operated by
it; and not in violation of any city zoning regulations by reason of the
condition of business premises or the use to be made thereof.
   D.   Require Affidavits: Require, when considered necessary in the
discretion of the license assessor and collector, affidavits regarding the
license history of the applicant indicating whether such person, in previous
business operations in this or another state, has had a business license
revoked or suspended, together with the reasons therefor; to request that the
chief of police obtain a record of any prior convictions of the applicant or
licensee when determined by the license assessor and collector to be necessary
and desirable. (1989 Code § 9-312)
3-1A-3: ISSUANCE OF RECEIPT:
In the event the license assessor and collector has not completed any of the
steps set forth in section
3-1A-2 of this article at the time the applicant or licensee pays for a license
or renewal thereof, the city treasurer may issue a receipt for the money paid,
but it shall not be construed as the approval of the license assessor and
collector for the issuance of a license, nor shall it entitle or authorize the
applicant to open or maintain any business until such time as the license
itself has been issued to him. (1989 Code § 9-313)
3-1A-4: RENEWAL LICENSE PROCEDURE:
The applicant for renewal of a license shall submit an application for renewal
of such license to the license assessor and collector on such form as that
officer may direct, and shall disclose thereon such information concerning the
conduct and operation of licensee's business during the preceding licensing
period as may be reasonably required by the license assessor and collector and
as may be reasonably necessary for determination of the licensee's eligibility
for a renewal license and possible adjustment of the license fee. (1989 Code §
9-314)
3-1A-5: DOING BUSINESS PREVIOUSLY WITHOUT LICENSE:
In the event it is discovered that any applicant for a new business license has
done business in the city during a previous year without a proper license as
required by this or a previous city ordinance, the license assessor and
collector shall not issue a license to such applicant for the current year
until and unless said applicant pays to the city the license fee which would
have been applicable for his business during the preceding year when he failed
to apply and obtain such license, together with the ten percent (10%) penalty
for such preceding year. (1989 Code § 9-315)
3-1A-6: DETERMINATION OF LICENSE FEE:
Every person engaged in business within the city shall pay an annual license
fee to be calculated in accordance with this article. Subsection A of this
section shall apply to all businesses except for those specifically covered in
subsequent subsections of this section, and the fee for such licenses shall be
determined in accordance with the specific subsection pertaining to their
specific business.
   A.   General Business License Fees: The license fee for all businesses shall
be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, together with ten dollars ($10.00) per year
for each person more than one employed or engaged in such business. Part time
employees shall be assessed five dollars ($5.00), the combined total of which
shall not exceed three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). An applicant or
licensee, through submission of payroll records to the license assessor and
collector upon reasonable request, shall verify the number of employees or
their status as full time or part time.
   B.   Professional Business: Professions shall include anyone practicing the
science of medicine or healing, dentists, lawyers, engineers, architects,
veterinarians, counselors, accountants, securities and investment brokers, and
any other activity, which the license assessor and collector shall determine to
be a professional business. In addition, the professional business shall pay
the general business license fees as outlined in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Pawnbrokers And Secondhand Dealers: Pawnbrokers and dealers in
secondhand merchandise shall comply with the provisions of chapter 9 or 10 of
this title as outlined. In addition the license fee shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per year, together with ten dollars ($10.00) per year for
each person more than one employed or engaged in such business. Part time
employees shall be assessed five dollars ($5.00), the combined total of which
shall not exceed three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). An applicant or
licensee, through submission of payroll records to the license assessor and
collector upon reasonable request, shall verify the number of employees or
their status as full time or part time.
   D.   Amusement Devices: Any machine, device, electronic mechanism or other
contrivance which is legal under the laws of the state and city, designed or
intended to be operated or used for amusement or the playing of a game upon, or
in response to, the payment of some charge or the insertion therein of a coin
or other object, shall be considered an adjunct of a business, and shall
display the license as outlined in section
3-1-9 of this chapter. A general business license for each such amusement
device shall require a fee as outlined in subsection A of this section. All
fees shall be payable by the owner of a device rather than the person on whose
premises the device may be located. If the owner of the device is also the
owner of the premises whereon a device is located, the license for the device
shall be in addition to any license that may otherwise be required for any
other business conducted on the premises.
   E.   Vending Machines: Any machine, device, electronic mechanism or other
contrivance which is legal under the laws of the state and the city, designed
or intended to be operated or used for vending or selling candy, cigarettes or
other merchandise shall display the license as outlined in section
3-1-9 of this chapter. A general business license for each such vending machine
shall be required as outlined in subsection A of this section. All fees shall
be payable by the owner of a device rather than the person on whose premises
the device may be located. If the owner of the device is also the owner of the
premises whereon a device is located, the license for the device shall be in
addition to any license that may otherwise be required for any other business
conducted on the premises.
   F.   Banks, Savings And Loans: The license fee for all banks, savings and
loans or other financial institutions shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per year, together with ten dollars ($10.00) per year for each person more than
one employed or engaged in such business. Part time employees shall be assessed
five dollars ($5.00), the combined total of which shall not exceed three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). An applicant or licensee through submission of
payroll records to the license assessor and collector upon reasonable request
shall verify the number of employees or their status as full time or part time.
   G.   Home Business: All home businesses shall comply with the zoning
requirement of a home occupation. In addition, a general business license fee
shall be paid as in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2007-36, 12-12-2007)
3-1A-7: REBATE OF FEE:
No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made by reason
of the nonuse of such license or by reason of a change of location or type of
business rendering the use of such license ineffective, except in the following
instances:
   A.   When a license fee is collected in error;
   B.   When a licensee has been prevented from enjoying the full license term
due to death or physical incapacity to engage in a business;
   C.   When a licensee is rendered unable to conduct business because he has
entered the armed services of the United States; or
   D.   When the licensed business is destroyed by fire or other casualty
through no fault of licensee. In the event of the applicability of an
exception, the rebate shall be prorated according to the number of days
remaining in the license year after occurrence of the event relied upon for a
rebate. (1989 Code § 9-317)
3-1A-8: ACCEPTANCE OF DUTIES:
As a condition of his right to do business in the city, each applicant and
licensee accepts all regulations and provisions of the ordinances of the city
as they may apply to any aspect of his business and agrees to comply with the
same, and he does further consent to permit all reasonable inspections of his
business operations and premises as provided hereunder for the purpose of
ascertaining such compliance with the laws and regulations of the city in areas
of health, fire prevention, safety and consumer protection, together with such
examination of his business books and records as may be necessary for
determining the payment of fees hereunder. Where the license assessor and
collector deems it necessary and advisable, he may require the applicant or
licensee to maintain casualty or liability insurance in an amount and of a
nature to be prescribed during all periods that the licensee engages in
business in the city in order to afford adequate protection to those who
patronize such business, and an applicant or licensee accepts such requirement
as a further condition of his right to do business in the city. (1989 Code § 9-
318)
3-1A-9: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Report Of Violations; Service: In performance of the power of the
license assessor and collector to inspect premises and records referred to in
section
3-1A-2 of this article, those inspectors designated in said section shall
report all violations of this article or of other laws or ordinances to the
license assessor and collector and shall submit such other reports as the city
council shall order. Upon receipt of a report of the violation of this article
or of any other law or ordinance of the city, the license assessor and
collector shall issue to the affected person a provisional order to comply, in
writing, which shall be personally served upon the person and advise him of the
specific violation. In the event service cannot be obtained upon the person
doing business or his agent or employee, a copy of such notice shall be affixed
to some structure on the premises, and a copy shall be deposited in the United
States mail, addressed to the address contained on the license application. The
provisional order shall require compliance, or arrangements with the license
assessor and collector for such compliance, within five (5) days of service of
the order, unless the affected person requests a hearing.
   B.   Hearing: A hearing on the provisional order shall be requested in
writing and presented to the city council setting forth the provisional order,
the alleged noncompliance and the reason why the licensee believes that he is
either complying or should not have to comply. Such request for hearing must be
filed within ten (10) days after receipt by the licensee of personal service or
within fifteen (15) days after the mailing of notice by the license assessor
and collector. Filing shall be by delivery to the license assessor and
collector. The city council shall thereupon advise the licensee of a hearing
date, such date to be at least five (5) days after the filing of request for
hearing, and upon such hearing the licensee shall be afforded full opportunity
to present witnesses and evidence in support of his allegation that he either
complies or should not have to comply. The hearing shall be public.
   C.   Decision; Compliance Time Limit; Revocation: In the event the city
council shall concur with the licensee, the license assessor and collector
shall be directed to quash the provisional order. If the city council upholds
the provisional order, or if no hearing before the city council is requested
within the time allowed, the provisional order shall be considered final. Upon
failure of the licensee to comply with the provisional order within five (5)
days after service of the order, or five (5) days after ruling by the city
council in the event of a hearing, the license assessor and collector shall
have the right to declare the business license revoked because of the violation
referred to in the provisional order for the reason that the operation of the
business is so inimical to the public health, safety and the general welfare as
to constitute a nuisance. Upon revocation of a license, the licensee shall
summarily cease business and close the premises upon which the business was
operated.
   D.   Civil Suit: The city attorney shall institute civil suit at the request
of the license assessor and collector to enjoin the operation of any business
being operated without the license required hereunder, and he shall also
commence suit to collect the amount of any unpaid fee, the payment of which is
required hereunder, if it cannot be collected by other means. (1989 Code § 9-
319)
3-1A-10: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. (1989 Code § 9-320)
3-1A-11: LICENSE DEBT TO CITY:
The amount of any license imposed by this article shall be deemed a debt to the
city, and any person engaging in business without having a license from the
city so to do shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court
of competent jurisdiction for the amount of license by this article imposed on
such business. In the event of payment by the licensee which is insufficient
under the provisions of this article, he shall similarly be liable to an action
as provided herein. (1989 Code § 9-321)
3-1A-12: PENALTY:
Violations of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a class B
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 9-322)
CHAPTER 2
SPECIALTY BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Amusement Devices And Facilities
3-2-2: Billboards
3-2-3: Collections Agencies
3-2-4: Construction Contractors
3-2-5: Employment Agency
3-2-6: Locksmiths
3-2-7: Mobile Food
3-2-8: Motels And Hotels
3-2-9: Occult Arts
3-2-10: Pawn, Secondhand, And Gem Sales
3-2-11: Private Investigators
3-2-12: Salvage Yards And Dealers
3-2-13: Short Term Rentals
3-2-14: Storage Rentals
3-2-15: Tobacco Sales
3-2-16: Towing Service
3-2-17: Vehicles For Hire
3-2-1: AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Applicability: Any machine, device, electronic mechanism or other
contrivance which is legal under the laws of the State of Utah and Washington
City, designed or intended to be operated or used for amusement in response to
the payment of some charge or insertion of a coin or other object, shall be
licensed under the general license fee required by Section
3-1-5 above. A separate license shall not be required for each machine, device,
mechanism or other contrivance, but a separate license shall be required for
each separate location where one or more is located for commercial use, if the
amusement device is intended to remain or does remain at that location for one
week or more during the license year.   
   B.   Operational Requirements: It shall be unlawful for any amusement device
to be rigged, operated or utilized in any way for gambling purposes, and any
operation of any mechanical amusement device contrary to the ordinances of the
City or laws of the state shall be grounds for revocation by the License
Officer of the licenses for all other mechanical amusement devices within the
City owned by the same owner. The City shall have power to seize, impound and
dispose of any amusement device used for gambling purposes pursuant to the
procedures established in the applicable sections of Utah Code Annotated 76-10-
1112 as amended. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-2: BILLBOARDS:
All individuals seeking to construct or license a billboard in the City shall
comply with Utah Code Annotated section 72-7-5 as amended, apply through the
licensure procedure in section
3-1-3E of this Title, and remit payment of an advertising / licensing fee
designated by the City Council. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-3: COLLECTIONS AGENCIES:
All collection agencies seeking licensure within the City shall comply with
Utah Code Annotated section 12-1-1 et seq as amended; and apply through the
licensure procedure in section
3-1-3E of this Title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-4: CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS:
Contractors seeking licensure within the City shall comply with Utah Code
Annotated section 58-55-3 as amended; and apply through the licensure procedure
in section
3-1-3E of this Title. The City will reciprocate out of area licenses for
contractors who provide a valid and current State contractors license in
addition to a current business license from their local jurisdiction. Both
licenses must be presented when applying for a building permit. (Ord. 2022-64,
12-14-2022)
3-2-5: EMPLOYMENT AGENCY:
All employment agencies seeking licensure within the City shall comply with
Utah Code Annotated section 34-29-1 et seq as amended; and apply through the
licensure procedure in section
3-1-3E of this Title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-6: LOCKSMITHS:
   A.   Application Process: In addition to the information required by section
3-1-3E of this article, the business license application for locksmithing shall
also include a copy of their ID, and a BCI background check.
   B.   Police Review: The chief of police, or his or her designee, shall
review all locksmith applications. They only shall deny an application if the
applicant has been convicted of any misdemeanor involving theft or any felony.
   C.   License Records: Each licensee shall keep for a minimum of two (2)
years orderly and adequate records containing the following, which shall be
open to inspection by a police officer at any reasonable time:
      1.   The name and address of every person for whom a key is made from a
key bearing the imprint “M” or “master” or other recognizable mark indicating
it is a master key, together with the name and address of every person for whom
a locked automobile, building, structure, house, store, safe or vault is opened
and the date of transaction.
      2.   The name and address of every person for whom a lock or combination
of a lock is changed and the date of the transaction.
   D.   Exceptions: The requirements of this article shall not apply to the
following:
      1.   Persons otherwise licensed by the City or the state as a contractor
or carpenter who installs a lock as part of a door or remodeled door when the
lock and key come from a manufacturer’s stock and the installation does not
involve adjustment or reconstruction of the lock.
      2.    A person or an employee of a firm or corporation who is duly
licensed to conduct such business in an area outside the jurisdiction of the
City and who is not otherwise subject to the provisions of this law, when their
work in the City does not involve, in a six (6) month period, more than one
contract and one day to perform. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-7: MOBILE FOOD:
All mobile food vendors seeking licensure within the City shall comply with
Utah Code Annotated section 11-56-101 et seq as amended; and apply through the
licensure procedure in section
3-1-3E of this Title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-8: MOTELS AND HOTELS:
All motel or hotel establishments seeking licensure within the City shall
comply with all State, zoning, building, and health department requirements and
apply through the licensure procedure in section
3-1-3E of this Title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-9: OCCULT ARTS:
   A.   Applicability: Fortune tellers, mediums, astrologers, psychics, palm
readers, hypnotists, and all other practitioners of unusual or occult arts or
sciences or those holding themselves out to be such shall obtain a business
license.
   B.   License and Permit Application:
      1.   Business License: Persons desiring to practice occult arts from a
premise within City limits shall obtain the license required in section
3-1-3E.
         a.   Additional Information And Requirements: In addition to the
licensing requirements in section
3-1-3E applicants must also provide an original or a copy of a BCI background
check as defined in section
3-5-2 of this article
      2.   Temporary Use Permits: Persons desiring to practice occult arts for
circuses, carnivals, fairs, festivals or other special events shall obtain a
Temporary Use Permit as required by Title 9, chapter 19 of this code. (Ord.
2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-10: PAWN, SECONDHAND, AND GEM SALES:
All individuals seeking licensure for pawn, secondhand, or gem sales within the
City shall comply with Utah Code Annotated section 13-32a as amended; and apply
through the licensure procedure in section
3-1-3E of this Title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-11: PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS:
All private investigators within the City shall comply with Utah Code Annotated
section 53-9-101 et seq as amended; and apply through the licensure procedure
in section
3-1-3E of this Title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-12: SALVAGE YARDS AND DEALERS:
All salvage yards seeking licensure within the City shall comply with Utah Code
Annotated section 72-7-201 et seq as amended; and apply through the licensure
procedure in section
3-1-3E of this Title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-13: SHORT TERM RENTALS:
   A.   License Requirements:
      1.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person to keep, conduct,
operate or maintain a "short term residential rental property" as defined and
described in section
9-12E-1 through
9-12E-9 and
9-14-25 of the Washington City Code within the City without a business license
for such a unit. A person who owns multiple short term residential rental
properties is required to obtain a separate license for the operation and
maintenance of each of those short term residential rental properties.
      2.   License Not Transferable: A short term residential rental property
business license is not transferable between persons or structures. Any person
holding such a license shall give written notice within thirty (30) days to the
business license official after having transferred or otherwise disposed of
legal or equitable control of any rental dwelling unit licensed under this
chapter. Such notice of transferred interest shall be deemed a request to
cancel an existing business license for such rental dwelling unit and shall
include the name, address, and information regarding the person(s) succeeding
to the ownership or control thereof.
      3.   Transient Room Tax: All short term residential rental properties
shall be subject to the collection of the municipality transient room tax as
allowed under Utah Code 59-28-101 et seq as amended. Proof of remittance will
be required annually upon license renewal.
      4.   Garbage Removal: Garbage shall be removed from the property by the
owner or property manager and properly disposed of within twenty-four (24)
hours of tenants leaving the property.
      5.   Cleaning Service: Each property shall be cleaned at least weekly
while occupied and in between tenant occupancy. Each property shall also comply
with the sanitary facilities requirements outlined for motels in this code.
      6.   Local Property Manager/Point Of Contact Required: All short term
residential rental properties must designate a local property manager or point
of contact that resides within Washington County. The property manager or point
of contact must obtain a Washington City property management business license.
The property manager or point of contact shall be available twenty-four (24)
hours per day to respond to tenant and neighborhood questions or concerns. Each
short term residential rental property shall have a clearly visible sign within
the unit containing the following information:
         a.   Name and phone number of the local property manager/contact.
         b.   Maximum occupancy of the unit.
         c.   Garbage pick up.
      7.   Owner And Property Manager Responsible: The owner and property
manager shall be jointly and severally liable for any violations of this
chapter. Any rental dwelling unit which is found in violation of this chapter
or any other requirement of this code may be subject to penalty of law and/or
revocation of the short term residential rental properties business license.
   B.    Penalty; Suspension Or Revocation Of License:
      1.   Enforcement Provisions.
         a.   Any owner of any dwelling within the City who allows or permits
occupation of said dwelling as a short-term rental without having first
obtained a business license in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall be in violation of this section and shall be guilty of a civil infraction
as set forth in section
1-4-1(2) of City Code. A violator of this paragraph, for each and every such
violation, shall be punished by a fine not less than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per day for an individual or one thousand dollars ($1,000)
per day for a corporation.
         b.   Any owner of any dwelling within the City, who, having first
obtained a business license for use or occupation of said dwelling as a short-
term rental, thereafter operates or permits the operation of said short-term
rental in violation of the terms and provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a civil infraction as set forth in section
1-4-1(2) of this Code. A violator of this paragraph, for each and every such
violation, shall be punished by a fine not less than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per day for an individual or one thousand dollars ($1,000)
per day for a corporation.
         c.   Any person who occupies a short-term rental as a guest and who
violates any local ordinance or state law shall be subject to arrest, issuance
of a citation, or other civil or criminal process in accordance with all state,
federal or local statutes, rules, or City Code and City ordinances.
         d.   Due to the nightly/daily nature of short-term rentals, any
violation of any provision of this section regulating short-term rentals shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense for each and every day that such a
violation occurs or continues.
         e.   In the event of three (3) or more violations of this section
committed by an owner or guest, or any combination of the two, within any
twelve (12) month period, the City business license official is authorized to
revoke the short-term business license by issuing a written notice of
revocation to the owner. The revocation of a short-term business license by the
City business license official is an administrative decision that may be
appealed as set forth in section
3-1-12(B)(3).
         f.   In the event of a license being revoked for violations of this
chapter, the owner of the property in question shall not be issued a new short-
term rental business license for a period of one (1) year, provided that a new
license is otherwise permitted.
         g.   In addition to the denial, suspension, revocation, or refusal to
renew a license as outlined in this chapter, any licensee who shall operate a
short term rental in violation of this chapter, and/or any person designated by
the licensee as the manager or person in charge of daily operation of said
facility who shall permit or allow said facility to operate in violation of
this chapter, shall be guilty of a civil infraction as set forth in section
1-4-1(2) of this Code. A violator of this paragraph, for each and every such
violation, shall be punished by a fine not less than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per day for an individual or one thousand dollars ($1,000)
per day for a corporation. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022; amd. Ord. 2025-10, 3-26-
2025)
3-2-14: STORAGE RENTALS:
A person engaged in the business of offering individual storage units for rent,
or a mini storage operator, shall comply with all State and local regulations
and apply through the licensure procedure in section
3-1-3E of this Title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-15: TOBACCO SALES:
   A.   Licensure and Compliance:
      1.   Tobacco Products and Tobacco Paraphernalia: No individual, entity,
organization, or business shall sell tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia
unless it complies with Utah Code Annotated 59-14-101 et seq as amended and has
received a tobacco sales business license. A tobacco sales business license
shall only be issued as a secondary license to a business license for one of
the following:
         a.   A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of food and
beverage products and is located in a building which is ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or larger;
         b.   A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of gasoline or
diesel fuel and is located in a building which is two thousand (2,000) square
feet or larger;
         c.   An on-premises alcoholic beverage sales license;
         d.   A business license for a pharmacy under Utah Code and is located
in a building which is ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger; or
         e.   A business license for any business that was lawfully selling
tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia under that license prior to May 8,
2012.
      2.   Application for License:
         a.   An application for a license shall be made in writing on the form
provided by the City’s licensing officer. The form must be completed in its
entirety. The application must be accompanied by:
            (1)   The business license required in this chapter;
            (2)   Documentation showing the square footage of the building;
            (3)   Proof of the operation of a business specified in subsection
(1)(a) or (1)(b) of this section, if the application is to qualify as such a
business; and
            (4)   If seeking to qualify under subsection (1)(e) of this
section, proof of the lawful sales of tobacco products and tobacco
paraphernalia prior to May 8, 2012, and the percentage of tobacco products and
tobacco paraphernalia sold as compared to the total annual gross receipts for
the business.
   B.   Retail Tobacco Specialty Businesses Not Permitted:
      1.   In accordance with Utah Code Annotated 10-8-41.6 the City shall not
issue Tobacco Sales Business Licenses for the operation of Retail Tobacco
Specialty Businesses, except as provided in 3-2-15A(e) of this chapter.
      2.   The operation of a Retail Tobacco Specialty Business shall not be
permitted, unless a business is seeking to qualify under 3-2-15A(e) of this
chapter, or as of May 17, 2017, had been issued and had continually maintained
a Retail Tobacco Specialty Business license by the City.
      3.   Notwithstanding other provisions in this chapter forbidding issuance
by the City of additional Retail Tobacco Specialty Business Licenses-and
recognizing that pursuant to City Code Subsection
3-1-9 no license issued by the City may be assigned, sold or transferred to
another person-the City shall consider the issuance of a new (or “replacement”)
Retail Tobacco Specialty Business License to the potential/prospective
purchaser of an existing business operating under an existing Retail Tobacco
Specialty Business License upon a finding by the City of the following:
         a.   The Existing Retail Tobacco Specialty Business Licensee is
selling its business in the normal course of business and pursuant to standard
business practices; and
         b.   The existing retail tobacco specialty business sold would remain
at the then-current physical location; and
         c.   The potential purchaser of the existing retail tobacco specialty
business has been-or will be as a condition of the sale of the business-
approved by the applicable State and local bodies (which bodies have authority
and jurisdiction for such approval at the time of the proposed sale).
   C.   Revocation of Business License for Specialty Tobacco Stores: Pursuant
to and consistent with the City’s business licensing process in section
3-1-12 of this City Code entitled “DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF A
BUSINESS”, the City may suspend, revoke, or terminate the business license of a
business which is operating as a tobacco sales business (including those
businesses operating under a Retail Tobacco Specialty Business License) if:
      1.   The Tobacco Sales Business License is not renewed continuously
without relapse or revocation;
      2.   The Tobacco Sales Business is closed for business or otherwise
suspends the sale of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia for more than
sixty (60) consecutive days; or
      3.   The Tobacco Sales Business substantially changes the business
premises or its business operation without complying with and obtaining
approval for/from applicable City zoning ordinances, building permit processes,
conditional use permit processes (including the process for amendment of an
existing conditional use permit), and business licensing processes (including
the amendment of an existing business license. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-16: TOWING SERVICE:
All towing service businesses seeking licensure within the City shall comply
with Utah Code Annotated section 72-9-6 as amended; and apply through the
licensure procedure in section
3-1-3E of this Title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-2-17: VEHICLES FOR HIRE:
All transportation network drivers and taxis seeking licensure within the City
shall comply with Utah Code Annotated sections 13-51-1 and 53-3 as amended; and
apply through the licensure procedure in section
3-1-3E of this Title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Reserved
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Number Permitted
3-3-4: License Required
3-3-5: Application For License
3-3-6: Qualifications Of Licensee
3-3-7: Fees For License
3-3-8: Current Status Of Other Charges
3-3-9: Local Consent
3-3-10: Proximity Limitations
3-3-11: Prohibited Acts And Activities - State Statute Provisions Adopted
3-3-12: Revocation, Suspension Or Refusal To Renew
3-3-13: Penalty
3-3-1: RESERVED:
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the Washington City Council hereby adopts, by
reference, and incorporates the definition sections in the Utah Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act. In addition, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning herein prescribed:
ACT:           The Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Utah Code Annotated title 32B or successor
               provisions as amended.
               A license entitling the licensee to sell an alcoholic product for consumption on the
BAR            licensed premises and in connection with a license issued by the state of Utah to
ESTABLISHMENT: operate as a bar establishment as provided in Utah Code Annotated 32B-6, part 4, or
               successor provisions as amended.
               A license intended to serve the clientele, patrons and guests of hotel, hotel-
               resort, or hotel-convention facilities, which bar establishment shall be located in
               a hotel containing not less than forty (40) guest rooms and with not less than one
               thousand (1,000) square feet of function space, consisting of meeting and/or dining
               rooms that can be reserved for private use under a banquet contract and be able to
BAR            accommodate a minimum of seventy-five (75) people and which bar establishment shall
ESTABLISHMENT  not have any separate entrances from outside the hotel facility. This type of bar
IN A HOTEL:    establishment license entitles the licensee to sell alcohol products for consumption
               on the licensed premises and in connection with a license issued by the state of
               Utah to operate as a bar establishment. This type of bar establishment license may
               only be issued to the owner or operator or the operator via management agreement of
               a qualifying hotel, hotel-resort, hotel-convention, or a wholly owned affiliate or
               subsidiary thereof.
               A license intended to serve the clientele, patrons and guests of a significant
               retail facility, which bar establishment shall be located in a retail facility
BAR            containing not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. This type of bar
ESTABLISHMENT  establishment license entitles the licensee to sell alcohol products for consumption
IN A RETAIL    on the licensed premises and in connection with a license issued by the state of
ESTABLISHMENT: Utah to operate as a bar establishment. This type of bar establishment license may
               only be issued to the owner or operator or the operator via management agreement of
               the qualifying retail facility, or a wholly owned affiliate or subsidiary thereof.
               A license intended to serve a specific area designated by the city council, which
BAR            bar establishment shall be located in a commercial zone and in the specific area
ESTABLISHMENT  designated in an overlay zone. This type of bar establishment license entitles the
IN DESIGNATED  licensee to sell alcohol products for consumption on the licensed premises and in
OVERLAY ZONE:  connection with a license issued by the state of Utah to operate as a bar
               establishment.
CITY:          The city of Washington, Utah.
LICENSE        The business license officer of the city.
OFFICER:
               Any property, building, enclosure, room or equipment used in connection with the
LICENSED       sale, storage, service, manufacture, distribution or consumption of alcoholic
PREMISES:      beverages or products and licensed to carry out the activity approved under this
               chapter and under the Act.
LICENSEE:      Any person issued a license by the city to sell, manufacture, store or allow
               consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises owned or controlled by the person.
               A license entitling the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises for
               consumption off the premises as provided in Utah Code Annotated, chapter 32B-7, or
               successor provisions as amended, except, in addition to the Act requirements, the
OFF-PREMISES   following is also required:
BEER RETAILER: A.   The off-premises retail space shall be at least one thousand (1,000) square
               feet; and
               B.   The off-premises beer retailer shall not have more than thirty percent (30%) of
               its total annual gross retail receipts for the off-premises retailer from the sale
               of beer.
               A license entitling the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages, including beer, wine,
               liquor and mixed drinks on the licensed premises for consumption on the premises as
               provided in Utah Code Annotated, title 32B, chapter 6, part 6, or successor
               provisions as amended or as provided in Utah Code Annotated, except as this section
               applies to hotels, in addition to the Act requirements, the following is also
               required:
               A.   A license intended to serve the clientele, patrons and guests of significant
ON-PREMISES    hotel/convention facilities, which on-premises establishment shall be located in a
BANQUET        hotel containing not less than forty (40) guest rooms and at least one thousand
LICENSE:       (1,000) square feet of function space, consisting of meeting and/or dining rooms
               that can be reserved for private use under a banquet contract and be able to
               accommodate a minimum of seventy-five (75) people. This type of banquet license
               entitles the licensee to sell alcoholic products for consumption on the licensed
               premises and in connection with a license issued by the state of Utah to provide
               banquet services in a hotel. This type of license may only be issued to the owner or
               operator or the operator via management agreement of a qualifying hotel, or a wholly
               owned affiliate or subsidiary thereof.
               A license entitling the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises for
               consumption on the premises as provided in Utah Code Annotated, title 32B, chapter
ON-PREMISES    6, part 7, or successor provisions as amended or as provided in Utah Code Annotated,
BEER RETAILER: except, in addition to the Act requirements, the following is also required:
               A.   To be wholly located on the licensed premises of a recreational amenity and
               shall not be allowed on the premises of a facility adjoining the licensed premises
               of a recreational amenity;
               Any person permitted under a contractual agreement with the Utah Department of
               Alcoholic Beverage Control to sell alcoholic products for consumption off the
               licensed premises of the agency as provided in Utah Code Annotated, chapter 32B-2,
               part 6, or successor provisions as amended or as provided in Utah Code Annotated,
               except, in addition to the Act requirements, the following is also required for the
               specified uses:
               A.   For an off-premises retail facility at a hotel:
                  1.   Shall be located in a hotel with not less than forty (40) guest rooms and at
               least one thousand (1,000) square feet of function space, consisting of meeting and/
               or dining rooms that can be reserved for private use under a banquet contract and be
               able to accommodate a minimum of seventy-five (75) people;
                  2.   The retail space for the package agency shall be at least one thousand
               (1,000) square feet; and
PACKAGE           3.   The total annual gross retail receipts for the package agency off-premises
AGENCY:        retailer shall not be more than thirty percent (30%) of the total gross receipts for
               the hotel; or
               B.   For hotel room service:
                  1.   Shall be in a hotel with not less than forty (40) guest rooms and at least
               one thousand (1,000) square feet of function space, consisting of meeting and/or
               dining rooms that can be reserved for private use under a banquet contract and be
               able to accommodate a minimum of seventy-five (75) people; and
                  2.   The total annual gross room service alcohol receipts for the package agency
               retailer shall not be more than thirty percent (30%) of the total gross receipts for
               the hotel; or
               C.   An off-premises retail facility at a manufacturing facility licensed under Utah
               Code Annotated chapter 32B-11:
                  1.   Shall be in the manufacturing facility and the retail space shall be at
               least one thousand (1,000) square feet.
               Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, business trust, or
PERSON:        other form of business enterprise, including a receiver or trustee, and the plural
               as well as the singular number, unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is
               disclosed by the context.
               For purposes of issuing an on-premises beer retailer license that is not a tavern,
               “recreational amenity” is one (1) or more of the following or an activity
               substantially similar to one (1) of the following:
               A.   A pool parlor;
               B.   A bowling facility;
RECREATIONAL   C.   A golf course;
AMENITY:       D.   Miniature golf;
               E.   A golf driving range;
               F.   A tennis club;
               G.   A sports facility that hosts professional sporting events and has a seating
               capacity equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500); or
               H.   A concert venue that has a seating capacity equal to or greater than two
               thousand five hundred (2,500). (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
 
3-3-3: NUMBER PERMITTED:
   A.   The quotas for alcohol licenses in Washington City shall be as set
forth herein. Where a quota is not set forth in this chapter, the quotas
established under the Act shall apply. Specified:
      1.   Off-Premises Beer Retailer: The total number of off-premises beer
retailer licenses issued within the city shall not exceed that number
determined by dividing the population of the city by one thousand (1,000).
However, the city council shall have discretion to issue an off-premises beer
retailer license without regard to the quota set forth above, if the licensee
falls within the category of establishment where the total square footage
devoted to the sale of grocery or related items exceeds ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and the impact of the applicant upon the economy of the city is
determined to be beneficial.
      2.   On-Premises Beer Retailer Tavern: On and after July 1, 1994, the
city shall not issue any new on-premises beer retailer tavern licenses. The
city may only renew existing on-premises beer retailer tavern licenses, permit
a change of licensee at licensed premises existing as of July 1, 1994, and
allow existing on-premises beer retailer tavern licensees to move to new
locations if the license fees are paid and the new location meets the
requirements of this chapter and other provisions of this code and the
requirements of the Act. Any on-premises beer retailer tavern licensee or
renewal whose license is revoked for whatever reason shall not be entitled to
obtain a new on-premises beer retailer tavern license.
      3.   Bar Establishment: The total number of licenses issued within the
city shall not exceed that number determined by dividing the population of the
city by twenty thousand (20,000). This license may only be issued in a
commercial or planned development zone that has been amended by the city
council allowing a bar establishment in that zone.
      4.   Bar Establishment In A Hotel: The total number of licenses issued
within the city shall not exceed that number determined by dividing the
population of the city by ten thousand (10,000).
      5.   Bar Establishment In A Retail Establishment: The total number of
licenses issued within the city shall not exceed that number determined by
dividing the population of the city by ten thousand (10,000).
      6.   Bar Establishment In Designated Overlay Zone: The total number of
licenses issued within the city in designated overlay zones shall not exceed a
total of three (3) licenses among any and all of the designated overlay zones.
A bar establishment must obtain its business license and be legally operating
within six (6) months from the date the site plan approval is granted by the
City Council in the event that the licensed location does not require new
facility construction. A bar establishment must obtain its business license and
be legally operating within eighteen (18) months from the date the site plan
approval is granted by the City Council in the event that the licensed location
is a new-build or substantial remodel/retrofit location. If a license is issued
for a bar establishment before it opens for business and the business fails to
open within the requisite time period listed herein, the city shall revoke the
bar establishment license.
      7.   On-Premises Beer Retailer: The total number of licenses issued
within the city shall not exceed that number determined by dividing the
population of the city by ten thousand (10,000).
   B.   State License No Effect: A license issued by the state for the sale of
alcoholic beverages shall not affect the need for a separate license from the
city. Holding one (1) type of license under this chapter shall have no effect
on the applicability of regulations or quotas governing other types.
   C.   Population Determination: Population for determining the number of
licenses shall be by the most recent U.S. decennial or special census or by any
other population determination made by the United States government or the
state. If the city council wishes to make more frequent determinations of
population than what may be available from the above sources, it may do so
based on such formula as it may reasonably consider to be accurate, and in such
event, it may abandon that determination upon issuance of a new census figure
by the United States or state if it believes the latter to be more accurate.
(Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-3-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   An alcohol license is required by any person who is required to have a
state alcohol license under the Act. The alcohol license is in addition to a
business license under chapter 1 of this title, “General License Provisions.”
   B.   Separate License Each Location And Type: Any license issued under this
chapter shall be to sell alcoholic product or otherwise conduct permitted
activities only at the specific place and in the specific manner provided by
such license. A separate license shall be obtained for each type of alcohol
activity and for each different location for which the applicant desires to
carry on activities regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-3-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Required: An application for a license under this chapter shall be made
in writing, under oath, and on a form provided by the city for a new license,
due to a change of ownership, a change of lessee of an existing licensed
premises, or a change of location of an existing licensed premises. Renewal
applications must be signed by an authorized signer for the business and
returned to the city with a copy of the current state alcohol license and all
applicable fees.
   B.   Accompanying Materials: Any application submitted under this chapter
shall be accompanied by:
      1.   A nonrefundable application fee in such amount as established by
resolution of the city council;
      2.   An issuance fee for an original license or renewal in such amount as
established by resolution of the city council, which is refundable if a license
is not issued. If a license is issued on or after July 1 in any year, one-half
(1/2) of the license fee shall be charged;
      3.   A copy of the applicant’s current business license or application
therefor;
      4.   A copy of the completed application being submitted to the state for
the state alcohol license;
      5.   For all off-premises beer retailer alcohol licenses, the applicant
shall provide a criminal history for the owner and the local manager of the
retail location along with a list of all community locations within three
hundred feet (300') of the off-premises beer retail location as provided in
section
3-3-10;
      6.   A signed consent form stating that the licensee will permit any
authorized representative of the city or any law enforcement officer an
unrestricted right to enter the licensed premises; and
      7.   Any other information the license officer may require.
   C.   Renewal Applications: Renewal applications must be signed by an
authorized signer for the business and returned to the city with a copy of the
current state alcohol license and all applicable fees.
   D.   Submission To License Officer: All applications and accompanying
information shall be returned to the license officer.
   E.   Reserved.
   F.   Assignment Or Transfer: No license issued under this chapter shall be
assigned, transferred, leased, subleased or sold, or otherwise transferred,
except that in the sole discretion of the city, a transfer of a license may be
permitted upon a change of location where the owner remains the same, or upon a
change of owners where the location remains the same. In either case, the same
requirements as to the location of premises and the qualifications of the
licensee shall apply, and the same fees will be required as in the case of the
issuance of an original license.
   G.   Nonuse - Validity: A license issued under this chapter which is not
used by the licensee within or for a period in excess of ninety (90)
consecutive days shall automatically revert to the city and shall no longer
have any validity. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-3-6: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
   A.   Every licensee hereunder shall be over the age of twenty-one (21) years
and lawfully present in the United States. If the applicant is a corporation,
partnership, limited liability company or other entity, it shall be qualified
to do business in the state and each shareholder, joint venturer, partner or
member holding any interest greater than twenty percent (20%) in the applicant
business, and each operator, director, officer, manager and trustee, shall meet
the qualifications to be a licensee. Any partnership, limited liability
company, corporation or other entity who shall hold its license through an
agent shall also meet all the qualifications of a licensee. Such agent shall be
personally responsible for assuring compliance with this chapter and the Act
and shall be subject to the penalties for any violation of this chapter or of
the Act. Upon the death, resignation or discharge of its agent, a partnership,
limited liability company, corporation or other entity shall, within thirty
(30) days, appoint another agent to qualify for and hold the license. Failure
to designate a substitute agent within the time required shall be grounds for
suspension, revocation or refusal to renew the license.
   B.   No license shall be issued to any person who has violated any provision
of this title or the Act or who has violated any provision of a license to sell
alcoholic products issued by any governmental agency within the state, or who
has had such a license revoked. No license shall be issued to any person who
has been convicted of a felony or of any violation of any law or ordinance
relating to alcoholic beverages or drugs, keeping a gambling or disorderly
house, or any law or ordinance involving moral turpitude, or who has pleaded
guilty to, including a plea in abeyance, or forfeited bail on a charge of
having committed a felony or of having violated any such law or ordinance.
(Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-3-7: FEES FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Application Fee: A nonrefundable application fee in such amount as
established by resolution of the city council shall be submitted with any
application for an original license.
   B.   License Fee: At the time of application for an original license or
renewal, the applicant shall pay an issuance fee in such amount as established
by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-3-8: CURRENT STATUS OF OTHER CHARGES:
No license shall be issued to any applicant who is in arrears in the payment to
the city for any business license fees, or who is otherwise indebted to the
city. Failure to pay business license fees or other charges assessed by the
city when due shall be a basis for suspension or revocation of any license
issued hereunder. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-3-9: LOCAL CONSENT:
Where a party seeks local consent of the city for an application for an alcohol
license with the state of Utah, the party shall submit an application as
required for an alcohol license. The city manager or designee shall consider
the location, the nature and class of the proposed license, and whether the
license will comply with the city ordinances. Local consent shall expire if a
license is not issued by the state within eighteen (18) months. (Ord. 2022-64,
12-14-2022)
3-3-10: PROXIMITY LIMITATIONS:
Specified: No off-premises beer retailer licensee’s premises may be established
within three hundred feet (300') of any community location, as measured from
the nearest entrance of the licensee’s premises or establishment by following
the shortest route of either ordinary pedestrian traffic or, where applicable,
vehicular travel along public thoroughfares, whichever is the closer, to the
property boundary of the community location. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-3-11: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES - STATE STATUTE PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
   A.   The city council hereby adopts by reference and incorporates into this
code all sections of Utah Code Annotated title 32B, Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act, or successor provisions as amended, that relate to Class B misdemeanors,
Class C misdemeanors or infractions. In the event the city code is inconsistent
with the requirements of the Act, the city code shall control, except if the
state law preempts the city code then the state law shall control.
   B.   It is unlawful:
      1.   For a person to buy for resale, sell or deal in alcoholic products
without complying with the provisions of this chapter, the Act and any other
applicable law;
      2.   For an off-premises beer retailer licensee or its employee to sell,
dispose of, deliver or give beer to any person between the hours of one o’clock
(1:00) A.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M.;
      3.   For an on-premises beer retailer/non-tavern recreational amenity
retailer to serve beer in containers other than a clear glass, a clear pitcher
or the beer’s original container. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-3-12: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR REFUSAL TO RENEW:
   A.   Reasons Specified: In addition to the provisions provided in this
Chapter, the license officer may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license
issued pursuant to this chapter for any of the following reasons:
      1.   There occurs on the licensed premises repeated acts of violence.
      2.   The licensee is on the premises habitually drunk or under the
influence of alcohol or illegal drugs.
      3.   The licensee fails to keep for a period of two (2) years, or make
available to the city upon reasonable request, all invoices, records, bills or
other papers and documents relating to the purchase and sale of alcoholic
beverages.
      4.   The licensee commits a violation which is a felony or any violation
of any law or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages, driving under the
influence of alcohol, or alcohol related reckless driving, keeping a gambling
or disorderly house, or any law or ordinance involving moral turpitude. (Ord.
2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-3-13: PENALTY:
Any violation of the statutes in this section will be subject to the penalty
provisions in section
3-1-14 of this code. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
CHAPTER 4
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Home Occupations
3-4-1: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
All home based businesses shall comply with the requirements listed in Title 9
of the Washington City Code. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-5-1: Purpose
3-5-2: Definitions
3-5-3: No Other City License Or Approval Required
3-5-4: Exemptions From Article
3-5-5: Solicitation Prohibited
3-5-6: Registration Of Solicitors
3-5-7: Application Form
3-5-8: Written Disclosures
3-5-9: When Registration Begins
3-5-10: Issuance Of License And Badge
3-5-11: Renewal
3-5-12: Maintenance Of Registry
3-5-13: Non Transferability Of Licenses
3-5-14: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of A License And Badge
3-5-15: Appeal
3-5-16: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
3-5-17: “No Solicitation” Notice
3-5-18: Duties Of Solicitors
3-5-19: Time Of Day Restrictions
3-5-20: Buyer’s Right To Cancel
3-5-1: PURPOSE:
Residents of the City have an inalienable interest in their personal safety,
well being, and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability to
provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief, political
or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in commerce. The City
has a substantial interest in protecting the well being, tranquility, personal
safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the ability to protect
citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property. The City also has
a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or otherwise unfair
consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.
There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the City and its
citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this article on the rights of
those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of City officials
derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and property from
criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens regarding door to
door solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement officers and those
affected by door to door canvassing and soliciting, as well as judicial
decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional protections afforded and
denied persons seeking to engage in door to door solicitation, the City adopts
this article to promote the City’s substantial interests in:
   A.   Respecting citizens’ decisions regarding privacy in their residences;
   B.   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
   C.   Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious
belief, political position, or charitable activities; and
   D.   Permitting truthful and non misleading door-to-door solicitation
regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
The City finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in this
article are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the City interests
referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those
regulated. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ADVOCATING:   Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support religious belief,
              political position, or charitable activities.
              The person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a certificate, either
APPELLANT:    personally as an applicant or registered solicitor, or on behalf of the applicant or
              registered solicitor.
              An individual who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and not a corporation,
APPLICANT:    partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity who applies for a
              certificate permitting door to door solicitation.
APPLICATION   A standardized form provided by the City to an applicant to be completed and
FORM:         submitted as part of registration.
              An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the
              date of the application, of either: a) a Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of
BCI:          Criminal Identification verified criminal history report personal to the applicant;
              or b) verification by the Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal
              Identification that no criminal history rising to the level of a disqualifying
              status exists for the applicant.
BUSINESS:     A commercial enterprise licensed by the City as a person or entity under this title,
              having a fixed or temporary physical location within the City.
CERTIFICATE:  A temporary, annual, or renewal certificate permitting door to door solicitation in
              the City applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of this article.
CHARITABLE    Advocating by persons or entities that either are, or support, a charitable
ACTIVITIES:   organization.
              Includes any person, joint venture, partnership, limited liability company,
              corporation, association, group, or other entity:
              A.   That is:
                 1.   A benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane,
              patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public health,
              environmental or conservation, or civic organization;
                 2.   For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter
CHARITABLE    fraternal association; or
ORGANIZATION:    3.   Established for any charitable purpose; and
              B.   That is tax exempt under applicable provisions of the internal revenue code of
              1986, as amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible contributions
              from the public for charitable purposes.
              C.   Charitable organization includes a chapter, branch, area, or office, or similar
              affiliate or any person soliciting contributions within the state for a charitable
              organization that has its principal place of business outside the City or state of
              Utah 1 .
COMPETENT     A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen (18) years of age and of
INDIVIDUAL:   sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage in rational thought,
              conversation, and conduct.
COMPLETED     A fully completed application form, a BCI, two (2) copies of the original
APPLICATION:  identification relied on by the applicant to establish proof of identity, and the
              tendering of fees.
              The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of no contest, guilty, entry of a
              judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not been set aside on appeal or
CRIMINALLY    pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal conviction is that offense of
CONVICTED:    which the applicant or registered solicitor was convicted, without regard to the
              reduced status of the charge after completion of conditions of probation or parole,
              and charges dismissed under a plea in abeyance or diversion agreement.
              Anything specifically defined in this article as requiring the denial or suspension
              of a certificate, and any of the following:
              A.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of: 1)
              felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, 3)
              the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual assault of any kind;
              B.   Criminal charges are currently pending against the applicant or registered
              solicitor for: 1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or
              exploiting a minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4)
              sexual assault of any kind;
              C.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of a felony
              within the last ten (10) years;
              D.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been incarcerated in a federal or
              state prison within the past five (5) years;
              E.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of a
DISQUALIFYING misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: 1) moral turpitude
STATUS:       which includes, but is not limited to: possession of a controlled substance, theft,
              fraud, falsification in official matters, offenses against privacy, lewdness, and
              voyeurism or 2) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
              F.   A final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant or registered
              solicitor within the last five (5) years indicating that: 1) the applicant or
              registered solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation,
              or 2) that a debt of the applicant or registered solicitor was nondischargeable in
              bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
              G.   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently on parole or probation to
              any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house
              arrest or subject to a tracking device;
              H.   The applicant or registered solicitor has an outstanding arrest warrant from
              any jurisdiction; or
              I.   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently subject to a protective
              order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
              The practice of engaging in or attempting to engage in conversation with any person
DOOR TO DOOR  at a residence, whether or not that person is a competent individual, while making
SOLICITATION: or seeking to make or facilitate a home solicitation sale, or attempting to further
              the sale of goods and/or services.
ENTITY:       Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful
              entity, organization, society or association.
              The cost charged to the applicant or registered solicitor for the issuance of a
FEES:         certificate and identification badge, which shall not exceed the reasonable costs of
              processing the application and issuing the certificate and identification badge
FINAL CIVIL   A civil judgment that would be recognized under state law as a judgment to which
JUDGMENT:     collateral estoppel would apply.
GOODS:        One or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise, perishables of any kind,
              subscriptions, or manufactured products offered, provided, or sold.
              To make or attempt to make a sale of goods or services by a solicitor at a residence
HOME          by means of door to door solicitation, regardless of:
SOLICITATION  A.   The means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
SALE:         B.   The time of delivery of the goods or services; or
              C.   The previous or present classification of the solicitor as a solicitor,
              peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or similar designation.
LICENSING     The City employee(s) or agent(s) responsible for receiving from an applicant or
OFFICER:      registered solicitor the completed application and either granting, suspending, or
              denying the applicant’s certificate.
NO            A reasonably visible and legible sign that states “No Soliciting”, “No Solicitors”,
SOLICITATION  “No Salespersons”, “No Trespassing”, or words of similar import.
SIGN:
POLITICAL     Any actually held belief, or information for, against, or in conjunction with any
POSITION:     political, social, environmental, or humanitarian belief or practice.
REGISTERED    Any person who has been issued a current certificate by the City.
SOLICITOR:
REGISTRATION: The process used by the City licensing officer to accept a completed application and
              determine whether or not a certificate will be denied, granted, or suspended.
              Any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or in conjunction with, any
RELIGIOUS     theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption, presumption or position, or religious
BELIEF:       doctrine, dogma, or practice regardless of whether or not the belief or information
              is endorsed by any other person or public or private entity.
              Any living unit contained within any building or structure that is occupied by any
RESIDENCE:    person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the City, together with the
              lot or other real property on which the living unit is located. This does not
              include the sidewalk, public street or public right-of-way.
              That person or entity responsible to provide the following to an applicant,
              registered solicitor, and the competent individual in a residence to whom a sale of
              goods or services is made or attempted to be made by means of a home solicitation
              sale:
RESPONSIBLE   A.   Maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax number,
PERSON OR     computing the sales taxes owing from any sale of goods or services, paying the sales
ENTITY:       taxes, and filing any required returns or reports;
              B.   Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to cancel the
              sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
              C.   Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those persons who
              timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law.
SALE OF GOODS The conduct and agreement of a solicitor and the competent individual in a residence
OR SERVICES:  regarding a particular good(s) or service(s) that entitles the consumer to rescind
              the same within three (3) days under any applicable federal, state, or local law.
SERVICES:     Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided, or sold to a
              competent individual of a residence.
              Any of the following activities:
              A.   Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares, merchandise
              or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or consideration,
              regardless of whether advance payment is sought.
              B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase insurance,
SOLICITING OR subscriptions to publications, or publications.
SOLICIT OR    C.   Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value for the
SOLICITATION: benefit of any person or entity.
              D.   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or services.
              E.   Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence for the purpose
              of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding religious belief,
              political position, charitable conduct, or a home solicitation sale.
              F.   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of soliciting,
              such as hawking or peddling.
SOLICITOR OR  A person(s) engaged in door to door solicitation.
SOLICITORS:
SUBMITTED IN  The information for an appeal of a denial or suspension of a certificate, submitted
WRITING:      in any type of written statement to the City offices by certified, registered,
              priority, overnight or delivery confirmation mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
              An oral, written, or electronic report:
              A.   That is submitted to and documented by the City;
              B.   By any of the following:
                 1.   A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or other
              City employees with publicly available identification of their name, address, and
              any other reliable means of contact;
                 2.   City law enforcement or licensing officer; or
                 3.   Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level of
              government.
SUBSTANTIATED C.   That provides any of the following information regarding a registered
REPORT:       solicitor:
                 1.   Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying status of
              a registered solicitor;
                 2.   Probable cause that the registered solicitor has committed a disqualifying
              status which has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying status;
                 3.   Documented, eyewitness accounts that the registered solicitor has engaged in
              repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrates failure by the registered solicitor
              to adhere to the requirements of this article; or
                 4.   Probable cause that continued licensing of the registered solicitor creates
              exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety, or welfare of any
              individuals or entities within the City.
              The written form provided to applicant by the City wherein applicant agrees that the
WAIVER:       City may obtain a name, date of birth, and BCI background check on the applicant for
              licensing purposes under this article, and which contains applicant’s notarized
              signature. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
 
 
Notes
1 1. Charitable solicitation act UCA §§ 13-22-2(1)(a) and (b).
3-5-3: NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration need not
apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the City
to engage in door to door solicitation.
   B.   Any business licensed by the City under another City ordinance that
uses employees, independent contractors, or agents for door to door
solicitation in an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the
business, shall be required to have such solicitors obtain a certificate,
unless otherwise exempt from registration.
   C.   Any business located outside of City limits that desires to have
employees, independent contractors, or agents for door to door solicitation
within the City shall also be required to obtain a license. Such a business
shall also be required to have such solicitors obtain a certificate, unless
otherwise exempt from registration.
   D.   Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other
requirement of federal, state, or other local government law regarding any
license, permit, or certificate that a registered solicitor is otherwise
required to have or maintain. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM ARTICLE:
The following are exempt from registration under this article:
   A.   Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent individual
prior to the time of the person’s arrival at the residence;
   B.   Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the
state of Utah permits them to engage in door to door solicitation to offer
goods or services to an occupant of the residence;
   C.   Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously made
order, or persons providing services at a residence pursuant to a previously
made request by a competent individual;
   D.   Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any religious belief, or political position regardless of
whether goods, services, or any other consideration is offered or given, with
or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or purchase;
and
   E.   Persons representing a charitable organization. The charitable
exemption shall apply to students soliciting contributions to finance
extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs;
provided, that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the school
administration, and that such student solicitors carry current picture student
identification from the educational institution for which they are soliciting.
Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties and
prohibitions outlined in sections
3-5-17,
3-5-18 and
3-5-19 of this article while advocating or soliciting. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-
2022)
3-5-5: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this article, the practice of being in and upon a private
residence within the City by solicitors, for the purpose of home solicitation
sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set
forth in this article. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-6: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS:
Unless otherwise exempt under this article, all persons desiring to engage in
door to door solicitation within the City, prior to doing so, shall submit a
completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a certificate. (Ord.
2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-7: APPLICATION FORM:
The licensing officer shall provide a standard application form for use for the
registration of solicitors. Upon request to the licensing officer, or as
otherwise provided, any person or entity may obtain in person, by mail, or
facsimile, a copy of this application form. Each application form shall require
disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following information,
documentation, and fee:
   A.   Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has
received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this article.
   B.   Contact Information:
      1.   Applicant’s true, correct and legal name, including any former names
or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
      2.   Applicant’s telephone number, home address and mailing address, if
different;
      3.   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone
number of the responsible person or entity; and
      4.    The address by which all notices to the applicant required under
this article are to be sent.
   C.   Proof Of Identity: An in-person verification by the licensing officer
of the applicant’s true identity by use of any of the following which bear a
photograph of said applicant:
      1.   A valid driver’s license issued by any state;
      2.   A valid passport issued by the United States;
      3.   A valid identification card issued by any state;
      4.   A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States
military.
Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to
establish proof of identity shall be returned to the applicant.
   D.   Proof Of Registration With Department of Commerce: The applicant shall
provide proof that either the applicant, or the responsible person or entity,
has registered with the Utah State Department of Commerce.
   E.   Special Events Sales Tax Number: The applicant shall provide a special
events sales tax number for either the applicant, or for the responsible person
or entity for which the applicant will be soliciting.
   F.   Marketing Information:
      1.   The goods or services offered by the applicant, including any
commonly known, registered or trademarked names;
      2.   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits,
registrations, or other qualifications required by federal or state law to
promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered goods or services.
   G.   BCI Background Check: The applicant shall provide:
      1.   An original or a copy of a BCI background check as defined in
section
3-5-2 of this article; and
      2.   A signed copy of a waiver whereby the applicant agrees to allow the
City to obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on the applicant for
purposes of enforcement of this article.
   H.   Responses To Questions Regarding “Disqualifying Status”: The applicant
shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the
application form:   
      1.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of: a) felony homicide,
b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, c) the sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual assault of any kind;
      2.   Are any criminal charges currently pending against the applicant
for: a) felony homicide, b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting
a minor, c) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual
assault of any kind;
      3.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a felony within the
last ten (10) years;
      4.   Has the applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison
within the past five (5) years;
      5.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within
the past five (5) years involving a crime of: a) moral turpitude, or b) violent
or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
      6.   Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant within
the last five (5) years indicating that: a) the applicant had either engaged in
fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or b) that a debt of the applicant was
nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4),
(a)(6), or (a)(19);
      7.   Is the applicant currently on parole or probation to any court,
penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest
or subject to a tracking device;
      8.   Does the applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any
jurisdiction; or
      9.   Is the applicant currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   I.   Fee: The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the
City, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application
and issuing the certificate and identification badge.
   J.   Headshot Photo: The applicant shall provide a passport style headshot
photograph to be used on the solicitor ID.
   K.   Execution Of Application: The applicant shall execute the application
form, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on
the present knowledge and belief of the applicant, the information provided is
complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-8: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the
applicant of the following:
   A.   The applicant’s submission of the application authorizes the City to
verify information submitted with the completed application including:
      1.   The applicant’s address;
      2.   The applicant’s and responsible person’s or entity’s state tax
identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
      3.   The validity of the applicant’s proof of identity;
   B.   The City may consult any publicly available sources for information on
the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding
warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments;
   C.   Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is
allowed;
   D.   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant
with a completed application;
   E.   The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed
application;
   F.   To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, the applicant’s
BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not
available for public inspection;
   G.   The City will maintain copies of the applicant’s application form,
proof of identity, and identification badge. These copies will become public
records available for inspection on demand at the City offices whether or not a
license is denied, granted, or renewed;
   H.   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial, or suspension of a
license under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-9: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS:
The licensing officer shall not begin the registration process unless the
applicant has submitted a completed application. The original identification
submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned after the licensing
officer verifies the applicant’s identity. A copy of the identification may be
retained by the licensing officer. If an original BCI background check is
submitted by the applicant, the licensing officer shall make a copy of the BCI
and return the original to the applicant. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-10: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE AND BADGE:
The licensing officer shall review the completed application submitted by the
applicant and issue a badge in accordance with the following:
   A.   Issuance: A solicitor badge shall be issued allowing the applicant to
immediately begin door-to-door solicitation upon the following conditions:
      1.   Applicant’s submission of a completed application;
      2.   Applicant’s submission of the required fee;
      3.   Applicant establishes proof of identity;
      4.   The applicant’s representations on the application form do not
affirmatively show a disqualifying status;
      5.   The BCI does not affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
      6.   The applicant has not previously been denied a license by the City,
or had a license revoked for grounds that still constitute a disqualifying
status under this article.   
   B.   Solicitor Badge: The identification badge shall bear the name of the
City and shall contain: 1) the name of the registered solicitor; 2) address and
phone number of the registered solicitor, or the name, address, and phone
number of the responsible person or entity; 3) recent photograph of the
registered solicitor; and 4) the date on which the license expires. (Ord. 2022-
64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-11: RENEWAL:
Any annual solicitor license that is not suspended, revoked, or expired may be
renewed for the new year with the submission of a new completed application and
payment of the fee, unless any of the conditions for the denial, suspension or
revocation of a license are present as set forth in section
3-5-14 of this article, or a disqualifying status is present. Renewal will take
place according to the requirements in
3-1-8 of this title. A new solicitors badge will be issued upon completion of
renewal application. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-12: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The licensing officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a
copy or record of every completed application received and the license or
written denial issued by the City. The applicant’s BCI background check shall
remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public
inspection. The licensing officer may furnish to the head of the City’s law
enforcement agency a listing of all applicants, those denied, and those issued
a license. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-13: NON TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES:
Individual solicitor licenses shall be issued only in the name of the applicant
and shall list the responsible party or entity, if any. The license shall be
non transferable. A registered solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to
facilitate home solicitation sales with different: a) goods or services; or b)
responsible person or entity, from those designated in the originally submitted
completed application, shall submit a written change request to the licensing
officer. A new license based on the amended information shall be issued for the
balance of time remaining on the solicitor’s previous license before the
amendment was filed. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-14: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE AND BADGE:
   A.   Denial: Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a
license to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      1.   The license application is incomplete or incorrect;
      2.   The applicant fails to:
         a.   Establish proof of identity,
         b.   Provide a BCI, or
         c.   Pay the associated fees
      3.   The completed application or BI indicates that the applicant has a
disqualifying status; or
      4.   The applicant has previously been denied a license by the City, or
has had a license revoked for grounds that still constitute a disqualifying
status under this article.
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation: The City shall either suspend or revoke a
license when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a license occurs.
   C.   Notice Of Denial Or Suspension: Upon determination of the licensing
officer to deny an applicant’s completed application or to suspend a registered
solicitor’s license, the City shall cause written notice to be sent to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the method indicated in the completed
application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or suspension,
the documentation or information the City relied on to make the decision, the
availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon one business
day’s notice to the City, and the date upon which the denial or suspension of
the license shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant or
registered solicitor shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the
notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or suspension of
the license shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from the
date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of exigent
circumstances outlined in subsection C4 of the definition of “substantiated
report” in section 3-18-2 of this article, in which case, the suspension is
effective immediately. The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless
and until the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a
court to be contrary to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a
license automatically results in its revocation. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-15: APPEAL:
An applicant or registered solicitor whose license has been denied or suspended
shall have the right to appeal according to the procedure laid out in
3-1-12(B) of this title. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-16: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   B.   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to
face solicitation: 1) the name of the solicitor; 2) the name and address of the
entity with whom the solicitor is associated; and 3) the purpose of the
solicitor’s contact with the person and/or competent individual. This
requirement may be satisfied through the use of the badge and an informational
flyer;
   C.    No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   D.   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the
granting of a license of registration implies any endorsement by the City of
the solicitor’s goods or services or of the individual solicitor. (Ord. 2022-
64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-17: “NO SOLICITATION” NOTICE:
   A.   Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a “no solicitation” sign which shall be posted on or
near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the
sidewalk leading to the residence.
   B.   The display of such a sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute
notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
   C.    It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each
residence for the presence of any such notice.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors who are
exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord.
2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-18: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for
any “no soliciting” sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a
solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, “no
solicitation” signs. If such sign or placard is posted such solicitor shall
desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall
immediately depart from such property. Possession of a license of registration
does not in any way relieve any solicitor of this duty.   
   B.   It is a violation of this article for any person soliciting or
advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner
attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a “no
solicitation” sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or
attempting to engage in advocating, a home solicitation sale, door to door
soliciting, or soliciting.
   C.   It is a violation of this article for any solicitor through ruse,
deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take action
calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
   D.   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence or
dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.   
   E.   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical
contact with, or touch another person without the person’s consent.
   F.   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their
explicit consent.
   G.   The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person
and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their
lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
   H.   The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 2022-
64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-19: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a
residence before nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o’clock (9:00) P.M.
Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the
resident to do so. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-5-20: BUYER’S RIGHT TO CANCEL:
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer’s signature to a written
statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third
business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of “buyer’s
right to cancel” shall be in the form required by section 70C-5-103, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, or a current version thereof or any state or federal law
modifying or amending such provision. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
CHAPTER 6
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose And Intent
3-6-2: Application Of Provisions
3-6-3: Definitions
3-6-4: Zone Permitted; Distance Restrictions; Classification
3-6-5: Location Of Sexually Oriented Businesses
3-6-6: Existing Businesses
3-6-7: Permit Requirements; Application
3-6-8: Employee License Requirements
3-6-9: Investigation
3-6-10: Inspection Of Premises
3-6-11: Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
3-6-12: Fee For Permit
3-6-13: Expiration Of Permit; Renewal
3-6-14: Suspension Of Permit
3-6-15: Revocation Of Permit
3-6-16: Review Of Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
3-6-17: Transferability
3-6-18: Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or Videos In Booths
3-6-19: Minors
3-6-20: Advertising And Lighting
3-6-21: Hours Of Operation
3-6-22: Nudity Prohibited; Exemptions
3-6-23: Live Entertainment
3-6-24: Operation Without Valid Permit
3-6-25: Distribution Of Sexual Devices
3-6-26: Immunity From Prosecution
3-6-27: Injunctions
3-6-28: Penalty
3-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the citizens of the City and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the City, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse
secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of
this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
   B.   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the City.
The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials.
   C.   Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first
amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or
effect of this chapter to in any way condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material or material harmful to minors. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain
business activities, which are characterized as sexually oriented businesses,
and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually oriented
business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions require,
this chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances. (Ord.
2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms and words are defined as
follows:
                                                          A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless
EMPLOYEE:                                                 of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the
                                                          operator of said business.
                                                          Means and includes any of the following:
                                                          A.   The opening or commencement of any business as a new business;
                                                          B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented
ESTABLISHMENT:                                            business, to any of the “sexually oriented businesses” defined in this section;
                                                          C.   The addition of any of the “sexually oriented businesses” defined in this
                                                          chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
                                                          D.   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
                                                          A.   The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or
NUDITY, NUDE OR STATE OF NUDITY:                          the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
                                                          B.   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttocks, anus,
                                                          male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or nipple of the female breast.
OPERATOR:                                                 The owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any
                                                          permitted or licensed premises.
PERMITTED PREMISES OR LICENSED PREMISES:                  Any premises that requires a license and/or permit and that is classified as a
                                                          sexually oriented business.
                                                          A person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented
PERMITTEE OR LICENSEE:                                    business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the
                                                          application for a permit and/or license.
PERSON:                                                   An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal
                                                          entity.
                                                          Any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the
PUBLIC BUILDING:                                          City, any special district, school district, or any other agency or political
                                                          subdivision of the state or the United States, which building is used for
                                                          governmental purposes.
                                                          Public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including,
                                                          but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir,
PUBLIC PARK:                                              athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian or bicycle paths, open space,
                                                          wilderness areas, or similar public land within the City which is under the control,
                                                          operation or management of the City. Public park does not include a public square.
PUBLIC SQUARE:                                            Property owned and maintained by the City that has been designated as a public square
                                                          and is open for public use as provided in this chapter.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION:                                    Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for
                                                          religious worship and related religious activities.
                                                          Except with regard to caretaker residences in a commercial or manufacturing zone, a
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR RESIDENTIAL USE:                  single-family, duplex, townhouse, multifamily or mobile home park, development or
                                                          subdivision and campgrounds, and single-family, duplex, townhouse, multifamily, or
                                                          mobile home uses, all as defined under City ordinances.
                                                          Any public or private educational facility, including, but not limited to, child
                                                          daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools,
                                                          primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high
SCHOOL:                                                   schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special
                                                          education schools, junior colleges and universities. School includes the school
                                                          grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and
                                                          only incidentally as a school.
                                                          A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and
SEMINUDE:                                                 areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting
                                                          straps or devices.
                                                          An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS:                               cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor,
                                                          sexual encounter establishment, escort, escort agency or seminude model studio.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:                             Those businesses defined as follows:
                                                          An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more still or
                                                          motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, or other image
   ADULT ARCADE:                                       producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are regularly used
                                                          to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
                                                          reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
                                                          sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
                                                          A commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its
                                                          stock in trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or
                                                          devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising
                                                          to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one (1) or more of the
                                                          following:
                                                          A.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
                                                          motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are
                                                          characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO “specified anatomical areas”;
STORE:                                                    B.   An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
                                                          the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing
                                                          “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, and still be
                                                          categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. Such
                                                          other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being
                                                          categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long
                                                          as one (1) of its principal business purposes is offering for sale, rental or
                                                          viewing, for some form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or
                                                          describe “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”.
                                                          A nightclub, bar, restaurant, “bottle club,” or similar commercial establishment,
                                                          whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features:
                                                          A.   Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or seminude;
   ADULT CABARET:                                      B.   Live performances which are characterized by “specified sexual activities;” or
                                                          C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
                                                          reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
                                                          sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
                                                          A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:
                                                          A.   Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides
                                                          patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
                                                          cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
                                                          depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
   ADULT MOTEL:                                        areas” and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of
                                                          material including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets,
                                                          radio or television; or
                                                          B.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours;
                                                          or
                                                          C.   Allows a tenant or occupant to sub rent the sleeping room for a time period of
                                                          less than ten (10) hours.
                                                          A commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER:                       similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
                                                          description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” are
                                                          regularly shown for any form of consideration.
                                                          A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which, for
   ADULT THEATER:                                      any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear seminude or live
                                                          performances which are characterized by “specified sexual activities”.
                                                          A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion,
   ESCORT:                                             guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie
                                                          or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
                                                          A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to
   ESCORT AGENCY:                                      furnish escorts as one (1) of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other
                                                          consideration.
                                                          Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub,
                                                          administration of fomentations, electronic or magnetic treatments, or any other
                                                          treatment whereby manipulation of the human body occurs as a part of or in connection
                                                          with “specified sexual activities,” or where any person providing such treatment,
                                                          manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his or her “specified anatomical
   MASSAGE PARLOR:                                     areas.” The definition of “sexually oriented businesses’‘ shall not include the
                                                          practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor by a
                                                          licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist or massage
                                                          therapist not engaged in the above, nor by any nurse or technician working under the
                                                          supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical
                                                          therapist, nor by trainers for any amateur, semi professional or professional athlete
                                                          or athletic team or school athletic program.
                                                          Any place where a person, who regularly appears seminude, is provided for money or
   SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO:                              any form of consideration, to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
                                                          photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
                                                          A business or commercial establishment, that as one (1) of its primary business
                                                          purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons
                                                          may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of “specified sexual activities”
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT:                     or activities when one (1) or more of the persons is seminude. The definition of
                                                          “sexually oriented businesses” shall not include an establishment where a medical
                                                          practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by
                                                          the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
                                                          Any of the following:
                                                          A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:                               buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
                                                          areolae; or
                                                          B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
                                                          opaquely covered.
                                                          Any of the following:
                                                          A.   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region,
                                                          buttocks, anus or female breasts;
                                                          B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:                              copulation or sodomy;
                                                          C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
                                                          D.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
                                                          E.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
                                                          forth in subsections A through D of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS:  Increase in the floor area or wall area occupied by the business by more than fifteen
                                                          percent (15%), as the floor area and wall area exist on the effective date hereof.
                                                          Any of the following:
                                                          A.   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
                                                          B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED   business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
BUSINESS:                                                 C.   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers
                                                          ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other
                                                          operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control.
                                                          (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
 
3-6-4: ZONE PERMITTED; DISTANCE RESTRICTIONS; CLASSIFICATION:
   A.   Zone Permitted; Distance Restrictions; Measurement: The establishment
of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted only in M-1 manufacturing
zone and shall be subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any of the
following “sexually oriented businesses” as defined in section
3-6-3 of this chapter: a) within one thousand feet (1,000') of another such
business; or b) within one thousand feet (1,000') of any religious institution,
school, boys club, girls club, or similar existing youth organization, or
public park, public square or public building; or c) within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any property zoned as a residential district, where zoning allows
(except with regard to caretaker residences in a commercial or manufacturing
zone), any residential use or any properties actually used for residential
purposes.
      2.   As regarding subsection A1 of this section, distance between two (2)
sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of each
business. The distance between any sexually oriented business and any religious
institution, school, boys club, girls club, or similar existing youth
organization, public park, public square, public building, or any properties
zoned as a residential district, zoned to allow residential use or used for
residential purposes, shall also be measured in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects from the nearest property line of the
premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest
property line of the premises of a religious institution, school, boys club,
girls club, or similar existing youth organization, public park, public square,
public building, or any properties zoned as a residential district, zoned to
allow any residential use, or used for residential purpose.
   B.   Classification: The classification of businesses regulated are:
      1.   Adult arcade;
      2.   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store;
      3.   Adult cabaret;
      4.   Adult motel;
      5.   Adult motion picture theater;
      6.   Adult theater;
      7.   Massage parlor;
      8.   Sexual encounter establishment;
      9.   Escort agency; or
      10.   Seminude model studio. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-5: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
The City’s zoning ordinance hereby requires that sexually oriented businesses
shall be permitted only as provided in subsection
3-6-4A of this chapter, in which such use is listed as permissible. Permits for
sexually oriented businesses shall be required and governed by the procedures
and policies specified in this chapter. In addition, any sexually oriented
business shall be subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   It is unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a
sexually oriented business except as provided in subsection
3-6-3 of this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a
sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of: 1) any
religious institution; 2) any school; 3) a boys club, girls club, or similar
existing youth organization; 4) a public park; 5) a public square; 6) a public
building; 7) the boundary of any residential district or property zoned for
residential use; and 8) a property line of a lot devoted to residential use.
   C.   It is unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a
sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of another such
business, which will include, any adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort
agency or seminude model studio.
   D.   It is unlawful for a person to cause or permit the operation,
establishment or maintenance of more than one (1) sexually oriented business
within the same building, structure or portion thereof, or to cause the
“substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business” 1  in any building,
structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See definition at section
  3-6-3 of this chapter.
3-6-6: EXISTING BUSINESSES:
   A.   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on November 18, 1999,
that is in violation of sections
3-6-4 and
3-6-5 of this chapter, shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use
will be permitted to continue for a period of one (1) year, with a possible
extension of one (1) year to be granted by the planning commission only upon a
convincing showing of “extreme financial hardship,” which is defined as the
recovery of the initial financial investment in the nonconforming use, unless
sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of
thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one
thousand feet (1,000') of one another and otherwise in a permissible location,
the sexually oriented business which was first established and has been in
continuous operation at the particular location is the conforming use, and the
later established business is nonconforming.        
   B.   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of a sexually oriented business permit and/or license, of a religious
institution, school, boys club, girls club or similar youth organization,
public park, public square, public building, residential district, property
zoned for residential use or residential lot within one thousand feet (1,000')
of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal
of a valid permit and/or license and does not apply when an application for a
permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or
has been revoked.
   C.   Any establishment subject to the provisions of this section shall apply
for a permit as provided by section
3-6-7 of this chapter within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof. Any
establishment existing prior to the effective date hereof, shall comply with
the regulations pertaining to sections
3-6-18,
3-6-20,
3-6-23, and
3-6-25 of this chapter, within sixty (60) days of the effective date hereof,
and all other applicable permit regulations within thirty (30) days of the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-7: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; APPLICATION:
   A.   Permit Required: No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to
operate without a valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the City
for the particular type of business. It shall be unlawful for a person to
operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business without said
permit.
   B.   City Manager Responsibility: The City Manager or his/her designee is
responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and/or
canceling sexually oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually
oriented businesses. The City Manager or his/her designee is also responsible
for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which an
application for a permit has been received complies with all requirements of
sections
3-6-4 through
3-6-6 of this chapter, all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now in
effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date hereof by the
City and in the City’s general plan.
   C.   Police Department Responsibility: The police department is responsible
for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal act during the time period set forth.
   D.   Planning Department Responsibility: The planning department is
responsible for inspecting a proposed, permitted or non permitted sexually
oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with
applicable statutes and ordinances.
   E.   Application For Permit: Any person desiring to operate a sexually
oriented business shall file a license application with the City.
   F.    Information, Documents Required: The completed application shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
      1.   If the applicant is:
         a.   An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of
age.
         b.   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and
the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
         c.   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the
date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of the state, the names and capacity of all officers, directors
and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and
the address of the registered office for service of process.
      2.   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant must state the
sexually oriented business’ fictitious name and submit the required state
fictitious business name registration documents.
      3.   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed
pursuant to this section have, within the two (2) or five (5) year periods, as
specified in section
3-6-10 of this chapter, immediately preceding the date of the application, been
convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified criminal act
involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction.
      4.   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed
pursuant to this section have had a previous permit under this chapter or any
other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or county
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as
well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the
applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to this section have been a
partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a
corporation that is permitted under this chapter whose permit has previously
been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked and the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
      5.   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to
this section holds any other permits and/ or licenses under this chapter or
other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county
and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses.
      6.   The single classification of permit for which the applicant is
filing.
      7.   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address, and telephone numbers, if
any.
      8.   The applicant’s mailing address and residential address.
      9.   A recent photograph of the applicant.
      10.   The applicant’s driver’s license number, social security number,
and state or federally issued tax identification number.
      11.   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
      12.   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared by a Utah
registered land surveyor within thirty (30) days prior to the date the
application is submitted to the City depicting the property lines and the
structures containing any established existing uses regulated by this chapter
within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be certified; the property
lines of any established religious institution, school, boys club, girls club
or similar youth organization, public park, public square or public building
within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be certified; and the
property lines of any residentially zoned area or residential property within
one thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be certified. For purposes of
this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in
existence at the time an application is submitted.
      13.   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
an individual, (s)he must sign the application for a permit as the applicant.
If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a permit as an applicant. If a
corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity
which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent
(10%) or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a
permit as applicant.
      14.   If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other
than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises films, video cassettes
or other video reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, then said person shall, at the time of application
for a permit, also comply with the requirements of section
3-6-18 of this chapter.
   G.   Changes In Information: Applicants for a permit under this section
shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement all application information
required by this section in the event that said information changes in any way
from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said
continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change shall be
grounds for suspension of a permit.
   H.   Improperly Completed Application: In the event that the City Manager or
his/her designee determines or learns at any time that the applicant has
improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business,
he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant
ten (10) days to properly complete the application. The time period for
granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the
applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.
   I.   Qualification Of Applicant And Premises Required: The applicant must be
qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be
inspected and found to be in compliance with health, fire and building codes
and other applicable laws.    
   J.   Nonrefundable Application Fee: The applicant shall be required to pay a
nonrefundable application fee in such amount as established by resolution of
the City Council at the time of filing an application under this section.
   K.   Certification Of Location: Prior to obtaining any permit or license to
operate any “sexually oriented business,” as defined in section
3-6-3 of this chapter, and as part of any application for a permit under this
section, the applicant shall obtain from the City or its designee a
certification that the proposed location of such business complies with the
locational requirements of sections
3-6-4 through
3-6-6 of this chapter.
   L.   Other Permits, Licenses Not Applicable: The fact that a person
possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt him/
her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.
   M.   Permit Deemed Consent: By applying for a permit under this chapter, the
applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter
and to the exercise by the City Manager or his/her designee, the police
department and all other City agencies charged with enforcing the laws,
ordinances and codes applicable in the City of their respective
responsibilities under this chapter.
   N.   Names Of Licensed Employees Submitted: The applicant shall be required
to provide the City with the names of any and all employees who are required to
be licensed pursuant to section
3-6-8 of this chapter. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a
permit is granted or renewed. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-8: EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: Each individual to be employed in a sexually oriented
business who engages in the services rendered by a seminude model studio,
escort or escort agency, sexual encounter establishment, massage parlor, or a
live performer or entertainer, shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented
business employee license. Each applicant shall pay a permit fee in such amount
as established by resolution of the City Council. Said fee is to cover
reasonable administrative costs of the licensing application process.
   B.   Information And Documents Required: Before any applicant may be issued
a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit to
the City business License Officer, on a form to be provided by the City, the
following information:
      1.   The applicant’s name and any other names (including “stage” names)
or aliases used by the individual;
      2.   Age, date and place of birth;
      3.   Height, weight, hair and eye color;
      4.   Current residence address and telephone number;
      5.   Current business address and telephone number;
      6.   State driver’s license or identification number;
      7.   Social Security number;    
      8.   Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least eighteen
(18) years of age;
      9.   Attached to the application form, a color photograph of the
applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face, and the applicant’s
fingerprints on a form provided by the City. Any fees for the photographs and
fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;
      10.   A statement detailing the license or permit history of the
applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing
of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or
sought to operate, in this or any other county, city, state or country, any
sexually oriented business, and if so, whether the applicant has ever had a
license, permit or authorization to operate such business denied, revoked or
suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, the applicant shall state the date, the name of the issuing or
denying jurisdiction, and shall describe in full the reasons for the denial,
revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or
suspension shall be attached to the application; and
      11.   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal
act,” as defined in section
3-6-11 of this chapter. This information shall include the date, place, nature
of each conviction or plea of bolo contendere and identify the convicting
jurisdiction.
   C.   Investigation; Issuance Conditions: The business License Officer shall
refer the sexually oriented business employee license application to the police
department for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained
on the application. The investigation shall be completed and the application
and report of the investigation shall be forwarded to the City Manager within
ten (10) days from the date the completed application is filed. After the
investigation, the City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a license
unless one (1) or more of the following findings is true:
      1.   That the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in
any report or record required to be filed with the police department or other
department of the City;
      2.   That the applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
      3.   That the applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal act,”
as defined in section
3-6-11 of this chapter;
      4.   That the sexually oriented business employee license is to be used
for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter;
      5.   That the applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked by the City within two (2) years of the date of the current
application.   
   D.    Renewal Of License:
      1.   A license granted pursuant to this section shall expire on December
31 of each year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in
this section. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days
before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected. Renewal
shall be subject to review by the City Manager or his/her designee and a
finding by the City Manager or his/her designee and the police department that
the applicant has not been convicted of any “specified criminal act,” as
defined in section
3-6-11 of this chapter, and has not committed any act during the existence of
the previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial permit
application.
      2.   The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment of a fee as
set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-9: INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the City and upon
payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the City License Officer shall
immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter
send photocopies of the application to the police department and any other City
agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and
other applicable laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an
investigation of the applicant, the application and the proposed sexually
oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set
forth in this chapter. Such investigations shall be completed within twenty
(20) days of receipt of the application by the City. At the conclusion of its
investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the
application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it,
and, in the event it disapproves, state the reasons therefore. The police
department shall only be required to certify the NCIC records request check
mentioned in section
3-6-11 of this chapter. The police department shall not be required to approve
or disapprove applications.
   B.   A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that
the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any provision
of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the City.
After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency
shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the City License
Officer, who shall immediately forward the application and all comments by each
department to the City Manager or his/her designee. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-10: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
   A.   Authority: An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of
the City, the health department and the fire department to inspect the premises
of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the
law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
   B.   Refusal Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for a person who operates a
sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued for said business under this chapter, or his/her agent or employee, to
refuse to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is
occupied or open for business. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-11: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   Time Limit: The City Manager or his/her designee, shall grant or deny
an application for a permit within thirty (30) days from the date of its proper
filing. Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the City requests and
is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant shall be permitted to
begin operating the business for which the permit is sought, unless and until
the City or its designee notifies the applicant of a denial of the application
and states the reason for that denial.
   B.   Contents Of Permit: The City Manager or his/her designee, shall grant
the application unless one (1) or more of the criteria set forth in subsection
C of this section is present. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face
the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date,
and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall also
indicate that the sexually oriented business is subject to prohibitions against
public nudity and indecency pursuant to the United States Supreme Court
decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991). The permit shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.
   C.    Reasons For Denial: The City Manager or his/her designee, shall deny
the application for any of the following reasons:
      1.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue on his/her payment
to the City of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him/her or
imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      3.   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit
by the City to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve
(12) months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually
oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months.
      4.   An applicant has failed to provide information required by this
section or the permit application for the issuance of the permit or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form.
      5.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not
been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes, and
other applicable laws by the department or agency responsible under law for
investigating said compliance.
      6.   The application or permit fees required by this chapter have not
been paid.
      7.   An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is not
in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented business
under sections 3-20-4 through 3-20-6 of this chapter.
      8.   The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance
or court order.
      9.   The applicant has a permit under this chapter which has been
suspended or revoked.
      10.   An applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal act”, for
which:
         a.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for “specified criminal acts” which are
sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with
another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution
of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax
violations;
         b.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for “specified criminal acts,”
which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes
connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited
to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution,
pandering or tax
         c.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twenty-four (24) month period for “specified criminal acts,” which
are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with
another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution
of obscenity or materials harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax
violations; offenses occurring within any twenty-four (24) month period.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
disqualification of the applicant. An applicant who has been convicted of the
above described “specified criminal acts” may qualify for a sexually oriented
business permit only when the time period required above has elapsed.
      11.   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ, an employee who
does not have a valid license as required in section
3-6-8 of this chapter.
   D.   Notification Of Denial: If the City Manager or his/her designee, denies
the application, he/she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the
reason for the denial.
   E.    Previous Denial: If a person applies for a permit for a particular
location within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial of a
previous application for a permit at that location, and there has not been an
intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to
lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the
application shall be denied. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-12: FEE FOR PERMIT:
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is in such amount as
established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-13: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT; RENEWAL:
   A.   Each permit shall expire on December 31 of each year and may be renewed
only by submitting an application as provided in section
3-6-7 of this chapter. For renewals, the filing of the original survey along
with the renewal application shall be sufficient. Application for renewal shall
be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made
less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the
permit will not be affected.
   B.   When the City Manager or his/her designee denies renewal of the permit,
the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this chapter for one (1) year
from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the City or its designee,
finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been
corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-14: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Conditions Constituting Suspension: The City Manager or his/her
designee, shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if
he/she determines that a permittee, or an employee of a permittee, has:
      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
or
      2.   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages while working on the
premises of a sexually oriented business; or
      3.   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or
      4.   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexual oriented
business premises; or
      5.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building,
fire, health, zoning or other applicable statute, code, ordinance or
regulation, whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on
investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing said
rules or laws. In the event of such statute, code, ordinance or regulation
violation, the City shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and
shall allow the permittee a seven (7) day period in which to correct the
violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before the
expiration of the seven (7) day period, the City shall forthwith suspend the
permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension; or
      6.   Engaged in permit transfer contrary to section
3-6-17 of this chapter. In the event that the City suspends a permit on the
ground that a permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to section
3-6-17 of this chapter, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forthwith
notify the permittee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect
until the applicable section of this chapter has been satisfied; or
      7.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of
operation as set forth in section
3-6-21 of this chapter; or
      8.   Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license as
required in section
3-6-8 of this chapter.
   B.   Term Of Suspension: The suspension shall remain in effect until the
violation of the statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been
corrected. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-15: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Revocation Within Specified Time: The City Manager or his/her designee
shall revoke a permit if a cause for suspension as provided in section
3-6-14 of this chapter occurs and the permit has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
   B.   Conditions Constituting Revocation: The City Manager or his/her
designee, shall revoke a permit upon determining that:
      1.   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant’s
opportunity for obtaining a permit; or
      2.   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances in or on the premises; or
      3.   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises; or
      4.   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the permittee’s permit was suspended; or
      5.   A permittee has been convicted of a “specified criminal act,” for
which the time period required in section
3-6-11 of this chapter has not elapsed; or
      6.   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a
person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted
premises, constituting a “specified criminal act” for which a conviction has
been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually
oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
permit; or
      7.   A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees
related to a sexually oriented business; or
      8.   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or any other specified
sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
      9.   A permittee has been operating more than one (1) sexually oriented
business under a single roof.
   C.   Term Of Revocation: When the City Manager or his/her designee revokes a
permit, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the permittee shall
not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for one (1) year from the
date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City
Manager finds that the basis for revocation under this section has been
corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date revocation became effective. If the permit was
revoked under this section, an applicant may not be granted another permit
until the expiration of one (1) year from the date the revocation became
effective. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-16: REVIEW OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or
suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek
prompt review of such administrative action through the City Council, or
special City review board if one is established by the City. If the denial,
suspension or revocation is affirmed upon review, the administrative action may
be reviewed by the court having jurisdiction. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-17: TRANSFERABILITY:
   A.   Operation At Other Location Prohibited: A permittee shall not operate a
sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other
than the address designated in the application for a permit and the permit
issued in response thereto.
   B.   Transfer Requirements: A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to
another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following
requirements:
      1.   Obtains an amendment to the permit from the City Manager or his/her
designee, which provides that he/ she is now the permittee, which amendment may
be obtained only if he/she has completed and properly filed an application with
the City Manager or his/her designee, setting forth the information called for
under section
3-6-7 of this chapter; and
      2.   Pays a transfer fee of twenty percent (20%) of the annual permit fee
set by this chapter.
   C.   Suspension Or Revocation Proceedings: No permit may be transferred when
the City Manager or his/her designee has notified the permittee that suspension
or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the permittee.
   D.   Transfer To Another Location: A permittee shall not transfer his permit
to another location.
   E.   Violation; Revocation: Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly
or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void and the
permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-18: EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS IN BOOTHS:
   A.   Requirements: A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, and, regardless of whether or not
a permit has been issued to said business under this chapter, which exhibits on
the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet
of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which
depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply
with the following requirements:
      1.   Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager’s stations, the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than
eight feet (8'). The diagram shall also designate the place at which this
permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches (±6"). The City manager or his/her designee may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
      2.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      3.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station may be made without the prior approval of the City or its designee.
      4.   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      5.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two (2) or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager’s stations. The
view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager’s station.
      6.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in subsection A5 of this section remains unobstructed
by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or persons
at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to this chapter.
      7.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any
one time.
      8.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles as measured at
the floor level.
      9.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
   B.   Violation: It is unlawful for a person to knowingly fail to fulfill any
duty set forth under subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-19: MINORS:
It is unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for
such business under this chapter, and knowingly or with reasonable cause to
know, permit, suffer or allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) to be
admitted to, work at, purchase goods from, or remain on the business premises
of the sexually oriented business. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-20: ADVERTISING AND LIGHTING:
   A.   Advertising Prohibited Activities: It shall be unlawful for a person to
operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for such business under this chapter,
and advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable
state statute or local ordinance.
   B.   Outside Advertising: It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or
cause to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not
a permit has been issued for such business under this chapter, and display or
otherwise exhibit the materials and/or performances at such sexually oriented
business in any advertising which is visible outside the premises. This
prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or location of
such sexually oriented business.
   C.   Interior View Of Premises From Outside: The permittee shall not allow
any portion of the interior premises to be visible from outside the premises.
   D.   Outside Lighting: All off street parking areas and premises entries of
the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours
of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one (1) foot-candle of light on the parking surface
and walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually
oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to
reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be
shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
   E.   Compliance With Subsequently Enacted Regulations: Nothing contained in
this section shall relieve the operators of a sexually oriented business from
complying with the requirements of any subsequently enacted City ordinances or
regulations. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-21: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   Operator: It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be
operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business under this chapter, and allow such business
to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a
performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a
service, or solicit a service, between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and
nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day.
   B.   Employee: It shall be unlawful for a person to work as an employee of a
sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued for said business under this chapter, and engages in a performance,
solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or
solicit a service between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and nine o’clock
(9:00) A.M. of any particular day. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-22: NUDITY PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Prohibition: The United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen
Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991) which upheld the rights of cities to
prohibit live public exposure of a person’s private parts, specifically applies
to sexually oriented businesses, regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued to said businesses under this chapter, including such businesses where
no alcoholic beverages are sold, served or consumed at the premises. Public
nudity is prohibited within the City, including any sexually oriented business.
Any sexually oriented business which is found in violation of this section
shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of section
3-6-14 of this chapter.
   B.   Exemptions; Defenses:
      1.   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter
that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class
operated:
         a.   By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
         b.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
         c.   In a structure:
            (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
and
            (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must
enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
            (3)   Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at
any one time.
      2.   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that
an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is
permitted under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical area during the
employee’s bona fide use of a restroom, or during the employee’s bona fide use
of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-
2022)
3-6-23: LIVE ENTERTAINMENT:
   A.   Defined: For purposes of this section, “live entertainment” is defined
as a person who appears seminude, or a performance which is characterized by
“specified sexual activities”.   
   B.   Stage Requirements: No person shall perform live entertainment for
patrons of a sexually oriented business establishment except upon a stage at
least eighteen inches (18") above the level of the floor which is separated by
a distance of at least ten feet (10') from the nearest area occupied by
patrons. No patron shall be permitted within ten feet (10') of the stage.
   C.   Dressing Rooms: The sexually oriented business establishment shall
provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male performers which
shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than performers.
   D.   Access Between Stage And Dressing Rooms: The sexually oriented business
establishment shall provide access for performers between the stage and the
dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate
access is not physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a minimum
four foot (4') wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area
and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons
and the performers which prevents any physical contact between patrons and
performers.
   E.   Physical Contact Prohibited: No entertainer, either before, during or
after a performance, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron
shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after
a performance. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact while in or
on the premises of the establishment.
   F.   Fixed Rails: Fixed rails at least thirty inches (30") in height shall
be maintained establishing the separation between performers and patrons
required by this section.
   G.   Gratuities: No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
entertainer. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer shall
place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located separate from
the performers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact between a
patron and a performer. No performer shall solicit any gratuity from any
patron.
   H.   Prohibited Conduct: No operator of a sexually oriented business
establishment shall cause or allow a performer to contract or engage in any
entertainment such as a “couch” or a “straddle” dance with a patron while in or
on the establishment premises. No performer shall contract to or engage in a
“couch” or “straddle” dance with a patron while in or on the establishment
premises. For purposes of this subsection, “couch” or “straddle” dance is
defined as an employee of the establishment intentionally touching or coming
within ten feet (10') of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of
any “specified anatomical area,” or any “specified sexual activity.” For
purposes of this subsection, “employee” is defined as set forth in section
3-6-3 of this chapter.
   I.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to an employee of an
establishment who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or
bartender, comes within ten feet (10') of a patron. No employee shall engage in
any “specified sexual activity” or display or expose any “specified anatomical
area” while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or bartender.
   J.   Compliance Requirements: Operators of a sexually oriented business
desiring to provide live entertainment or existing businesses providing live
entertainment shall comply with the following provisions:
      1.   For purposes of this section, “establishment” is defined as set
forth in section
3-6-3 of this chapter. No establishment shall be in compliance with this
section until the City’s designated agents have inspected and approved of the
establishment’s compliance. The City shall have ten (10) days from the date it
receives written notice from the operator that the establishment is ready for
inspection to approve or disapprove of compliance required by this section.
Failure to approve or disapprove of compliance within ten (10) days shall
constitute a finding of compliance under this section.
      2.   The operator of an establishment that has been providing live
entertainment under a valid sexually oriented business permit at the time the
ordinance codified herein is adopted, shall have sixty (60) days from the
effective date hereof to bring the establishment into compliance with this
section. Failure to do so while continuing to provide live entertainment shall
cause the establishment’s permit to be suspended under section
3-6-14 of this chapter. The permit shall remain suspended until the
establishment is approved by the City’s designated agents as being in full
compliance with this section.
      3.   The operator of an establishment that has been operating under a
valid permit for another classification of sexually oriented business and who
wishes to provide live entertainment at that establishment, shall apply for and
receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation of an
establishment providing live entertainment before any live entertainment is
provided at that establishment. No live entertainment permit shall be issued
until the establishment is approved as being in full compliance with this
section and all other applicable requirements of this chapter.
      4.   The applicant for a permit to operate a new establishment, who
wishes to provide live entertainment, shall apply for and receive a sexually
oriented business permit for the operation of an establishment providing live
entertainment before any live entertainment is provided. No live entertainment
permit shall be issued until the establishment is approved as being in full
compliance with this section and all other applicable requirements of this
ordinance. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-24: OPERATION WITHOUT VALID PERMIT:
In addition to the criminal provisions found in other sections of this chapter,
the following additional criminal provisions shall also apply to sexually
oriented businesses. It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or cause to
be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business under this chapter, and such person knows or
should know that:
   A.   The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit under
this chapter for any applicable classification;
   B.   The business has a permit which is under suspension;
   C.   The business has a permit which has been revoked; or
   D.   The business has a permit which has expired. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-25: DISTRIBUTION OF SEXUAL DEVICES:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for anyone to distribute, for commercial
purposes, sell or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia
designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or
for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others.
   B.    Devices Included: Such devices, instruments or paraphernalia include,
but are not limited to, phallic shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips,
chains, bather restraints, racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing
implements (excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry) or other tools of
sadomasochistic abuse. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-26: IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION:
The City and its designees, the police department and all other departments and
agencies, and all other City officers, agents and employees, charged with
enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution,
civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon a sexually oriented
business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-27: INJUNCTIONS:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without having a valid permit is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for the criminal violation. Such violation shall be punishable by a
fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or thirty (30) days imprisonment,
and if an injunction must be sought, attorney fees and costs will be assessed
at the discretion of the court against the sexually oriented business. (Ord.
2022-64, 12-14-2022)
3-6-28: PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under
this code or the Utah Criminal Code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or
comply with or violates any of the criminal provisions of this chapter, such
person upon conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a criminal offense
pursuant to Utah Code 10-8-41.4(4) as amended and, upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance
shall be considered as a separate offense.
   B.   Court Action: Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the
City from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent
jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or
noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be
limited to, an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for
damages.
   C.   Civil Violations Hearing Officer: Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the City from prosecuting any violation of this chapter
by means of a civil violations hearing officer established pursuant to
authority as provided by the laws of the state or this code.
   D.   Remedies Cumulative: All remedies and penalties provided for in this
section shall be cumulative and independently available to the City, and the
City shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this
section to the full extent allowed by law. (Ord. 2022-64, 12-14-2022)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Established
4-1-2: Fire Chief Position Created
4-1-3: Powers And Duties Of Fire Chief
4-1-4: Appointments And Hiring
4-1-5: Designation Of Emergency Vehicles
4-1-6: Responsibilities, Rights And Restrictions
4-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created a fire department to be known as the Washington City
volunteer fire department. (1989 Code § 10-111)
4-1-2: FIRE CHIEF POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of chief of the fire department. (1989
Code § 10-121)
4-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Supervision Of Department: The fire chief shall have responsibility for
the general supervision of the department and shall be governed by the city
personnel policies and procedures.
   B.   Control And Extinguish Fire: During a fire, the fire chief shall have
full authority to take all measures as he shall deem necessary, subject to
state law, to control and extinguish the fire and for that purpose he is hereby
made a special peace officer. (1989 Code § 10-122)
   C.   Report Information To City Manager: The fire chief shall, as requested,
report to the city manager the condition of the fire equipment, the number of
fires and their causes and the estimated loss therefrom, together with such
other information as the city manager may request or as he shall deem
appropriate. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-8-2012)
   D.   Enforce Fire Protection And Prevention: The fire chief shall strictly
enforce all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to the
protection against and prevention of fire.
   E.   Maintain Equipment: The fire chief shall maintain the equipment of the
department in good repair and order and ready for use.
   F.   Establish Rules And Regulations: The fire chief, subject to the
approval of the mayor and city council, shall establish rules and regulations
for the operation of the department.
   G.   Delegate Duties: The fire chief may delegate his duties to any person
employed by the department, but such delegation shall not relieve the fire
chief of his responsibility for the performance thereof.
   H.   Investigation Of Fires: The fire chief shall cause all fires to be
promptly investigated to determine the cause of the fire and report the cause
of the fire, the time originated, and such other information as may be relevant
to prevent other fires. (1989 Code § 10-122)
4-1-4: APPOINTMENTS AND HIRING:
All appointments or hiring of employees shall be done in accordance with the
city personnel policies and procedures. (1989 Code § 10-123)
4-1-5: DESIGNATION OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Fire trucks and other motor vehicles used to transport fire equipment or fire
personnel are hereby designated authorized emergency vehicles. (1989 Code § 10-
131; amd. 2007 Code)
4-1-6: RESPONSIBILITIES, RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Removal Of Obstructions At Fire: The officer in charge at any fire may
order the removal or destruction of any fence, building or structure, or that
any utility be closed, cut or removed when deemed necessary to control,
extinguish or prevent the spread of fire. (1989 Code § 10-132)
   B.   Control Of Persons: All persons present at a fire shall obey the lawful
orders of any firefighters. (1989 Code § 10-133)
   C.   Interference With Firefighters In Discharge Of Duties: Every person at
the scene of any fire who wilfully disobeys the lawful orders of any public
officer or firefighter, or offers any resistance to or interference with the
efforts of any firefighter, or company of firefighters to extinguish the same,
or engages in any disorderly conduct calculated to prevent the same from being
extinguished, or who forbids, prevents or dissuades others from assisting to
extinguish the same, is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 10-134; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Unlawful Interference: Any person who shall wilfully hinder any officer
or firefighter in the discharge of his duty at a fire, or in any manner injure,
deface or destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the
city or who shall interfere with any fire company or person, or who shall
wilfully break or injure any water pipe or interfere with the water or its
source of supply, shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 10-135; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Investigation After Fire Report: The fire chief, or such other persons
as he shall designate, shall, after extinguishing a fire, make a prompt and
thorough investigation of the cause of the fire, the time the fire began, the
amount of loss and insurance, a description of the affected buildings and
premises, and shall secure all other useful information available, and record
the same in a record book kept for that purpose in the office of the department
and shall report the same to the city council at such time as it may direct.
(1989 Code § 10-136)
   F.   Right To Enter And Inspect: The fire chief or his deputies, upon
presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter upon any
premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspections. (1989
Code § 10-137)
   G.   Persons Present Subject To Orders: Every capable person eighteen (18)
years or older present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer
in command and shall render assistance in the manner directed by the officer in
command. (1989 Code § 10-138; amd. 2007 Code)
   H.   False Alarm: It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in or report
to the fire department a false alarm or report of a fire or to tamper or remove
any part of the fire alarm system. (1989 Code § 10-139)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Use Of Landfill
4-2-3: Collection And Disposal Of Residential Solid Waste
4-2-4: Mandatory Use Of Automated/Semiautomated Containers
4-2-5: Residential Solid Waste Collection Procedures
4-2-6: Fees
4-2-7: Monthly Billing
4-2-8: Commercial Or Private Haulers
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ALLIED/RED ROCK: Allied Waste Transportation, Inc., dba Red Rock Waste
Services, Inc.
ALLIED/RED ROCK AGREEMENT: That certain agreement, and any amendments thereto,
between Washington County special service district no. 1 and Allied Waste
Transportation, Inc., dba Red Rock Waste Services, dated June 4, 1999, a copy
of which is attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit A and
incorporated herein by this reference.
AUTOMATED PICK UP: A method or system, including all necessary vehicles and
equipment, of collecting solid waste through the use of containers designed for
or compatible with mechanical pick up.
BOARD: The administrative control board of Washington County special district
no. 1.
COLLECTION STATION: Dumpsters, roll off boxes or other similar containers,
established by district for disposal of residential waste in isolated or rural
areas where individual curbside collection is infeasible or impractical.
COMMERCIAL HAULER: Any person or entity who is engaged primarily in the
business of collecting and disposing of commercial solid waste generated by any
other person or entity.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE: Any solid waste produced by or resulting from the use
of commercial property or premises.
DISTRICT: Washington County special service district no. 1.
DUMPSTER: Any container constructed of metal, of two (2) yards' volume or more,
and designed to be compatible with mechanical collection equipment.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes, other than
household waste or special waste, which, because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly
contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible
or incapacitating reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment, when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
PRIVATE HAULER: A. Any person or entity who, as the owner, tenant or other
occupant of property or premises classified as commercial, collects and
disposes of solid waste generated by the use of said property; and
   B.   Any person or entity who collects and disposes of construction debris.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE: Any solid waste produced by or resulting from the use
of any residential property or premises, except for hazardous waste and
construction/demolition waste.
SEMIAUTOMATED/AUTOMATED CONTAINER: A receptacle specifically designed for or
compatible with automated pick up, having a capacity of sixty (60) or ninety
four (94) gallons, of Rotomold design and constructed of Phillips Marlex C1-100
cross linked high density polyethylene, or equivalent materials approved by the
district, and equipped with a tightfitting, permanently attached lid and wheels
for easy movement.
SOLID WASTE: Shall have the same meaning as specified in Utah Code Annotated
section 19-6-502(7), as amended. (Ord. 99-28, 10-27-1999)
4-2-2: USE OF LANDFILL:
All solid waste generated within the incorporated areas of the city, except for
hazardous waste, lead acid batteries and used oil, shall be transported to and
disposed of at the county landfill. (Ord. 99-28, 10-27-1999)
4-2-3: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE:
Collection and disposal of all residential solid waste within the corporate
limits of the city shall be provided exclusively by Washington County special
service district no. 1, through its authorized subcontractor, Allied/Red Rock,
except for residential solid waste hauled to the landfill by the owner or
occupant of the residential property. (Ord. 99-28, 10-27-1999)
4-2-4: MANDATORY USE OF AUTOMATED/SEMIAUTOMATED CONTAINERS:
Each residential unit within the incorporated areas of the city shall be
required to utilize an automated/semiautomated container which has been
approved and delivered to the property by the district, except that collection
of residential waste may be accomplished by use of dumpsters in:
   A.   Condominium or townhome developments already utilizing dumpsters as a
means of solid waste collection as of October 27, 1999; and
   B.   Condominium or townhome developments utilizing individual automated or
semiautomated containers as a means of collection of solid waste as of October
27, 1999, where use of individual automated or semiautomated containers is
determined by district to be impractical or unfeasible; and
   C.   Condominium or townhome developments established after October 27,
1999, where use of dumpsters as a means of solid waste collection has been
preapproved by district. (Ord. 99-28, 10-27-1999)
4-2-5: RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION PROCEDURES:
All residential solid waste shall be required to be placed for collection in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the Allied/Red Rock agreement, a
copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit A and by
this reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth. (Ord. 99-28, 10-27-
1999)
4-2-6: FEES:
   A.   Residential Fees Established: Except as provided herein, for all
residential property located within the incorporated areas of the city, there
is hereby established a monthly residential solid waste collection and disposal
fee for each residential unit, consisting of the following amounts:
      1.   The amount to be paid to Allied/Red Rock pursuant to the following
schedule:
 
From 10-27-1999 to 12-31-2002 $4.80 per residence
From 01-01-2003 to 12-31-2006 5.05 per residence
From 01-01-2007 to 12-31-2009 5.30 per residence
 
      2.   The sum of two dollars eighty cents ($2.80) per residence for
operation of the county landfill; and
      3.   The sum of one dollar fifty five cents ($1.55) per residence for
administrative expenses of the district; and
      4.   The sum of eighty five cents ($0.85) to offset the cost of billing
and collection.
   B.   Residential Fee Established For Availability Of Service: The
residential fee established hereby is for the availability of residential solid
waste collection and disposal service provided by the district through its
authorized subcontractor, Allied/Red Rock, and said fee shall be imposed when
said service is available regardless of whether said service is actually
utilized. (Ord. 99-28, 10-27-1999)
4-2-7: MONTHLY BILLING:
Billing for residential solid waste collection and disposal services to
residential units in the incorporated areas of the city shall be done on a
monthly basis, and shall be included in any billing for other services supplied
by the city, including water, power, sewer, etc. All payments for residential
solid waste collection and disposal services not received on or before the
twentieth day of the month following the month for which services were provided
shall be deemed delinquent and shall thereafter bear interest at the rate of
five percent (5%) per annum until paid in full. (Ord. 99-28, 10-27-1999)
4-2-8: COMMERCIAL OR PRIVATE HAULERS:
No private or commercial hauler shall be allowed to collect or dispose of
commercial solid waste generated by commercial establishments or through the
use of other commercial property within the incorporated areas of the city
without having first obtained from Washington County special service district
no. 1 a license to operate as a private or commercial hauler. (Ord. 99-28, 10-
27-1999)
CHAPTER 3
LITTER; HANDBILLS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Handbills And Posters; Restricted Activity
4-3-3: Litter Regulations
4-3-4: Handbill Regulations
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE: A public or private litter storage and collection
receptacle.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:
   A.   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
   B.   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest in sales thereof;
   C.   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. However, the terms of this
clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the
same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained
in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place
of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without
a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state,
or under any ordinance of the city; or
   D.   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributer.
GARBAGE: Waste from the preparation, cooking or consumption of food, condemned
food products and all refuse and waste from the handling, storage, preparation
and sale of produce. Garbage originates primarily in kitchens, stores, markets,
restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled, stored, sold,
cooked and consumed.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety, welfare or appearance of the city.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general or local circulation or any periodical or
current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per
year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill
or newspaper.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
public area in the city, owned or used by the city.
REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks. (1989 Code § 10-431)
4-3-2: HANDBILLS AND POSTERS; RESTRICTED ACTIVITY:
No person or business shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise fix, or
cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card,
poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the
attention of the public, or upon any sidewalk, curb or any other portion or
part of any public way or public place or any lamppost, electric light,
telegraph, telephone or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or
upon the columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any
bridge or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture
of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be authorized
or required by the laws of the United States or state, and the ordinances of
the city. (1989 Code § 10-449A)
4-3-3: LITTER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Public Places: No person shall throw or deposit litter in or on any
street, sidewalk or other public place except:
      1.   In authorized receptacles for collection or in official city garbage
dumps; or
      2.   For collection as authorized by the city council. (1989 Code § 10-
432)
   B.   Placement In Receptacles: Persons placing litter in authorized
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on
private property. (1989 Code § 10-433)
   C.   Sweeping Into Gutters Prohibited: No person shall sweep into or deposit
in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway, except as
authorized by the city council. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep
the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (1989 Code § 10-434)
   D.   Merchants' Duty To Keep Sidewalks Clear: No person owning or occupying
a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
business shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of
litter. (1989 Code § 10-435)
   E.   Thrown By Person In Vehicle: No person, while a driver or passenger in
a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter on any street or other public place,
or on private property. (1989 Code § 10-436)
   F.   Loads Causing Litter: No person shall drive or move any truck or other
vehicle unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or other
public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other
public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any
kind. (1989 Code § 10-437)
   G.   Parks: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park, except in
authorized receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the park or on
any street or other public place. Where authorized receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein. (1989 Code § 10-438)
   H.   Lakes And Fountains: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any
fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere
within the city. (1989 Code § 10-439)
   I.   Occupied Private Property: No person shall throw or deposit litter on
any occupied private property, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on any private property. (1989 Code § 10-447)
   J.   Vacant Lots: No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or
vacant private property, whether or not owned by such person. (1989 Code § 10-
448)
4-3-4: HANDBILL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Throwing Or Distributing In Public Places; Penalty: No person shall
throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Unless otherwise
authorized by the city council, it is an infraction and, upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to hand out, distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not
be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place for any person to
hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (1989 Code § 10-440;
amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Placing On Vehicles: Unless otherwise authorized by the city council,
no person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
on any vehicle; provided however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public
place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver
thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to
accept it. (1989 Code § 10-441)
   C.   Depositing On Uninhabited Or Vacant Premises: No person shall throw or
deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any private premises
which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (1989 Code § 10-
442)
   D.   Prohibiting Distribution Where Properly Posted: No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill on any private
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on
said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign
bearing the words "no trespassing", "no peddlers or agents", "no
advertisements", or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the
occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right
of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left on such premises. (1989
Code § 10-443)
   E.   Distributing At Inhabited Private Premises: No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on private
premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or on
such private premises. However, in case of inhabited private premises which are
not posted, as provided in this section, such person, unless requested by
anyone on such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in
or on such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or
deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted
about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except
that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or
regulations. (1989 Code § 10-444)
   F.   Exception For Mail And Newspapers: The provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers,
except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner so
as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on private property. (1989 Code § 10-445)
   G.   Posting Notice Prohibited: No person shall post or affix any notice,
poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the
public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or on any public
structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. (1989
Code § 10-446)
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Defined
4-4-2: Permit Required
4-4-3: Application For Permit
4-4-4: Issuance Of Permit
4-4-5: Existing Businesses And Facilities
4-4-1: DEFINED:
"Offensive businesses", within the meaning of this chapter, shall include, but
not be limited to, packinghouses, dairies, tanneries, canneries, renderies,
junk or salvage yards, bone factories, slaughterhouses, butcher shops, soap
factories, foundries, breweries, distilleries, livery stables, blacksmith
shops, or any other enterprise or establishment which creates excessive odors,
fumes, smoke, gases or noises. (1989 Code § 10-241B)
4-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall commence or change the location of an offensive business or
establishment within the city without first filing an application for a permit
to do so with the city recorder. (1989 Code § 10-241A; amd. 2007 Code)
4-4-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application for a permit shall specify the location at which the business
or establishment is to be operated and maintained or the new location to which
it is to be moved. The application shall describe the type of activity which
will be conducted and describe the manner in which the business or
establishment shall eliminate, control, or modify the emission by the business
of the undesirable odors, fumes, noises, and other noisome features and the
manner in which it shall be screened from public view, if its appearance is
offensive. (1989 Code § 10-241C)
4-4-4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   Report And Recommendation: The community development director shall
cause a study to be made of the proposed business or relocation of any
offensive business or establishment by the board of health and by personnel
engaged in the inspection of buildings and other facilities. A report and
recommendation shall be made to the city council. The city council, after
review, may grant to the applicant an opportunity to be heard and present
additional facts. Thereafter the city council may: (1989 Code § 10-242; amd.
2007 Code)
      1.   Deny the application.
      2.   Recommend a modification thereof.
      3.   Grant a limited permit to enter into the business or make the change
of location subject to the requirement that the business or facility conform to
standards established by the city council with reference to controlling the
offensive features of the business.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: In the event a permit is granted, it shall be
subject to revocation either upon failure of the operator or owner to conduct
his business in the manner specified by the city council at the time of the
granting of the permit, or because a change of circumstances makes the
continued operation or maintenance of the business or facility a public
nuisance.
   C.   Modification Of Permit: The city council shall have power to revoke or
modify the permission to operate and maintain the business in such a manner as
it deems necessary for the public good. (1989 Code § 10-242)
4-4-5: EXISTING BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Investigation By City Council: The city council may require an
investigation of any existing offensive business or facility to determine
whether or not it should be permitted to remain in existence within the city
limits. If the city council determines that the continuation of the business or
facility has become a nuisance to persons situated within the city limits or
that ample control is not being exercised to minimize the creation of excessive
odors, fumes, smoke, gases, and noise, it shall notify the owner or operator
thereof that the city council is considering revoking or modifying the
operator's permit.
   B.   Conform To Standards And Specifications: If the city council decides to
require a modification of the manner in which the business or facility is to be
maintained, it shall specify the standards or specifications to which the
enterprise must conform or otherwise lose its permit to engage thereafter in
the business or activity. (1989 Code § 10-243; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 5
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Sales And Discharge Regulated
4-5-3: Permit And License Required
4-5-4: Inspection Of Premises
4-5-5: Dates Specified
4-5-6: Enforcement
4-5-7: Penalty
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMBINATION FIREWORKS DEVICE: Any device containing combinations of two (2) or
more of the effects described in the definitions of "ground or handheld
sparking device" or "ground audible device", as defined in this section.
FIREWORKS: Any composition or device manufactured or used for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or
detonation, but does not include model rockets, toy pistol caps, emergency
signal flares, snakes or glow worms, party poppers, wire sparklers under thirty
six inches (36") in length, matches, or class A and B explosives.
GROUND AUDIBLE DEVICE: Any paper or cardboard tube containing not more than
fifty milligrams (50 mg) of pyrotechnic material that travels along the ground
(chaser) upon ignition and often produces a whistling and/or popping effect.
GROUND OR HANDHELD SPARKING DEVICE: A. Any cylindrical tube (cylindrical
fountain) not exceeding three-fourths inch (3/4") inside diameter and
containing not more than seventy five grams (75 g) of pyrotechnic composition
which produces a shower of color and sparks upon ignition and may whistle or
pop;
   B.   Any cardboard or heavy paper cone (cone fountain) containing up to
fifty grams (50 g) of pyrotechnic composition which produces a shower of color
and sparks upon ignition and may whistle or pop;
   C.   Any cylindrical tube (illuminating torch) containing up to one hundred
grams (100 g) of pyrotechnic composition which produces colored fire upon
ignition;
   D.   Any pyrotechnic device (wheel) capable of being attached to a post or
tree containing up to six (6) "driver" units or tubes not exceeding one-half
inch (1/2") inside diameter, that each contain not more than sixty grams (60 g)
of pyrotechnic composition per driver unit, which revolves upon ignition
producing a shower of color and sparks and sometimes a whistling effect;
   E.   Any device similar in design and effect to a "wheel" capable of being
placed on the ground (ground spinner) and ignited; and
   F.   Any narrow paper fuseless tube (flitter sparkler) filled with
pyrotechnic composition that produces color and sparks when the popper at one
end of the tube is ignited.
TRICK NOISEMAKER: A. Any tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke (smoke device) as its
primary effect.
   B.   Any device that produces a small report intended to surprise the user,
including:
1. "Booby trap", which is a small tube with a string protruding from both ends
that ignites the friction sensitive composition in the tube when the string is
pulled.
2. "Snapper", which is a small paper wrapped device containing a minute
quantity of explosive composition coated on bits of sand which explodes,
producing a small report.
3. "Trick match", which is a kitchen or book match coated with a small quantity
of explosive or pyrotechnic composition that produces a small shower of sparks
when ignited.
4. "Cigarette load" which is a small wooden peg coated with a small quantity of
explosive composition that produces a small report when the cigarette is
ignited.
5. "Auto burglar alarm", which is a tube that contains pyrotechnic composition
that produces a loud whistle and smoke when ignited. A small quantity of
explosive, not exceeding fifty milligrams (50 mg) may also be used to produce a
small report. A squib is used to ignite the device. (1989 Code § 10-611)
4-5-2: SALES AND DISCHARGE REGULATED:
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for retail sale, or to discharge
any fireworks within the city, other than those defined in section
4-5-1 of this chapter. (1989 Code § 10-612)
4-5-3: PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit For Selling Required; Fee: Any person engaged in the retail
selling of fireworks within the city shall be required to obtain a permit from
the city. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council
shall be charged for the permit. (1989 Code § 10-613; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Business License Required: All persons engaged in the retail selling of
fireworks within the city shall be required to obtain a business license in
accordance with the business license ordinance. (1989 Code § 10-615)
4-5-4: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Any person engaged in the retail selling of fireworks within the city shall
allow the fire chief or his designated agent to inspect the premises where the
selling is taking place, to ensure compliance with state regulations
promulgated by the state fire prevention board. (1989 Code § 10-614)
4-5-5: DATES SPECIFIED:
   A.   Sales Permitted: Fireworks may be sold on or between June 20 and July
25; on or between December 20 and January 2; and fifteen (15) days before and
on the Chinese New Year. (1989 Code § 10-617)
   B.   Discharge: Fireworks may be discharged three (3) days prior to, on the
day of, and three (3) days following July 4, July 24 and January 1, and the
Chinese New Year. (1989 Code § 10-618)
4-5-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Officers And Fire Officials: Every municipal officer charged with the
enforcement of state and municipal laws, including all fire enforcement
officials, is charged with the responsibility to enforce this chapter.
   B.   Seizure; Revocation Of License: Fireworks sold or offered for sale in
violation of this chapter may be seized and destroyed, and the license of the
person selling or offering fireworks for sale may be revoked. (1989 Code § 10-
616)
4-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 10-619; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 6
FENCING OF SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Wading Pools Exempt
4-6-3: Deep Pools
4-6-4: Pool Entrances
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ABOVEGROUND/PORTABLE POOLS: A removable pool of any shape that is deeper than
forty two inches (42") or holds more than two thousand five hundred (2,500)
gallons of water, or has a water surface area in excess of one hundred fifty
(150) square feet. The aboveground pool frame is located entirely aboveground
and may be readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its original
integrity.
INGROUND SWIMMING POOL: Any pool whose sides rest in partial or full contact
with the earth.
ON GROUND SWIMMING POOL: Any pool whose sides rest fully above the surrounding
earth and which has a deep area below ground level.
PERMANENTLY INSTALLED POOL: One that is constructed in the ground in such a
manner that the pool cannot be readily disassembled.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL: Shall include all constructed pools which are used as a
swimming pool in connection with a single- family residence and available only
to the family of the householder and his private guests.
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL: Any constructed or prefabricated pool other than a
private swimming pool.
WADING POOL: Any constructed or prefabricated pool used for wading which is
less than twenty four inches (24") deep. (1989 Code § 10-510; amd. 2007 Code)
4-6-2: WADING POOLS EXEMPT:
Wading pools shall be exempted from the regulations of this chapter. All other
pools shall be required to comply with this chapter. (1989 Code § 10-511)
4-6-3: DEEP POOLS:
Swimming pools with a depth of two feet (2') or more shall be completely
surrounded by a security tight fence, enclosure, wall or sturdy barrier of at
least five feet (5') in height, or as approved by the building inspector. (Ord.
2009-08, 3-25-2009)
4-6-4: POOL ENTRANCES:
All gates and enclosures must be self-latching and be provided with hardware
for permanently locking, with all latches placed at least four feet, six inches
(4'-6") above the underlying ground to prevent access by small children to the
pool area. (1989 Code § 10-513; amd. Ord. 2023-30, 11-8-2023)
CHAPTER 7
CLOSING GATES LEADING TO STATE OR BLM GRAZING LAND
SECTION:
4-7-1: Signs Posted On Gates
4-7-2: Duty To Close And Fasten Gates After Use
4-7-3: Penalty
4-7-1: SIGNS POSTED ON GATES:
   A.   Required: Each gate within the city limits that leads to state or BLM
grazing land shall have posted on it a sign for the purpose of giving notice to
individuals of this chapter and penalties for violation.
   B.   Language: The language on each sign shall state the following:
Notice: Failure to properly close and securely fasten this gate is a violation
of Washington City Ordinance No. 86-18. Anyone found guilty of violating
Ordinance No. 86-18 is subject to fine and/or imprisonment.
   (Ord. 86-18, 6-25-1986, eff. 6-25-1986)
4-7-2: DUTY TO CLOSE AND FASTEN GATES AFTER USE:
It shall be unlawful for any individual using posted gates within the city
limits that lead to state or BLM grazing land to leave them open or unfastened
after use. (Ord. 86-18, 6-25-1986, eff. 6-25-1986)
4-7-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class
B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 86-18, 6-25-1986, eff. 6-25-1986; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 8
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS; RECOVERY OF EXPENSES
SECTION:
4-8-1: Definitions
4-8-2: Recovery Of Expenses
4-8-3: Cost Recovery Procedure
4-8-4: Action To Recover Costs
4-8-5: Expenses Of Other Responding Entities
4-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the following meanings:
EXPENSES: All costs incurred for the response, containment and/or removal and
disposal of hazardous materials on initial remedial action. It includes, but is
not necessarily limited to, the actual labor costs of government and other
personnel, including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits,
administrative overhead, and any costs of equipment, equipment operation,
materials, disposal and any contract labor or materials.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY: A sudden and unexpected release of any substance
that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical chemical or infectious
characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public safety or the
environment, and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat. (Ord. 2003-
03, 2-12-2003)
4-8-2: RECOVERY OF EXPENSES:
   A.   Authorized: Those persons or entities whose negligent or intentional
actions cause or create, in whole or in part, a hazardous materials emergency
within the boundaries of the city, are liable to the city for all costs and
expenses incurred in or arising from response to such hazardous materials
emergency by the city/county and any other political subdivision, agency or
cooperative entity. The city shall recover all such costs and expenses,
including reasonable attorney fees, litigation expenses and court costs
incurred in, related to or arising out of, all cost recovery efforts and
enforcement of the terms of this chapter.
   B.   Billing Rate: All costs and expenses shall be billed at the current
rate established and approved by resolution of the executive committee of the
interlocal agreement for cooperative hazardous materials protection and
services.
   C.   Payment Not Admission Of Liability: The payment of expenses under this
section does not constitute an admission of liability or negligence in any
legal action for damages. (Ord. 2003-03, 2-12-2003)
4-8-3: COST RECOVERY PROCEDURE:
   A.   Determination Of Responsible Person: The city shall investigate and
determine the person or entity responsible for causing or creating the
hazardous materials emergency and shall notify the responsible party in writing
of said determination of responsibility and the amount of costs and expenses
incurred by the city in responding to the hazardous materials emergency.
   B.   Appeal: The notice required by subsection A of this section shall
specify that the party determined to be responsible for causing or creating the
hazardous materials emergency has the right to appeal the decision determining
responsibility to the governing body and shall specify a deadline for filing
the notice of appeal and the person or office in which it must be filed. The
deadline for filing the notice of appeal shall not be less than fifteen (15)
days from the date of the notice.
   C.   Hearing: In the event a notice of appeal is filed, the hearing before
the governing body shall be an informal public hearing, and the parties shall
not be required to adhere to the Utah rules of civil procedure or evidence. The
appealing party and the city shall each be entitled to present evidence and
argument in support of their respective positions, in accordance with
procedures established at the hearing by the governing body.
   D.   Decision Final: The decision of the governing body shall be final.
(Ord. 2003-03, 2-12-2003)
4-8-4: ACTION TO RECOVER COSTS:
In the event the responsible party fails or refuses to pay all of the costs and
expenses determined by the city related to or arising out of the city's
response to the hazardous materials emergency within thirty (30) days after
assessment or after the governing body's decision on an appeal, the city may
initiate a legal action to recover such costs, including reasonable attorney
fees and costs. (Ord. 2003-03, 2-12-2003)
4-8-5: EXPENSES OF OTHER RESPONDING ENTITIES:
   A.   Recovery Of Expenses By City: In the event that personnel and equipment
from other political subdivisions, agencies or cooperative entities shall
respond to assist with the hazardous materials emergency, then the city shall
recover costs and expenses incurred by such other political subdivisions,
agencies or cooperative entities as part of county/city cost recovery efforts.
   B.   Reimbursement To Agency: Upon recovery of costs and expenses from the
responsible party, the city is authorized to reimburse such other political
subdivisions, agencies or cooperative entities for their actual costs incurred
in responding to the hazardous materials emergency. (Ord. 2003-03, 2-12-2003)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY, OFFENSES, NUISANCES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: Enforcement Officials
5-1-3: Dog Licensing
5-1-4: Regulatory Permits
5-1-5: Prohibited Acts And Activities
5-1-6: Dogs Attacking Persons And Animals
5-1-7: Vicious Animals
5-1-8: Dogs Biting Persons
5-1-9: Bites; Duty To Report
5-1-10: Nuisance Animals
5-1-11: Rabies Control And Rabid Animals
5-1-12: Revocation Of License
5-1-13: Animal Shelter
5-1-14: Impounding
5-1-15: Court Orders; Procedure
5-1-16: Penalty
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ANIMAL AT LARGE: Any domesticated animal, whether or not licensed, not under
restraint, as defined in "animal under restraint" in this section.
ANIMAL BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment that takes in animals for
boarding for fee.
ANIMAL GROOMING PARLOR: Any establishment maintained for the purpose of
offering cosmetology services for animals for fee.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility owned and/or operated by a governmental entity or
any animal welfare organization that is incorporated within the state of Utah
under Utah Code Annotated section 11-46-102, as amended, and used for the care
and custody of seized, stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted
dogs, cats or other small domestic animals.
ANIMAL UNDER RESTRAINT: Any animal under the control of its owner or person
having charge, care, custody or control, shall be considered under control of
the owner when on a leash or lead, confined within a vehicle, or within the
real property limits of the owner.
BITE: An actual breaking of the skin, tear, puncture, laceration or abrasion by
the teeth of an animal.
CAT: Any age feline of the domesticated types.
CATTERY: An establishment for boarding, breeding, buying, grooming or selling
cats for fee.
DOG: Any canine families over four (4) months of age. Any canine families under
four (4) months of age is a puppy.
DOMESTICATED ANIMALS: Animals accustomed to living in or about the habitation
of man, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, fowl, horses, swine and
goats.
GUARD DOG: A working dog which must be kept in a fenced run or other suitable
enclosure during business hours, or on a leash or under absolute control while
working, so it cannot come into contact with the public.
HOLDING FACILITY: Any pet shop, kennel, cattery, groomer, riding school stable,
animal shelter, veterinary hospital, humane establishment, or any other such
facility used for holding animals.
KENNEL: An establishment having three (3) or more dogs for the purpose of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for fee or selling.
LEASH OR LEAD: Any chain, rope or device used to restrain an animal.
PET: A domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility, including,
but not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, fish, hamsters, mice and other animals
associated with man's environment.
PET SHOP: Any establishment containing cages or exhibition pens, not part of a
kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets for sale are kept or
displayed.
QUARANTINE: The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the
animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE: An establishment which offers boarding and/or riding
instruction for any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro, or which offers such
animals for hire.
STRAY: Any "animal at large", as defined in this section.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which is dangerously aggressive, including, but not
limited to, any animal which has bitten or in any other manner attacked any
person or animal.
WILD ANIMAL: Any animal of a species that in its natural life is wild. Those
animals, however domesticated, shall include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Alligators and crocodiles.
   B.   Bears (Ursidae): All bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black
bears, etc.
   C.   Cat family (Felidae): All except the commonly accepted domestic cats,
and including cheetahs, cougars, leopards, lions, lynxes, panthers, mountain
lions, tigers, wildcats, etc.
   D.   Dog family (Canidae): All except domesticated dogs, and including
wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingos, etc.
   E.   Porcupines (Erethizontidae).
   F.   Primates (Hominidae): All subhuman primates.
   G.   Raccoons (Prosynnidae): All raccoons, including eastern raccoons,
desert raccoons, ringtailed cats, etc.
   H.   Skunks.
   I.   Venomous fish and piranha.
   J.   Weasels (Mustelidae): All including weasels, martens, wolverines,
ferrets, badgers, otters, ermine, mink, mongooses, etc., except that persons
raising members of this family as a business for the pelts shall not be
prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 2012-09, 5-23-2012)
5-1-2: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
   A.   Division Of Animal Control: There is hereby created a division of
animal control. (1989 Code § 13-202)
   B.   Powers Of Animal Control Officials:
      1.   The animal control officer or any person employed by the city as an
animal control officer shall take the oath of office and shall be vested with
the power and authority to enforce this chapter.
      2.   The animal control officer is authorized and empowered to apprehend
and take with them and impound any animal found in violation of this chapter
and including licensable dogs for which no license has been procured in
accordance with this chapter, or any licensed or unlicensed dogs for any other
violation thereof.
      3.   In the enforcement of this chapter, any peace officer or the animal
control officer is authorized to enter onto the open premises excluding
dwellings of any person to take possession of any dog in violation of this
chapter.
      4.   Any peace officer or the animal control officer is empowered to
issue citations in regards to acts in violation of this chapter. (1989 Code §
13-203)
   C.   Duties Of Animal Control Officials:
      1.   Any peace officer or the animal control officer shall:
         a.   Enforce this chapter and perform other responsibilities pursuant
thereto;
         b.   Supervise the municipal animal shelter under his jurisdiction;
         c.   Keep adequate records of all animals impounded and all monies
collected;
         d.   See that all animals and animal holding facilities in his
jurisdiction are licensed, controlled and permitted in accordance with any
applicable ordinance and/or regulations.
      2.   Animal control officers shall:
         a.   Enforce this chapter in all respects pertaining to animal control
within the jurisdiction, including the care and impounding of animals and
prevention of cruelty to animals;
         b.   Carry out all duties prescribed or delegated by the city manager
or a designated supervisor. (1989 Code § 13-204)
   D.   Interference With Officer Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person knowingly and intentionally to interfere with any peace officer or any
animal control officer in the lawful discharge of his duties as herein
prescribed. (1989 Code § 13-205)
5-1-3: DOG LICENSING:
   A.   License Required: All dogs must be licensed every two (2) years, except
as otherwise provided herein, to a person of the age of eighteen (18) years or
older.
   B.   Lifetime Dog License: A lifetime dog license can be purchased for the
life of the dog, or until such animal is removed from the city, for a onetime
fee. The dog must be altered prior to licensing, have a current rabies
vaccination, and a current rabies vaccination must be kept on file for the
extent of the license. This license is not transferable to another animal or
owner, and will be voided if such actions occur.
   C.   Time Limit For Obtaining: Any person owning, possessing or harboring
any dog shall obtain a license for such animal within thirty (30) days after
the dog reaches the age of four (4) months; or in the case of a dog over four
(4) months, within five (5) days of the acquisition of the dog.
   D.   Application For License: License applications must be submitted at time
of purchase to the division of animal control, utilizing a standard form which
requests name, address, telephone number of the applicant; breed, sex, color
and age of the animal; and rabies information. The application shall be
accompanied by the prescribed license fee and by a current rabies vaccination
certificate. Rabies vaccinations shall be given by a licensed veterinarian,
every three (3) years.
   E.   License Fee:
      1.   No license shall be issued until the following license fee has been
paid. All fees are listed in the master fee schedule for Washington City on
file with the city.
      2.   In addition to the regular fee, no license fee shall be prorated or
apportioned. The fees provided for herein may be amended from time to time by
resolution of the city council. No dog will be licensed as spayed or neutered
without proof that such surgery was performed.
   F.   Kennels; Conditional Use Permits:
      1.   Except for commercial kennels, which have been granted a conditional
use permit by the city council, no person or entity shall own, possess, keep or
maintain more than four (4) dogs in one location within the city limits.
Further, in agricultural, residential agricultural, single-family residential,
multiple-family residential, neighborhood commercial and mobile home zones, no
person or entity shall own, possess, keep or maintain more than two (2) dogs,
unless a permit for a residential kennel has been approved by the animal
control department.
      2.   In addition to the requirements of subsection D of this section,
applications for a license for a third or fourth dog in any area zoned
agricultural, residential agricultural, single-family residential, multiple-
family residential, neighborhood commercial or mobile home shall not be
approved until such time that a permit for a residential kennel has been
granted by the animal control department.
      3.   A residential kennel permit is only valid during the license period.
The residential kennel permit will not be granted with lifetime dog licenses.
The application must be submitted and approved and the residential kennel
permit fees must be collected, prior to licensing of the third and/or fourth
dog.
   G.   License Tag:
      1.   Upon payment of the license fee, the city shall issue to the owner a
certificate and a tag for each dog licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon
the license number corresponding with the tag number on the certificate. The
owner shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the animal and see that
the collar and tag are constantly worn. Failure to attach the tag as provided
shall be in violation of this chapter, excepting dogs which are kept for show
purposes are exempt from wearing the collar and tag.
      2.   Dog tags are not transferable from one dog to another. No refunds
shall be made on any dog license fee for any reason whatsoever. Replacements
for lost or destroyed tags shall be issued upon payment to the city. See master
fee schedule for Washington City on file with the city.
      3.   Any person removing or causing to be removed the collar, harness or
tag from any licensed dog without the consent of the owner or keeper thereof,
except a licensed veterinarian or animal control officer who removes such for
medical and other reasons, shall be in violation of this chapter.
   H.   Exemptions To License Requirements:
      1.   The provisions of subsections A through G of this section shall not
apply to:
         a.   Dogs whose owners are in transit (up to 30 days) within the
jurisdiction;
         b.   Individual dogs within a properly licensed dog kennel or other
such establishment when such dogs are held for resale.
      2.   The fee provisions of subsection E of this section shall not apply
to:
         a.   Seeing eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons if such
dogs are actually being used by blind persons to assist them in moving from
place to place;
         b.   Hearing dogs properly trained to assist deaf persons if such dogs
are actually used by deaf persons to aid them in responding to sounds.
      3.   Although exempt from the fees of subsection E of this section, a
license tag will be issued by the city, which must be attached to the harness,
leash or collar of the dog as prescribed in subsection G1 of this section.
      4.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to exempt any dog
from having a current rabies vaccination. (Ord. 2012-09, 5-23-2012)
5-1-4: REGULATORY PERMITS:
   A.   Commercial Permits: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
maintain a kennel, cattery, pet shop, groomery, riding stable, veterinary
clinic or hospital, or any similar establishment, unless such person first
obtains a regulatory permit from the department of animal control, in addition
to all other required licenses. All applications for permits to operate such
establishments shall be submitted, together with the required permit fee, on a
printed form provided by the animal control officer. Before the permit is
issued, approval shall be granted by the appropriate zoning authority.
   B.   Display Of Permit; Changes; Transferability: A valid permit shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in each establishment, and said permit shall be
considered as appurtenant to the premises and not transferable to another
location. The permittee shall notify the animal control officer within thirty
(30) days of any change in his establishment or operation which may affect the
status of his permit. In the event of a change in ownership of the
establishment, the permittee shall notify the animal control officer
immediately. Permits shall not be transferable from one owner to another.
   C.   Renewal Of Permit: Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall
automatically expire on December 31 immediately following date of issue. Within
two (2) months prior to the expiration of the permit, the permittee shall apply
for a renewal of the permit and pay the required fee. Any application made
after December 31, except an application for a new establishment opening
subsequent to that date, shall be accompanied by a late application fee in
addition to the regular permit fee.
   D.   Permit Fees: Current fees are listed in the master fee schedule for
Washington City on file with the city.
   E.   Exemptions: Research facilities where medical or related research is
being conducted, humane shelters and other animal establishments operated by
state or local government or which are licensed by federal law are excluded
from the licensing requirements of this chapter.
   F.   Inspection: All establishments required to be permitted under this
chapter shall be subject to periodic inspections, and the inspector shall make
a report of such inspection with a copy to be filed with the animal control
officer.
   G.   Standards For Permitted Establishments: The animal control officer
shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the operation of kennels,
catteries, groomeries, pet shops, riding stables, and veterinary clinics or
hospitals. Such rules and regulations shall provide for the type of structures,
buildings, pens, cages, runways or yards required for the animal sought to be
kept, harbored or confined on such premises; the manner in which food, water
and sanitation facilities will be provided to such animals; measures relating
to the health of said animals, the control of noise and odors, and the
protection of persons or property on adjacent premises; and other such matters
as the animal control officer shall deem necessary. Such rules and regulations
shall have the effect of law, and violation of such rules and regulations shall
be deemed a violation of this chapter and grounds for revocation of a permit
issued by the animal control officer.
   H.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   Grounds: A permit may be suspended or revoked, or a permit
application rejected, on any one or more of the following grounds:
         a.   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other
law or regulation governing the establishment, including noise, building and
zoning ordinances;
         b.   Falsification of facts in a permit application;
         c.   Conviction on a charge of cruelty to animals.
      2.   Notification: Upon an inspection of kennels, catteries, groomeries,
pet shops, riding stables, veterinary clinics or hospitals, the inspector shall
notify the permit holder or operator of such violation by means of an
inspection report form or other written notice. The notification shall:
         a.   Set forth the specific violation found;
         b.   Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the
correction of the violation found;
         c.   State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter may result in immediate suspension of the
permit;
         d.   State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or
inspection findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is
filed with the animal control officer within five (5) days of the date of
notice.
      3.   Revocation Or Suspension: Any permit granted under this chapter may
be suspended or revoked by the city for violations listed in subsection H1 of
this section. A minimum of five (5) days' notice shall be given to the
permittee advising him of the date and time for such hearing, and listing the
cause or causes for such suspension or revocation. No new permit shall be
issued to any person whose permit has been previously revoked except upon
application for a new permit, accompanied by the required application fee, and
unless and until all requirements of this chapter have been met.
      4.   Emergency Suspension: Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
chapter, when the inspecting officer finds unsanitary or other conditions in
the operation of kennels, catteries, groomeries, veterinary clinics or
hospitals, riding stables, pet shops, or any similar establishments, which, in
his judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to public health, he may, without
warning or hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator
citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken. Such order
may state that the permit is immediately suspended and all operations are to be
immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall
comply immediately therewith. Any animals at such a facility may be confiscated
by the animal control officer and impounded or otherwise provided for according
to the provisions of this chapter.
      5.   Service Of Notice: Notice provided for under this section shall be
deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection report
form or other notice has been delivered personally to the permit holder or
person in charge, or such notice has been sent by certified mail to the last
known address of the permit holder. A copy of such notice shall be filed with
the records of the animal control officer. (Ord. 2012-09, 5-23-2012)
5-1-5: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Harboring Stray Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or
keep any lost or strayed dog. Whenever any dog shall be found which appears to
be lost or strayed, it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the animal
control or the police department within twenty four (24) hours, and the police
department shall impound the dog as herein provided. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-8-2012)
   B.   Dogs Running At Large: It shall be unlawful for any dog to run at
large. If any dog is at large, the owner or person having charge, care, custody
or control of said dog is in violation of this section regardless of the
precautions taken to prevent the escape and running at large of said dog. (Ord.
2017-01, 1-11-2017)
   C.   Dogs On Unenclosed Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to
chain, stake out or tether any dog on any unenclosed premises in such a manner
that the animal may go beyond the property line, unless such person has
permission of the owner of the affected property. (1989 Code § 13-245)
   D.   Female Dogs In Heat: Any owner or person having charge, care, custody
or control of any female dog in heat shall, in addition to restraining such dog
from running at large, cause such dog to be constantly confined in a building
or secure enclosure so as to prevent it from attracting by scent or coming into
contact with other dogs and creating a nuisance, except for planned breeding.
(1989 Code § 13-246)
   E.   Places Prohibited To Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any person to take
or permit any dog, whether loose or on a leash or in arms, in or about any
establishment or place of business where food or food products are sold or
displayed, including, but not limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, meat
markets and fruit or vegetable stores; however, seeing eye and hearing dogs and
dogs employed by government agencies shall be excluded from the requirements of
this subsection. (1989 Code § 13-247)
   F.   Cruelty To Animals:
      1.   Physical Abuse: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or
maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat with a stick, chain, club or
other object, mutilate, burn or scald, overdrive or otherwise cruelly set upon
any animal. Each offense shall constitute a separate violation.
      2.   Hobbling Animals: It is unlawful for any person to hobble livestock
or other animals by any means which may cause injury or damage to any animal.
      3.   Lack Of Care And Maintenance: It shall be the duty of any person to
provide any animal in his charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with
adequate food, drink, care and shelter.
      4.   Animals In Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or
confine any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner,
including, but not limited to, carrying or confining such animal without
adequate ventilation or for an unusual length of time.
      5.   Abandonment Of Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to
abandon any animal within the jurisdiction.
      6.   Animal Poisoning: It shall be unlawful for any person by any means
to make accessible to any animal, with intent to cause harm or death, any
substance which has in any manner been treated or prepared with any harmful or
poisonous substance. This provision shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit
the use of poisonous substances for the control of vermin in furtherance of the
public health when applied in such a manner as to reasonably prohibit access to
other animals.
      7.   Injury To Animals By Motorists:
         a.   Every operator of a motor or other self-propelled vehicle upon
the streets of the jurisdiction shall immediately, upon injuring, striking,
maiming or running down any domestic animal, give such aid as can reasonably be
rendered. In the absence of the owner, he shall immediately notify the animal
control department, furnishing requested facts relative to such injury.
         b.   It shall be the duty of such operator to remain at or near the
scene until such time as the appropriate authorities arrive, and upon the
arrival of such authorities, the operator shall immediately identify himself to
such authorities. Alternatively, in the absence of the owner, a person may give
aid by taking the animal to the animal control department. Such animal may be
taken in by the animal control facility and dealt with as deemed appropriate
under the circumstances.
      8.   Animals For Fighting:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
raise, keep or use any animal, fowl or bird for the purpose of fighting or
baiting of any animal or fowl; and for any person, firm or corporation to
knowingly rent any building, shed, room, yard, ground or premises for any such
purposes as aforesaid, or to knowingly suffer or permit the use of his
buildings, sheds, rooms, yards, grounds or premises for the purposes aforesaid.
         b.   Law enforcement officers or animal control officials may enter
any building or place where there is an exhibition of the fighting or baiting
of a live animal, or where preparations are being made for such an exhibition,
and the law enforcement officers may arrest persons there present and take
possession of all animals engaged in fighting, or there found for the purposes
of fighting, along with all implements or applications used in such
exhibitions. This provision shall not be interpreted to authorize a search or
arrest without a warrant when such is required by law.
      9.   Killing Of Birds: It shall be unlawful for any person to take or
kill any bird, or to rob or destroy any nest, egg or young of any bird in
violation of the laws of the state.
      10.   Malicious Impounding: It shall be unlawful for any person
maliciously to secrete or impound the animal of another. (1989 Code § 13-259)
5-1-6: DOGS ATTACKING PERSONS AND ANIMALS:
   A.   Attacking Dogs: It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having
charge, care, custody or control of any dog to allow such dog to attack, chase
or worry any person, or domestic animal, or any species of hooved, protected
wildlife, or to attack domestic fowl. "Worry", as used in this section, shall
mean to harass by tearing, biting or shaking with the teeth.
   B.   Owner Liability: The owner in violation of subsection A of this section
shall be strictly liable for violation of this section. In addition to being
subject to prosecution under subsection A of this section, the owner of such
dog shall also be liable in damages to any person injured or to the owner of
any animal injured or destroyed thereby.
   C.   Defenses: The following shall be considered in mitigating the penalties
or damages, or in dismissing the charge:
      1.   That the dog was properly confined on the premises;
      2.   That the dog was deliberately or maliciously provoked.
   D.   Dogs May Be Killed: Any public safety officer may kill a dog while it
is committing any of the acts specified in subsection A of this section, or
while such dog is being pursued thereafter. (1989 Code § 13-248)
   E.   Court Order For Disposition: Upon the trial of any offense under this
section, the court may, upon conviction and in addition to the usual judgment
of conviction, order the impound master or other authorized person of the city
to put the dog to death or may order such other disposition of the dog as will
protect the inhabitants and animals of the city. (Ord. 92-14, 4-22-1992)
5-1-7: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
Every animal so vicious and dangerous that it cannot be controlled by
reasonable restraints, and every dangerous and vicious animal not effectively
controlled by its owner or person having charge, care or control of such
animal, so that it shall not injure any person or property, is a hazard to
public safety, and the animal control officer shall seek a court order pursuant
to section
5-1-15 of this chapter for destruction of the animal. If any animal attacks or
bites a person or animal two (2) times or more in a twelve (12) month period,
such animal may be immediately impounded by the department of animal control
without court order and held at owner expense pending court action. Any such
animal shall be deemed a vicious animal. The police officer or animal control
officer shall seek a court order as provided in section
5-1-15 of this chapter for destruction of the animal. Parties owning such
animals shall, if possible, be notified immediately of the animal's location by
the animal control officer. This section shall not limit any other section in
this chapter. (Ord. 92-15, 4-22-1992)
5-1-8: DOGS BITING PERSONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog that bites a person
without provocation, or to own a dog that has a known propensity to attack or
bite human beings without provocation. (This shall not prohibit ownership of
particular breeds of dogs, but is meant only to apply to individual dogs who
have such a propensity.) After a dog bites a person, the animal control officer
may impound the dog which may not be redeemed while awaiting final decision of
the court as to the disposition to be made of the dog.
   B.   Upon the trial of any offense under this section, the court may, upon
conviction and in addition to the usual judgment of conviction, order the
impound master or other authorized person of the city to put the dog to death
or may order such other disposition of the dog as will protect the inhabitants
of the city. (Ord. 92-16, 5-13-1992)
5-1-9: BITES; DUTY TO REPORT:
   A.   Reporting Required: Any person having knowledge of any individual or
animal having been bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall
report the incident immediately to the city.
   B.   Owner Report: The owner of an animal that bites a person and any person
bitten by an animal shall report the bite to city within twenty four (24) hours
of the bite, regardless of whether or not the biting animal is of a species
subject to rabies.
   C.   Physician Or Medical Personnel: A physician or other medical personnel
who renders professional treatment to a person bitten by an animal shall report
the fact that he has rendered professional treatment to the city within twenty
four (24) hours of his first professional attendance. He shall report the name,
sex and address of the person bitten as well as the type and location of the
bite. If known, he shall give the name and address of the owner of the animal
that inflicted the bite, and any other facts that may assist the animal control
officer in ascertaining the immunization status of the animal.
   D.   Person Treating Bitten Animal: Any person treating an animal bitten,
injured or mauled by another animal shall report the incident to the city or
the animal control officer. The report shall contain the name and address of
the owner of the wounded, injured or bitten animal, the name and address of the
owner and description of the animal which caused the injury, and the location
of the incident.
   E.   Violation: Any person not conforming with the requirements of this
section shall be in violation of this chapter. (1989 Code § 13-252; amd. 2007
Code)
5-1-10: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
Any owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of any animal or
animals causing a "nuisance", as defined below, shall be in violation of this
chapter and subject to the penalties provided herein. The following shall be
deemed a "nuisance". Any animal which:
   A.   Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner;
   B.   Is a "vicious animal", as defined herein and kept contrary to section
5-1-7 of this chapter;
   C.   Causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors;
   D.   Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings;
   E.   Defecates on any public sidewalk, park or building, or on any private
property without the consent of the owner of such private property, unless the
person owning, having a proprietary interest in, harboring or having care,
charge, control, custody or possession of such animal shall remove any such
defecation to a proper trash receptacle;
   F.   Barks, whines or howls or makes other disturbing noises in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion; persons making a complaint must sign
the summons against the violator which will subsequently be delivered by a
public safety officer;
   G.   Molests passersby by barking, snapping, pawing, clawing, biting or
growling;
   H.   Chases passing vehicles;
   I.   Attacks other domestic animals; (1989 Code § 13-250)
   J.   Is determined by the code enforcement department to be a public
nuisance by virtue of being offensive or dangerous to the public health,
welfare or safety;
   K.   By virtue of the number maintained, is determined by the code
enforcement department to be offensive or dangerous to the public health,
welfare or safety. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-8-2012)
5-1-11: RABIES CONTROL AND RABID ANIMALS:
   A.   Rabies Vaccination Required For Dogs: The owner or person having the
charge, care, custody and control of a four (4) months of age or older dog
shall have the animal vaccinated within thirty (30) days after it reaches said
age. Any person permitting any such animal to habitually be on or remain, or be
lodged or fed within such person's house, yard or premises, shall be
responsible for said vaccination. Unvaccinated dogs over four (4) months of age
acquired by the owner or moved into the jurisdiction must be vaccinated within
thirty (30) days of purchase or arrival. Every dog shall be revaccinated
thereafter every thirty six (36) months with a modified virus rabies vaccine.
This provision shall not apply to veterinarian or kennel operators temporarily
maintaining on their premises animals owned by others. (Ord. 2004-20, 6-23-
2004)
   B.   Duties Of Veterinarian And Tag Requirements:
      1.   It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, when vaccinating any
animal for rabies, to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination (in
duplicate) which includes the following information:
         a.   Owner's name and address;
         b.   Description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name);
         c.   Date of vaccination;
         d.   Rabies vaccination tag number;
         e.   Type of rabies vaccine administered;
         f.   Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.
      2.   A copy of this certificate shall be distributed to the owner and the
original retained by the issuing veterinarian. The veterinarian and the owner
shall retain their copies of the certificate for the interval between
vaccinations specified in this section. Additionally, a metal or durable
plastic rabies vaccination tag, serially numbered, shall be securely attached
to the collar or harness of the animal. An animal not wearing such a tag shall
be deemed to be unvaccinated and may be impounded and dealt with pursuant to
this chapter.
   C.   Transient Animal; Exception: The provisions of this section with
respect to vaccination shall not apply to any animal owned by a person
temporarily remaining within the jurisdiction for less than thirty (30) days.
Such animals shall be kept under strict supervision of the owner. It shall be
unlawful to bring any animal into the jurisdiction which does not comply with
the animal health laws and import regulations.
   D.   Impoundment Of Animal Without Valid Rabies Vaccination Tag:
      1.   Any vaccinated animal impounded because of lack of a rabies
vaccination tag may be reclaimed by its owner furnishing proof of rabies
vaccination and payment of all impoundment fees prior to release.
      2.   Any unvaccinated animal may be reclaimed prior to disposal by
payment of impound fees and by obtaining a rabies vaccination within seventy
two (72) hours of release.
      3.   Any dog not reclaimed prior to the seventy two (72) hour period
shall be disposed of pursuant to provisions of subsection 5-1-14C of this
chapter.
   E.   Reporting Of Rabid Animals: Any person having knowledge of the
whereabouts of an animal known to have been exposed to, or suspected of having,
rabies, or of an animal or person bitten by such a suspect animal, shall notify
the animal control officer, the city-county health department or the state
division of health.
   F.   Quarantining And Disposition Of Biting Or Rabid Animals:
      1.   Report; Confinement: An animal that has rabies or shows signs of
having rabies, and every animal bitten by another animal infected with rabies
or that has been exposed to rabies, shall be reported by the owner as set forth
above and shall immediately be confined in a secure place by the owner. The
owner shall turn over the animal to the animal control officer upon demand.
      2.   Surrender Upon Demand: The owner of any animal of a species subject
to rabies which has bitten shall surrender the animal to an authorized official
upon demand. Any person authorized to enforce this chapter may enter upon
private property to seize the animal; if the owner refuses to surrender the
animal, the officer shall immediately obtain a search warrant authorizing
seizure and impoundment of the animal.
      3.   Seizure And Quarantine: Any animal of a species subject to rabies
that bites a person or animal or is suspected of having rabies may be seized
and quarantined for observation for a period of not less than ten (10) days by
the animal control officer and/or the city-county health department. The owner
of the animal shall bear the cost of confinement. The animal shelter shall be
the normal place for quarantine. If the animal has a current rabies vaccination
at the time the bite was inflicted or if there are other special circumstances
justifying an exception, other arrangements may be made for quarantine. A
person who has custody of an animal under quarantine shall immediately notify
the department of animal control if the animal shows any signs of sickness or
abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement. It shall be unlawful
for any person who has custody of a quarantined animal to fail or refuse to
allow a health or animal control officer to make an inspection or examination
during the period of quarantine. If the animal dies within ten (10) days from
the date of bite, the person having custody shall immediately notify the
department or immediately remove and deliver the head to the state health
laboratory to be examined for rabies. If, at the end of the ten (10) day
period, the animal control officer examines the animal and finds no sign of
rabies, the animal may be released to the owner, or, in the case of a stray, it
shall be disposed of as provided in subsection 5-1-14C of this chapter.
      4.   Unvaccinated Bitten Animals:
         a.   In the case of an unvaccinated animal species subject to rabies
which is known to have been bitten by a known rabid animal, said bitten or
exposed animal should be immediately destroyed.
         b.   If the owner is unwilling to destroy the bitten or exposed
animal, the animal shall be immediately isolated and quarantined for six (6)
months under veterinary supervision, the cost of such confinement to be paid in
advance by the owner. The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not
comply herewith. (1989 Code § 13-253)
      5.   Vaccinated Bitten Animals:
         a.   If the bitten or exposed animal has been vaccinated, the animal
shall be revaccinated within twenty four (24) hours and quarantined for a
period of thirty (30) days following revaccination; or (1989 Code § 13-253;
amd. 2007 Code)
         b.   If the animal is not revaccinated within twenty four (24) hours,
the animal shall be isolated and quarantined under veterinary supervision for
six (6) months.
         c.   The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply with
subsection F5a or F5b of this section.
      6.   Removal Of Quarantined Animal: It shall be unlawful for any person
to remove any such animal from the place of quarantine without written
permission of the animal control officer. (1989 Code § 13-253)
5-1-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
If the owner of any dog is found to be in violation of this chapter on three
(3) or more different occasions during any twelve (12) month period, the animal
control officer shall seek a court order pursuant to section
5-1-15 of this chapter revoking for a period of one year any dog license. The
animal control officer shall pick up and impound any dogs kept by the person
under such order. Any dog impounded pursuant to such an order shall be dealt
with in accordance with the provisions of this chapter on impounded animals,
except that the person under the order of revocation shall not be allowed to
redeem the dog under any circumstances. (1989 Code § 13-251)
5-1-13: ANIMAL SHELTER:
   A.   The governing authority shall provide a facility to be used as an
animal shelter where animals may be adequately kept. They shall also provide
care for such impounded animals.
   B.   The governing authority shall provide for the painless and humane
destruction of dogs and other animals required to be destroyed by this chapter
or by the laws of the state.
   C.   The governing authority may furnish, when necessary, medical treatment
for such animals as may be impounded pursuant to this chapter. (1989 Code § 13-
258; amd. 2007 Code)
5-1-14: IMPOUNDING:
   A.   Animals To Be Impounded: The animal control officer shall place all
animals which he takes into custody in a designated animal impound facility.
The following animals may be taken into custody by the animal control officer
and impounded without the filing of a complaint:
      1.   Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of
this chapter;
      2.   Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this
chapter;
      3.   Any animal which is by this chapter required to be licensed and is
not licensed; an animal not wearing a tag shall be presumed to be unlicensed
for purposes of this section;
      4.   Sick or injured animal whose owner cannot be located;
      5.   Any abandoned animal;
      6.   Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter;
      7.   Any animal to be held for quarantine;
      8.   Any vicious animal not properly confined as required by section
5-1-7 of this chapter.
   B.   Records To Be Kept: The impounding facility shall keep a record of each
animal impounded, which includes the following information:
      1.   Complete description of the animal, including tag numbers;
      2.   The manner and date of impound;
      3.   The location of the pick up and name of the officer picking up the
animal;
      4.   The manner and date of disposal;
      5.   The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser;
      6.   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the
impound facility;
      7.   All fees received;
      8.   All expenses accruing during impoundment.
   C.   Disposition Of Animals:
      1.   Minimum Holding Period: Animals shall be impounded for minimum of
seventy two (72) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, before further
disposition, except as otherwise provided herein. Reasonable effort shall be
made to notify the owner of any animal wearing a license or other
identification during that time. Notice shall be deemed given when sent to the
last known address of the listed owner. Any animal voluntarily relinquished to
the animal control facility by the owner thereof for destruction or other
disposition need not be kept for the minimum holding period before release or
other disposition as herein provided.
      2.   Sale Of Animals: All dogs and cats, except for those quarantined or
confined by court order, held longer than the minimum impound period, and all
dogs and cats voluntarily relinquished to the impound facility, may be
destroyed or sold as the animal control officer shall direct. Any healthy dog
or cat may be sold to any person or to any institution engaged in scientific
research and desiring to purchase such animal for a price to be determined by
the animal control officer (see master fee schedule for Washington City on file
with the city) plus license and rabies vaccination if required.
      3.   Injured, Diseased Animals: Any licensed animal impounded and having
or suspected of having serious physical injury or contagious disease requiring
medical attention may, in the discretion of the animal control officer, be
released to the care of a veterinarian with the consent of the owner.
      4.   Destroying Animals: When, in the judgment of the animal control
officer, it is determined that an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons
or to protect the public from imminent danger to persons or property, such
animal may be destroyed without court order.
   D.   Redemption: The owner of any impounded animal or his authorized
representative may redeem such animal before disposition, provided he pays:
      1.   The impound fee;
      2.   The daily board charge;
      3.   The veterinary costs incurred during the impound period, including
rabies vaccination;
      4.   License fee, if required.
   E.   Impound Fees: Fees shall be charged according to the master fee
schedule for Washington City on file with the city.
      1.   Board: Fees shall be charged according to the master fee schedule
for Washington City on file with the city.
No impound fee will be charged the reporting owners of suspected rabid animals
if they comply with section
5-1-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-09, 5-23-2012)
5-1-15: COURT ORDERS; PROCEDURE:
Court orders shall be filed according to the following minimum notice and
procedure:
   A.   Petition: Any animal control officer shall petition the court for the
desired action.
   B.   Service Of Petition: The petition for the action, together with
supporting affidavits, shall be served on the party against whom the action is
taken at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 2012-09, 5-23-2012)
5-1-16: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, either by failing to do those
acts required herein, or by doing any act prohibited herein, shall be subject
to fine and/or imprisonment as follows:
   A.   Fines: Fines shall be charged according to the master fee schedule for
Washington City on file with the city.
Fines for second, third and subsequent violations are mandatory upon conviction
and may not be waived.
   B.   Alternative; Maximum: Or, imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed
six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such. Fines for violation of this chapter shall be
imposed according to the above schedule, but shall not exceed three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or six (6) months in jail. (Ord. 2012-09, 5-23-2012)
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES, CRIMES AND TRAFFIC CODES
SECTION:
5-2-1: State Statutes Adopted By Reference
5-2-2: Prima Facie Speed; Posted Streets
5-2-3: Parking Regulations
5-2-4: Weight Limitations
5-2-5: Dynamic Braking Devices
5-2-6: Cutting Through Corners
5-2-7: State Traffic Laws In Full Force And Effect On Washington County School
District Property
5-2-1: STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The following portions of Utah Code Annotated, as amended, and to the extent
they deal with class B misdemeanors, class C misdemeanors and infractions, are
hereby adopted by reference:
   A.   Title 30, chapter 6 (cohabitant abuse act);
   B.   Title 32A (alcoholic beverage control act), chapters 12 (criminal
offenses) and 13 (criminal procedure);
   C.   Title 41 (traffic code);
   D.   Title 53 (public safety code), chapters 3 (uniform driver's license
act), 8 (Utah highway patrol act) and 10 (criminal investigations and technical
services act);
   E.   Title 53A (state system of public education), chapter 3, part 5 (local
school boards) and chapter 11, part 1 (students in public schools);
   F.   Title 58 (occupations and professions), chapter 37 (controlled
substances act) and chapter 37a (drug paraphernalia act);
   G.   Title 62A (human services code), chapter 4a, parts 4 and 5 (child and
family services);
   H.   Title 72 (protection of highways), chapter 7, part 4 (weight
limitations) and chapter 9 (motor carrier safety act);
   I.   Title 76 (criminal code); and
   J.   Title 77 (code of criminal procedure), chapters 7 (arrest) and 36
(cohabitant abuse procedures act). (Ord. 2003-10, 5-14-2003)
5-2-2: PRIMA FACIE SPEED; POSTED STREETS:
   A.   When appropriate traffic control or regulatory signs giving notice of
speeds are posted, the prima facie maximum speed limits designated upon said
signs shall apply to the appropriate streets or portions of streets so posted.
   B.   In the absence of any speed limit sign designating a speed limit
applicable thereto, the prima facie speed limit shall be twenty five (25) miles
per hour. (1989 Code § 11-323; amd. 2007 Code)
5-2-3: PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Parking Parallel To Curb: No person shall park a vehicle headed in the
direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right hand wheels of the
vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or edge of the roadway, except
as otherwise provided in this section. (1989 Code § 11-340-1; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Lights On Parked Vehicles: Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon
any street within a business or residence district, no lights need be displayed
upon the parked vehicle. (1989 Code § 11-340-2)
   C.   Unattended Vehicle; Duty Of Driver:
      1.   No driver of a motor vehicle shall permit such vehicle to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing
the key, or when the motor vehicle is standing upon any perceptible grade,
without effectively setting the brakes thereon and turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the street.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck of the capacity
in excess of one ton rated capacity on any street where there is a perceptible
grade, unless the wheels of the truck are securely blocked, and the front
wheels, if facing down grade, turned toward the curb, and if facing up grade,
the back of the front wheels turned toward the curb.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck on any parking
lot or area abutting any street within the city where there is a perceptible
grade without securely blocking the wheels of the truck. (1989 Code § 11-340-3)
   D.   Illegally Parked Vehicles; Removal: Whenever any officer finds a
vehicle parked or standing upon a street in violation of any provisions of this
section, the officer is hereby authorized to move the vehicle, or require the
driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same to a position
off the main traveled part of the street. (1989 Code § 11-340-4)
   E.   Stopping Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places: No person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer
or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk.
      2.   In front or within two feet (2') of a private driveway.
      3.   Within an intersection.
      4.   Within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant.
      5.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      6.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon or
traffic control device located at the side of a roadway.
      7.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless authorized signs or markings indicate a different length.
      8.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail or railroad crossing.
      9.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance when properly
signposted.
      10.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct or be hazardous to traffic.
      11.   Upon any bridge or culvert structure upon a street or within a
street tunnel or underpass.
      12.   At any place where official signs or traffic markings prohibit
stopping, standing or parking.
      13.   With the left hand side of the vehicle to the curb, except as
otherwise permitted on one-way streets. (1989 Code § 11-340-5; amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Double Parking: No person shall park, stand or stop a vehicle upon the
roadway side of another vehicle which is parked, standing or stopped, except
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, or in compliance
with directions of a police officer or traffic control device, or when
necessary to avoid other traffic. (1989 Code § 11-340-6)
   G.   Approach To Parking Space:
      1.   No person shall move his vehicle in any manner or leave a parking
space and then reenter it to avoid the intent of this section.
      2.   Every driver about to enter a parking space being vacated shall stop
his vehicle and wait to the rear of the vehicle in the actual process of
vacating the parking space, and having so waited, shall have prior right to the
parking space over all other drivers.
      3.   No driver shall stop his vehicle ahead of a parking space being
vacated and attempt to interfere with a driver who has waited properly to the
rear of a parking space being vacated.
      4.   No driver shall stop and wait for a parking space unless the vehicle
vacating the space is actually in motion in the process of vacating.
      5.   No person shall park any vehicle in such a manner or under such
conditions as to obstruct any sidewalk, crossing or private driveway. (1989
Code § 11-340-7)
   H.   Parking In Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley,
except during the necessary and expeditious loading and unloading of
merchandise, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley
in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property or
interfere with the free movement of traffic through the alley. (1989 Code § 11-
340-8)
   I.   Time Limited Parking: No person who owns or has possession or control
of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a
consecutive period of forty eight (48) hours. (1989 Code § 11-340-9)
   J.   Parking Contiguous To Schools: No person shall park a vehicle upon that
side of any street contiguous to any school property during school hours when
posted with adequate signs prohibiting the same. (1989 Code § 11-340-10)
   K.   Parking On Narrow Streets Or Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle:
      1.   On any private or public street or alley where the width of the
roadway is less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   On the south or east side of any private or public street or alley
where the width of the roadway is over twenty feet (20'), but less than thirty
feet (30'), unless otherwise directed by traffic control devices.
      3.   Upon any private driveway within a central traffic district where
the width of the driveway is less than twenty feet (20'). (1989 Code § 11-340-
11)
   L.   Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited:
      1.   Parking Prohibited For Certain Purposes: No person shall park,
stand, stop or allow to be parked or operated a motor vehicle upon any roadway
or its public right of way or area abutting any roadway within the city, any
public parking lot, or any private parking lot accessed by the public for
parking, for the principal purpose of:
         a.   Displaying such vehicle for sale, except in a licensed auto sales
lot;
         b.   Greasing, repairing or servicing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
         c.   Displaying or advertising of any matter;
         d.   Selling foodstuffs or any other merchandise;
         e.   Parking, abandoning or storing unlicensed or improperly
registered vehicles.
      2.   Time Limited Parking: No person who owns or has possession or
control of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street or alley for more
than a consecutive period of forty eight (48) hours.
      3.   Vehicles Moved Then Reparked On Same Block Face: Any vehicle which
is moved from a parking spot and then reparked on the same street block face
within twenty four (24) hours from the time of said removal shall be deemed to
have been continuously parked for the purposes of this section. "Block face"
means the side of the street where the vehicle was parked between two (2)
intersecting streets.
      4.   Vehicle Defined: "Vehicle" includes a motor vehicle, trailer,
semitrailer, off highway vehicle, camper, park model recreational vehicle,
manufactured home, and mobile home. (Ord. 2015-26, 9-9-2015)
   M.   Standing And Parking On One-Way Roadways: In the event a street
includes two (2) separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction
upon each of said roadways, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the
left side of either of such roadways. (1989 Code § 11-340-13)
   N.   No Parking Zones:
      1.   The public works director is hereby authorized, subject to
provisions and limitations of this title and after a comprehensive study and
with the approval of the city council, to have placed, and when required herein
shall cause to be placed and maintained appropriate signs or traffic markings
to indicate standing or parking regulations, and the traffic markings shall
designate the zones and shall have the meanings herein set forth:
         a.   "Red" shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time,
except for the individual purposes of emergency vehicles.
         b.   "Yellow" with the words "restricted zone" stenciled thereon,
shall mean no stopping, standing or parking, except as stated on the signs or
markings giving notice thereof, except that this provision shall not apply on
Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. 98-26, 9-23-1998)
      2.   When appropriate signs or traffic curb markings have been erected or
placed according to this subsection, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle in any zone in violation of any of the provisions of this section.
      3.   For persons parking semitrucks (which term is defined in subsection
Q of this section, and other trucks exceeding 21/2 tons), or vehicles, who park
in violation of subsections N1 and N2 of this section, the penalty shall be a
fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      4.   The fine for unauthorized parking in a handicapped parking space is
one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00). (1989 Code § 11-340-14; amd. 2007
Code)
   O.   Applicability; Exceptions: The provisions of this section prohibiting
the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times
herein specified, or as indicated on official signs, except when it is
necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device. (1989 Code § 11-340-15)
   P.   Parking Limited By Signs:
      1.   When proper signs or traffic markings are erected or placed by
proper authority of the city council in each block giving notice thereof, it
shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or permit the vehicle to
remain parked for a longer time than the time specified between the hours shown
by the sign and markings, except Sundays and legal holidays.
      2.   Whether by this section or by resolution of the city council, a
parking time limit is imposed or parking prohibited on designated streets or
areas or parts of streets, the public works director shall cause to be erected,
placed and maintained appropriate signs in at least three (3) places in each
block giving the traffic marking and giving notice thereof of the parking
regulations. Unless such markings giving notice thereof are in proper place,
this parking regulation shall be ineffective. (1989 Code § 11-340-16; amd. 2007
Code)
   Q.   Truck Parking:
      1.   Definitions:
    GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle without load, plus the weight of any
load thereon.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
   PARK: The standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not.
   SEMITRUCK: Any vehicle-trailer combination that has at least three (3) axles
and is of the type that is commonly used for the commercial transport of
merchandise, goods, building materials or other items on the public
thoroughfares.
   STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular traffic.
   TRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for the
commercial transport of merchandise, goods, building materials or other items
on the public highways and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
      2.   Parking Prohibitions:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a semitruck or a
trailer on any street of the city, except as permitted below.
         b.   Nothing stated in this section shall prohibit the parking of the
following vehicles on city streets:
            (1)   Semitrucks or trailers in the process of commercial delivery
or receipt of merchandise, goods, building materials or other items within the
city, as long as the semitrucks or trailers do not remain parked for a
continuous period of more than two (2) hours.
            (2)   Semitrucks or trailers that have become inoperable due to
breakdowns or tire damage, as long as the semitrucks or trailers do not remain
parked for a continuous period of more than eight (8) hours.
         c.   The chief of police, after making reasonable effort to locate the
owner, is empowered to effect removal and impoundment of a semitruck or trailer
that is in violation of this subsection, and the cost of removal and
impoundment shall be charged to the owner or person claiming the impounded
vehicle or trailer. In addition, a violation of this subsection shall be a
class B misdemeanor or lesser offense as determined by the city prosecutor.
      3.   Weight Prohibitions:
         a.   Except as permitted below, it shall be unlawful for any person to
operate upon any street of the city any motor vehicle, including a semitruck or
other motor vehicle-trailer combination, that has a gross weight in excess of
twenty thousand (20,000) pounds per axle or thirty four thousand (34,000)
pounds per set of tandem axles.
         b.   Nothing stated in this subsection shall prohibit the operation on
city streets of motor vehicles and motor vehicle- trailer combinations,
including semitrucks, that are in the process of delivering merchandise, goods,
building materials or other items to locations within the city and that do not
have a gross weight in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) pounds per axle or
thirty four thousand (34,000) pounds per set of tandem axles.
         c.   Nothing stated in this subsection shall prohibit the operation on
city streets of motor vehicles and motor vehicle- trailer combinations,
including semitrucks, that have a valid overweight permit issued by the state
highway patrol and that do not have a gross weight in excess of twenty thousand
(20,000) pounds per axle or thirty four thousand (34,000) pounds per set of
tandem axles. (1989 Code § 11-340-17)
   R.   Penalty: Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, except:
      1.   Any person who parks a semitruck or trailer in violation of this
section shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Any person who operates a motor vehicle or motor vehicle- trailer
combination, including a semitruck, on any city street with a gross weight that
exceeds that permitted by this section shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 11-340-18; amd. 2007 Code)
5-2-4: WEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
   A.   City Manager Authority To Prohibit Certain Vehicles:
      1.   The city manager shall have authority, based on information from the
public works director, police chief and/or any other city department, to
prohibit or regulate the operation of vehicles, trucks or other commercial or
construction equipment, or impose limitations as to the weight thereof, on
designated streets, within the corporate limits of the city, over which the
city has jurisdiction. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-8-2012)
      2.   Said prohibitions may be imposed due to the potential for serious
damage, deterioration or destruction to the street itself, or the potential of
harm or injury to traffic or pedestrians on or along said street.
   B.   Posting Of Prohibitions:
      1.   When in the opinion of the city manager, it becomes necessary to
exercise authority under subsection A of this section, the city manager shall
direct the public works director to designate by appropriate signs placed on
such streets, the prohibitions or limitations enacted. Said prohibitions or
limitations shall not be enforced until or unless such time as said appropriate
signs are erected and maintained.
      2.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, should the city manager determine it
necessary to invoke the aforementioned authority, said signs may be substituted
with written notice to the affected vehicle owners and/or drivers, or by the
placement of peace officers at appropriate locations to notify persons of the
prohibitions or limitations until such time as appropriate signs can be
erected.
   C.   Type Of Restrictions: Prohibitions or limitations may be imposed in any
manner and to any extent deemed necessary by the city manager after
recommendation of the public works director, police chief, fire chief, or any
other city department, including restricting weight, size, hours of operation,
types of vehicles, season of use, or any other designation deemed necessary.
   D.   Ratification By City Council:
      1.   Any action taken by the city manager under this section shall be
effective immediately upon applicable notification being given as required in
subsection B of this section in the regular city council meeting immediately
following any action taken pursuant to this section. The city manager shall
advise the city council of said action taken. The city council shall then have
the prerogative to ratify or strike down the prohibitions or limitations
imposed, or any actions taken by the city manager.
      2.   Should the city council decide to strike down the city manager
action, said decision shall not in any way affect the authority of the city
manager to impose future regulations, and shall not be evidence of
inappropriate action taken by the city manager.
      3.   At any time after the imposition of any of the aforementioned
limitations, prohibitions or other actions by the city manager, the city
council shall have the authority to direct the city manager to modify said
limitations, prohibitions or other actions in any manner deemed necessary by
the city council.
   E.   Exempted Vehicles: None of the prohibitions or limitations imposed
under authority of this chapter shall apply to the following:
      1.   Emergency vehicles;
      2.   Service vehicles in the normal course of their repair and/or
maintenance work on public utilities; and service vehicles for commercial
operations; or
      3.   Any vehicle, truck or other equipment, the operation of which, on
any regulated street, has been exempted by the city manager. Said exemption
shall be based upon the posting of a bond or other assurance acceptable to the
city manager that any damage done to the road shall be remedied. The amount of
damage done to the street and the bond or other assurance amount shall be
determined by the city manager. In no case however, shall any vehicle, truck or
other equipment be allowed to operate, irrespective of the operator's desire to
post the above assurances, if it is determined by the city manager that the
operation of such will be unduly detrimental to the health, safety or welfare
of the city and/or its citizens or otherwise adversely affect the best
interests of the citizenry of the city. Said exemption and any bond related
thereto shall be subject to city council ratification as set forth in
subsection D of this section.
   F.   Penalty; Other Remedies:
      1.   Any person who operates any vehicle in a manner contrary to the
prohibitions imposed pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from
invoking any other criminal or civil penalty as allowed by city ordinance,
county ordinance or state law for the destruction or unlawful use of any street
within the corporate boundaries of the city over which the city has
jurisdiction. (1989 Code § 11-345; amd. 2007 Code)
5-2-5: DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICES:
   A.   Declaration Of Policy: It is declared to be the policy of the city to
prohibit the making of excessive, unnecessary loud noises which are unnatural
in their place and use and are detrimental to the public health, comfort,
welfare and peace and quiet of the residents of the city.
   B.   Defined: "Dynamic braking device" (commonly referred to as "jake
brake") means a devise used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the
engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose
of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
   C.   Noise Prohibited: No person shall operate or permit the operation of
any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged within the boundaries
of the city, except to avert imminent danger. The emitting of any compression
noise shall be prima facie evidence of the use of engine compression.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating the jake brake provisions shall be guilty
of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(Ord. 96-26, 11-13-1996; amd. 2007 Code)
5-2-6: CUTTING THROUGH CORNERS:
   A.   Avoiding Traffic Regulation: It shall be unlawful for the driver of a
vehicle, with the purpose and intent of avoiding obedience of any traffic
control device, to:
      1.   Drive through any private driveway or across any private property,
whether vacant or occupied; or
      2.   Drive across any public property not intended or marked for use as a
public street.
   B.   Harass Or Annoy: The driver of a vehicle shall not drive through any
private driveway or across private property for the purpose and with the intent
of harassing or annoying the private property owner or the owner’s patrons.
      1.   Prima Facie Evidence: It shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section if a person drives a motor vehicle, without stopping,
upon or through any such private driveway, lot, or similar area, for any
purpose. (Ord. 2019-13, 7-10-2019)
5-2-7: STATE TRAFFIC LAWS IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT ON WASHINGTON COUNTY SCHOOL
DISTRICT PROPERTY:
   A.   Property Owned By Washington County School District: All streets,
roadways, alleys, and parking lots on property owned or controlled by the
Washington County school district are “streets” or “highways” as these terms
are used in title 41, chapter 6a, Utah traffic code as adopted by section
5-2-1 of this chapter.
   B.   Penalty: A violation of this section shall be the same level offense as
specified in title 41, chapter 6a, Utah traffic code and carry the same minimum
and maximum penalties as the offense in the said title; upon conviction, a
person is subject to the same fine, for said offense, as provided in the
uniform fine and bail forfeiture schedule for the state of Utah. (Ord. 2021-24,
6-23-2021)
ARTICLE A. CURFEW FOR MINORS, PARKS
SECTION:
5-2A-1: Minors; Curfew
5-2A-2: Parks; Curfew
5-2A-1: MINORS; CURFEW:
   A.   Minor Curfew Established: It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain
or loiter upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the
city between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:
00) A.M. the following morning.
   B.   Aiding Minor To Violate Curfew: It is unlawful for any person to
assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to violate the provisions of this
section. It is unlawful for any person to use any influence or otherwise to
entice or persuade any minor from his or her parents, guardians or other
persons having charge or custody of such minor without the consent of such
parents, guardians or custodians.
   C.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
circumstances in which the minor is:
      1.   Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other responsible adult having
care and custody of such minor;
      2.   Engaged in a legitimate trade, employment or occupation which
requires the minor's presence in and/or on the sidewalks, streets, alleys or
public places, while working at or traveling to and/or from such employment;
      3.   Engaged on an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent,
guardian or other responsible person having care and custody;
      4.   In a motor vehicle engaged in normal interstate travel beginning in,
traveling through or ending in the city;
      5.   Attending or engaged in traveling between the minor's home or place
of residence and a place where any religious, municipal, social, entertainment,
sporting, political, library or school function is occurring;
      6.   Within the boundaries of the minor's place of residence.
   D.   Enforcement; Parental Responsibility:
      1.   Arrest And Citation: Any minor who is in violation of the provisions
of this section is subject to arrest and citation.
      2.   Return To Custody Of Parent: Upon arrest, the minor shall be
returned to the custody of the parent, guardian or other person charged with
the care and custody of the minor.
      3.   Refusal To Take Custody: It shall be unlawful for any parent,
guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of a minor who is in
violation of this section to knowingly refuse to appear and take custody of
said minor within a reasonable time after being ordered to do so by a peace
officer. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
      4.   Misdemeanor: Any person who violates the provisions of this section
is guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Prima Facie Evidence: Except as provided in subsection C of this
section, any remaining or loitering upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys
or public places in the city by a minor in excess of the times prescribed for
said minor in subsection A of this section, is prima facie evidence that said
remaining or loitering is unlawful. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-2A-2: PARKS; CURFEW:
   A.   Established: It shall be unlawful for any person to remain or loiter in
or upon any of the public parks, ball fields, parking lots or like public
property in the city between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following morning.
   B.   Exceptions: Involvement in a city sponsored, endorsed or permitted
activity extending beyond the curfew is exempt from the provisions of this
section.
   C.   Enforcement:
      1.   Arrest And Citation: Any person who is in violation of the
provisions of this section is subject to arrest and citation. (Ord. 2006-27A,
9-27-2006)
      2.   Misdemeanor: Any person who violates the provisions of this section
is guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Prima Facie Evidence: Except as provided in subsection B of this
section, any remaining or loitering upon any of the sidewalks, lawns, parking
lots, buildings, structures or property associated with the park in excess of
the time prescribed in subsection A of this section is prima facie evidence
that said remaining or loitering is unlawful. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
ARTICLE B. DISCHARGING WEAPONS WITHIN CITY LIMITS
SECTION:
5-2B-1: Regulations And Restrictions
5-2B-1: REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person, except public
officers (including animal control officers) in the pursuit of their lawful
duties, to discharge a dangerous weapon within the limits of the city.
   B.   Hunting Areas: By executive order, the mayor may open designated areas
within the limits of the city for hunting during regular hunting seasons for
specified periods not to exceed sixty (60) days.
   C.   Other Weapons: The use of BB guns, pellet guns, air guns, and bow and
arrows is specifically prohibited within the limits of the city, except for
target practice on private property, where the projectiles remain on the
property.
   D.   Exceptions: This section shall not prohibit the use of firearms to
start sporting events when the firearm is loaded with blank cartridges. A
"blank cartridge" is defined as a gun cartridge which contains a charge of
powder, but no bullet. (Ord. 93-12, 5-26-1993; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE C. OFF ROAD VEHICLES WITHIN DESERT TORTOISE RESERVE
SECTION:
5-2C-1: Prohibition; Penalty
5-2C-1: PROHIBITION; PENALTY:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
motorized vehicle within the Washington County desert tortoise conservation
plan reserve, unless it is on public or private roadways designated for
vehicular traffic.
   B.   Penalty: Each such instance of operation in violation of this section
shall constitute an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 97-3, 1-8-1997; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE D. CHILD ENDANGERMENT
SECTION:
5-2D-1: Unattended Children
5-2D-2: Emergency Action
5-2D-3: Notification Of Action
5-2D-4: Civil Liability
5-2D-5: Penalty
5-2D-1: UNATTENDED CHILDREN:
   A.   Vehicles:
      1.   A person commits an offense if he or she intentionally or knowingly
leaves a child in a motor vehicle for longer than five (5) minutes, knowing
that the child is:
         a.   Younger than eight (8) years of age; and
         b.   Not attended by an individual in the vehicle twelve (12) years of
age or older.
      2.   Children eight (8) to eleven (11) years old may not be left
unsupervised in a vehicle for longer than ten (10) minutes.
   B.   Structures: A person charged with the care of a child commits an
offense if he or she leaves a child under the age of eight (8) years:
      1.   Locked or confined in a dwelling, building, enclosure or in any
place without providing reasonable and necessary care and supervision for the
child; or
      2.   Under circumstances which no reasonable, similarly situated adult
would leave a minor child of similar age and ability. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-
2006)
5-2D-2: EMERGENCY ACTION:
Any law enforcement officer, firefighter, medical technician or other public
safety official who observes a child left unsupervised in a motor vehicle in
violation of this article may use whatever means reasonably necessary to
protect the child and remove the child from the motor vehicle. (Ord. 2006-27A,
9-27-2006)
5-2D-3: NOTIFICATION OF ACTION:
If a law enforcement officer, firefighter, medical technician or other public
safety official removes a child from a motor vehicle, notification shall be
left on the motor vehicle and the child shall be placed in the custody of child
protective services of the department of human services if the person having
care or custody of the child cannot be located. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-2D-4: CIVIL LIABILITY:
Law enforcement officers, firefighters, medical technicians or other public
safety officials shall not be liable in any civil action by any party for any
act performed in good faith under this article. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-2D-5: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this article is guilty of a class C
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE E. MINI-MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTERS, PERSONAL MOTORIZED
MOBILITY DEVICES, MOTORIZED CARTS AND GO- CARTS
SECTION:
5-2E-1: Definitions
5-2E-2: Mini-Motorcycles
5-2E-3: Motor Assisted Scooters
5-2E-4: Personal Motorized Mobility Devices
5-2E-5: Motorized Carts
5-2E-6: Go-Carts
5-2E-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
DIRECT       Oversight at a distance within which visual contact is maintained, and advice and
SUPERVISION: assistance can be verbally given and received.
ELECTRIC     The definition adopted by the Utah Code at 41-6a-102(17), or as amended by the
ASSISTED     Utah legislature.
BICYCLE:
             A small traditionally low set vehicle consisting of a frame, motor, wheels and
GO-CART:     steering mechanism, and is traditionally designed or built to be operated by
             children.
MINI-
MOTORCYCLE   The definition adopted by the Utah Code at 41-6a-102(37), or as amended by the
(Also Known  Utah legislature.
As POCKET
BIKE):
MOPED:       The definition adopted by the Utah Code at 41-6a-102(40), or as amended by the
             Utah legislature.
MOTOR        The definition adopted by the Utah Code at 41-6a-102(41), or as amended by the
ASSISTED     Utah legislature.
SCOOTER:
MOTOR DRIVEN The definition adopted by the Utah Code at 41-6a-102(4), or as amended by the
CYCLE:       Utah legislature.
             A self-propelled vehicle that is originally designed and traditionally used to
             transport passengers on private property, such as a golf course or campus, an
MOTORIZED    implement of husbandry as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 41-22-2,
CART:        operated in the manner prescribed in Utah Code Annotated sections 41-22-5.5(3)
             through 5.5(5), and is not structurally or mechanically altered from the original
             manufacturer’s design.
             A self-propelled device with two (2) nontandem wheels in contact with the ground,
PERSONAL     a system capable of steering and stopping the unit under typical operating
MOTORIZED    conditions, a motor not exceeding one horsepower or seven hundred fifty (750)
MOBILITY     watts, and a deck designed for a person to stand while operating the device.
DEVICE:      “Personal motorized mobility device” does not include a motorized wheelchair.
             (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. Ord. 2022-32, 6-8-2022)
 
5-2E-2: MINI-MOTORCYCLES:
   A.   A person may not operate a mini-motorcycle on any public property,
highway or path unless:
      1.   The mini-motorcycle is registered for highway use in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapter 1a, motor vehicle act; and
      2.   The operator is licensed to operate a motorcycle in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated title 53, chapter 3, uniform driver license act.
   B.   A person may not operate a mini-motorcycle on any public sidewalk.
   C.   An owner may not authorize or knowingly permit a person to operate a
mini-motorcycle in violation of this section. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
   D.   A person who violates this section is guilty of a class C misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
5-2E-3: MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTERS:
   A.   Use of a motor assisted scooter is subject to the provisions and
restrictions under Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-1115 regarding motor
assisted scooters; cycle and also Utah Code 41-61-1001 through 1011 regarding
pedestrian rights of way.
   B.   A person who violates this section is guilty of a class C misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2022-32, 6-
8-2022)
5-2E-4: PERSONAL MOTORIZED MOBILITY DEVICES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a personal motorized
mobility device is subject to the provisions and restrictions under Utah Code
Annotated section 41-6a-1165 regarding electric personal assistive mobility
devices.
   B.   A person who violates this section is guilty of a class C misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2022-32, 6-
8-2022)
5-2E-5: MOTORIZED CARTS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a personal motorized
mobility device is subject to the provisions and restrictions under Utah Code
Annotated section 41-6a-1508 regarding low-speed vehicles.
   B.   A person who violates this section is guilty of a class C misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2022-32, 6-
8-2022)
5-2E-6: GO-CARTS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a Go-Cart is subject to
the provisions and restrictions under Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-1508
regarding low-speed vehicles.
   B.   A person who violates this section is guilty of a class C misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2022-32, 6-
8-2022)
ARTICLE F. OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-2F-1: Purpose
5-2F-2: Definitions
5-2F-3: Provisions For Use Of OHV
5-2F-4: Prohibited Operation
5-2F-5: Exceptions
5-2F-6: Insurance
5-2F-7: Enforcement
5-2F-8: Penalty
5-2F-1: PURPOSE:
This article is for the purpose of adopting in part the Utah off highway
vehicle act 1  and designating Washington City roads, streets or highways open
for off highway vehicles and establishing regulations related thereto. (Ord.
2013-18, 8-28-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA title 41, ch. 22, 1953, as amended.
5-2F-2: DEFINITIONS:
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE (OHV): "All-terrain type I vehicles (ATV)", "all-terrain
type II vehicles", "off highway vehicles" and any motorized vehicles as defined
by Utah code section 41-22-2(2)(3).
OPERATE: To ride in or on and control the operation of an off highway vehicle.
OPERATOR: An individual who operates or is in actual physical control of an off
highway vehicle.
OWNER: A person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to an
off highway vehicle and entitled to its use or possession.
REGISTER: The act of assigning a registration number to an off highway vehicle
in accordance with section 41-22-3 of the Utah Code Annotated 1953.
WASHINGTON CITY ROADS, STREETS OR HIGHWAYS AND TRAILS DESIGNATED AS BEING OPEN
FOR PUBLIC TRAVEL FOR OHVs: Includes all present and future dedicated
Washington City streets except those listed below. All ATV travel should be the
most direct route from the residence to Washington Fields Road or Washington
Dam Road on the south side of the Virgin River to the trailheads east or south
and the most direct route to Main Street or Green Springs Drive (north of 100
North) to the north trailheads. No person may operate an OHV upon any state
street or highway except to cross as provided for in Utah Code Annotated 41-22-
10.3. The state and/or city streets or highways on which ATV use is prohibited
are:
   A.   Telegraph Road (entire road east to west).
   B.   Telegraph and Green Springs Interchange (from 200 South to 100 North).
   C.   Except for off highway implements of husbandry used in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated 41-22-5.5, a person may not operate an OHV on any street or
highway for any other purpose than to gain access to or from a private or
public area open for OHVs. (Ord. 2013-18, 8-28-2013)
5-2F-3: PROVISIONS FOR USE OF OHV:
Any person operating an OHV is subject to all of the provisions of title 41,
chapter 6a, Utah Code Annotated (1953), as amended (traffic code), which
includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Unless otherwise provided for herein, no person under sixteen (16)
years of age will be allowed to operate an OHV on a Washington City road,
street or highway designated for OHV use.
   B.   No person under the age of sixteen (16) may operate and no owner may
give permission to a person under the age of sixteen (16) to operate an OHV on
the designated roads, streets, and highways of Washington City.
   C.   All operators sixteen (16) years of age and older must possess a valid
operator's license as provided in title 53, chapter 3, uniform driver license
act.
   D.   All riders under the age of eighteen (18) may not operate or ride an
off highway vehicle on the designated roads, streets, and highways of
Washington City unless the person is wearing a properly fitted Snell or DOT
approved protective headgear designated for motorized use 1 .
   E.   All users of roads, streets and highways designated for use by OHVs
must obey all traffic and other safety laws and rules as designated 2 .
   F.   All users of the Washington City designated off highway roads, streets
and highways may not operate a vehicle at a speed greater than twenty five (25)
miles per hour and is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions,
giving regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing, including
when:
      1.   Approaching and crossing an intersection or bridge crossing;
      2.   Approaching and going around a curve;
      3.   Approaching a hillcrest;
      4.   Traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway;
      5.   Special hazards exist due to pedestrians, other traffic, weather or
road conditions.
   G.   Even when no special hazards exist, an operator of an OHV will stay as
far right on the roadway as possible and will not travel at a speed in excess
of twenty five (25) miles per hour at any time, upon any street, alley,
highway, or other public ground or place in the city. (Ord. 2013-18, 8-28-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA 41-22-10.8.
2 2. UCA 41.
5-2F-4: PROHIBITED OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any off highway vehicle
in the following ways or under the following circumstances, which are hereby
declared to be unsafe and a public nuisance:
   A.   On a roadway, shoulder or inside bank of slope or any road, street or
highway, except as provided in this article.
   B.   On direct crossing of a street or highway, unless:
      1.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees
(90°) to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;
      2.   The off highway vehicle is brought to a complete stop before
crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of the highway;
      3.   The operator yields the right of way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
      4.   In crossing a divided highway or a street of more than two (2)
lanes, the crossing is made only at an intersection of the highway with another
public street or highway controlled by a traffic signal 1 .
   C.   Without being equipped with at least one headlamp, one taillamp and
brakes, all in working order, which conform to standards as prescribed in Utah
Code Annotated 41-22-10.7.
   D.   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
person or property of another or to cause injury or damage to such person or
property.
   E.   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled
substance.
   F.   Without a manufacturer installed or equivalent muffler in good working
order and connected to the off highway vehicle's exhaust system. Mufflers must
have a federally approved spark arrester. Overall noise emission may not exceed
ninety nine (99) decibels at a distance of twenty inches (20"). Mufflers may
not be altered to increase motor noise, or have a cutout, bypass, or similar
device 2 .
   G.   In a direction other than the same direction as other motor vehicles.
   H.   Within the right of way of any road, street or highway while towing a
sled, skid or other vehicle, unless the object towed is connected to the off
highway vehicle by a hinged swivel and secure hitch.
   I.   In any municipal park or recreation area, except when posted as "open"
to off highway vehicles, and only along established paths and trails and within
the hours permitted.
   J.   Upon private property, other than that of the off highway vehicle owner
or operator, without express written permission of the owner.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person operating or accompanying a
person operating an OHV to refuse to immediately leave private land upon the
request of the owner or person in charge of such land.
      2.   No person operating or accompanying a person operating an OHV shall
obstruct any entrance or exit to private property with an OHV, trailer or other
vehicle without the owner's permission.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, mutilate, or
destroy any sign, signboards, or other notice which regulates trespassing for
purposes of operating an OHV on land, or to tear down, deface, or destroy any
fence or other enclosure or any gate or bars belonging to any such fence or
enclosure.
   K.   While carrying a strung bow or loaded firearm. (Ord. 2013-18, 8-28-
2013)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA 41-22-10.3.
2 1. UCA 41-22-10.7.
5-2F-5: EXCEPTIONS:
No person may operate an off highway vehicle on Washington City roads, streets
or highways not designated as open to OHV use, except:
   A.   When crossing a highway, trail, or road and the operator comes to a
complete stop before crossing; proceeds only after yielding the right of way to
oncoming traffic; and crosses at a right angle. Must also be in compliance with
subsection B of this section 1 .
   B.   When loading or unloading an OHV from a vehicle or trailer which shall
be done with due regard for safety and at the nearest practical point of
operation 2 .
   C.   When an emergency exists during any period of time and at those
locations when the operation of conventional motor vehicles is impractical or
when the operation is directed by a peace officer or public authority 3 . (Ord.
2013-18, 8-28-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA 41-22-10.3.
2 2. UCA 41-22-10.3.
3 3. UCA 41-22-10.3.
5-2F-6: INSURANCE:
Utah Code Annotated 41-12a-301(5) specifically states that owner's or
operator's security is not required on off highway vehicles registered under
section 41-22-3 when operated either:
   A.   On a highway designated as open for off highway vehicle use; or
   B.   In the manner prescribed by section
5-2F-5 of this article 1 . (Ord. 2013-18, 8-28-2013)
 
Notes
1 4. UCA 41-22-10.3.
5-2F-7: ENFORCEMENT:
Only peace officers of the state and their respective duly authorized
representatives may enforce this section. (Ord. 2013-18, 8-28-2013)
5-2F-8: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified, penalties for violation of this article shall be
punishable as a class C misdemeanor 1  with a minimum fine of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 2013-18, 8-28-2013)
 
Notes
1 5. UCA 41-22-17.
ARTICLE G. TOBACCO AND NICOTINE USE
SECTION:
5-2G-1: Prohibition Of Tobacco And Nicotine Use In Public Parks, City-Owned
Cemeteries, Special Events, And Near Mass Gatherings
5-2G-1: PROHIBITION OF TOBACCO AND NICOTINE USE IN PUBLIC PARKS, CITY-OWNED
CEMETERIES, SPECIAL EVENTS, AND NEAR MASS GATHERINGS:
   A.   Definitions: Nicotine Product, Tobacco Product and Alternative Nicotine
Product are words and terms that shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
Utah Code Section 76-10-101, as amended.
   B.   The sale, consumption, possession or use of any tobacco product,
nicotine product, or alternative nicotine product within the geographical
boundaries of Washington City is prohibited at the following public places and
public events:
      1.   Public parks;
      2.   Public recreation facilities;
      3.   Public trails;
      4.   City-owned cemeteries;
      5.   Special events held upon public property; and
      6.   Mass gatherings of one hundred (100) or more people on public
property.
   C.   Posting of Signs: "No Tobacco Use" signs, or the international "no
smoking" symbol sign (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly
and conspicuously posted in every public park.
   D.   Penalty: A violation of this section is an infraction and, upon
conviction, a person is subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1(C) of this code. Each violation shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 2021-
22, 5-12-2021)
CHAPTER 3
NUISANCES DEFINED AND DECLARED
SECTION:
5-3-1: Purpose
5-3-2: Definitions
5-3-3: Nuisances Defined
5-3-4: Exceptions
5-3-5: Responsibility For Nuisances
5-3-6: Enforcement; Administration
5-3-7: Finding Of Nuisance
5-3-8: Voluntary Correction
5-3-9: Administrative Citation
5-3-10: Other Remedies
5-3-11: Habitual Nuisance
5-3-12: Appeals
5-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means for the city and individuals
to identify nuisances within the city and to provide a means for correcting or
abating the nuisances. The city needs the ability to abate nuisances in order
to protect the health and safety of the public, to foster neighborhood
stability, to preserve the appearance, character and beauty of neighborhoods,
to encourage community pride, to preserve the value of property, and to protect
the general welfare of the city and its citizens, businesses and visitors. This
chapter provides for progressive enforcement measures to abate nuisances; the
most aggressive forms of enforcement are generally reserved for the most
recalcitrant violators of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ABATE: To repair, replace, remove, destroy, correct or otherwise remedy a
condition which constitutes a nuisance by such means, in such a manner and to
such an extent as the public safety official determines is necessary in the
interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.
COMPLETION DATE: The date by which the responsible person must abate a
nuisance. The completion date is originally set by the public safety official
on the voluntary correction agreement.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a residential building or residential
portion of a building that are arranged, designed, used or intended for use as
a complete, independent living facility for a single family and that includes
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EMERGENCY: A situation, which, in the opinion of the public safety official,
requires immediate action to prevent or eliminate an immediate threat to the
health or safety of a person or property.
FAMILY: A. An individual living alone; or
   B.   Two (2) or more people related by blood, marriage, adoption and their
foster children; or
   C.   Up to five (5) unrelated individuals who live and cook together as a
single housekeeping unit.
   D.   The definition of "family" includes nonpaying guests of up to two (2)
in number, if the guests live and cook together with the family in a single
dwelling unit.
HABITUAL NUISANCE: Any premises or property located within the city that
generates repeated responses from public safety officials because of nuisance
related activities. Excluding calls for drug or party houses, any premises or
property that generates three (3) or more calls for nuisance related activities
within an eighteen (18) month time period shall be deemed a "habitual
nuisance". Any premises or property that generates two (2) or more calls for
nuisance related activities within an eighteen (18) month time period to abate
any drug or party conditions as set forth in this chapter shall be deemed a
"habitual nuisance".
ILLEGAL RENTAL: Any dwelling unit that is rented to persons constituting more
than one family or otherwise in violation of any other city ordinance
regulating zoning and/or occupancy.
OWNER: Any person or persons who have title or interest in any building or
premises, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof. For the
purpose of giving notice, the term "owner" also includes any person in physical
possession of the building or premises.
PREMISES: A plot of ground, whether occupied or not.
PROPERTY: A building, structure or the premises on which the building or
structure is located, or undeveloped land.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area generally visible to public view and includes alleys,
bridges, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, streets and
buildings open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink
or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or
dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL: A code enforcement officer (also known as compliance
officer), police officer, animal welfare officer, firefighter or any other
public official or inspector, hired by Washington City to enforce the
ordinances of the city.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The person responsible for correcting or abating a nuisance
pursuant to this chapter. The "responsible person" includes the property owner
and any person who causes or permits a nuisance to occur or remain upon
property in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner, lessor, lessee
or other person entitled to control, use and/or occupy property where a
nuisance occurs. In cases where there is more than one responsible person, the
city may proceed against one, some or all of them.
UNSHELTERED STORAGE: Personal property which is capable of being viewed from
any public or private street or from any adjoining real property. "Unsheltered
storage" shall also include personal property which is covered by a tarp,
blanket, dark plastic or other similar covering. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-3-3: NUISANCES DEFINED:
This section defines "nuisance" by providing five (5) general definitions of
what constitutes a nuisance (subsection A of this section), and then providing
specific examples of situations, conduct or activities that constitute
nuisances (subsection B of this section). The purpose of the general
definitions is to allow the city to classify an offending situation, conduct or
activity as a nuisance, even though the situation, conduct or activity may not
be listed as a nuisance in the specific examples. The first three (3) general
definitions are taken directly from state law. The purpose of listing the
specific examples is to identify some of the specific situations, conduct and
activities that the city intends to abate as nuisances.
   A.   General Definitions Of Nuisance: Any activity that meets any one or
more of the five (5) definitions set forth below shall constitute a "nuisance"
if it occurs within the city:
      1.   Utah Code Annotated Sections:
         a.   "Nuisance", as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 78-38-1:
Anything which is injurious to health, indecent, offensive to the senses, or an
obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
         b.   "Nuisance", as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 76-10-801:
Any item, thing, manner or condition whatsoever that it is dangerous to human
life or health or renders soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome.
         c.   "Nuisance", as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 76-10-803:
Unlawfully doing any act or omitting to perform any duty, which act or
omission:
            (1)   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or
safety of three (3) or more persons;
            (2)   Offends public decency;
            (3)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct,
or renders dangerous for passage, any lake, stream, canal or basin, or any
public park, square, street or highway; or
            (4)   In any way renders three (3) or more persons insecure in life
or the use of property. An act which affects three (3) or more persons in any
of the ways specified in this subsection is still a "nuisance" regardless of
the extent to which the annoyance or damage inflicted on individuals is
unequal.
      2.   Nuisance: A condition in which:
         a.   Wrongfully annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health or safety of others; or
         b.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or
render dangerous for passage, any public park, square, street or highway, right
of way, trail, sidewalk, or any other public place; or
         c.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life, or in the use
of property, and which affects the rights of an entire community or
neighborhood, although the extent of the damage may be unequal.
      3.   Specific Nuisances: Anything specifically listed as a nuisance in
subsection B of this section.
   B.   Nuisances Enumerated: Every situation, conduct or activity listed below
constitutes a nuisance and may be abated pursuant to this chapter. The listed
examples are not exhaustive; a situation, conduct or activity not listed below,
but coming within one of the general definitions of "nuisance" listed in
subsection A of this section, shall also constitute a nuisance. The first six
(6) listed nuisances are also listed as nuisances pursuant to Utah Code
Annotated section 78-38-9:
      1.   Drug House: Every building or premises where the unlawful sale,
manufacture, service, storage, distribution, dispensing or acquisition of any
controlled substance, precursor or analog specified in Utah Code Annotated
title 57, chapter 37 (Utah controlled substances act) occurs.
      2.   Gambling: Every building or premises where gambling is permitted to
be played, conducted or dealt upon as prohibited in Utah Code Annotated title
76, chapter 10, part 11 (gambling), which creates the conditions of a
"nuisance", as defined in subsection A1a of this section.
      3.   Gangs: Every building or premises wherein criminal activity is
committed in concert with two (2) or more persons as provided in Utah Code
Annotated section 76-3-203.1.
      4.   Party Houses: Every building or premises where parties occur
frequently which creates the conditions of a "nuisance", as defined in
subsection A1a of this section. Some of the factors the city may examine in
determining whether a party house exists include:
         a.   An increase in the number of emergency response calls due to
parties being held;
         b.   Any pattern of activity that suggests that parties creating a
"nuisance", as defined by this chapter, are taking place;
         c.   Any pattern of activity which diminishes the quiet enjoyment of
those buildings and premises around the alleged party house or which cause the
immediate neighbors to fear for their safety or the safety of their family
members due to the party activity.
      5.   Prostitution: Every building or premises where prostitution or the
promotion of prostitution is regularly carried on by one or more persons, as
provided in Utah Code Annotated title 76, chapter 10, part 13 (prostitution).
      6.   Weapons: Every building or premises where a violation of Utah Code
Annotated title 76, chapter 10, part 5 (weapons), occurs on the premises.
      7.   Unsafe Condition: A condition that unreasonably or unlawfully
affects the health or safety of one or more persons.
      8.   Fire Hazard: Fire hazard.
      9.   Noxious Emanations: Emanation of noxious or unreasonable odors,
fumes, gas, smoke, soot or cinders.
      10.   Noxious Weeds: Noxious weeds located on vacant lots or other
property, along public sidewalks or the outer edge of any public street, or
weeds in any other location which constitute a fire and/or health hazard.
      11.   Refuse: Keeping or storing of any refuse or waste matter which
interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of nearby property.
      12.   Stagnant Water: Polluted, standing or stagnant water, which
constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition, or may become a mosquito
producing nuisance.
      13.   Improper Accumulations: An unreasonable accumulation of soil,
litter, debris, plant trimmings, trash, used or damaged lumber; junk; salvage
materials; abandoned, discarded or unused furniture; stoves, sinks, toilets,
cabinets or other fixtures or equipment visible from the street or an adjoining
property, including conditions which cause an unreasonable and prolonged odor
that effects the health, safety and comfort of adjoining properties. However,
nothing herein shall preclude the placement of stacked firewood for personal
noncommercial use on the premises.
      14.   Lighting; Illumination Restrictions:
         a.   No spotlight or floodlight shall be installed in any way which
shall permit the direct rays of such lights to penetrate into any residential
zone or onto any property used for residential purposes.
         b.   No light, sign or other advertising structure as regulated by any
city ordinance shall be erected at the intersection on any street in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where by reason
of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of,
or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or which
makes use of words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to
interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
         c.   Any lights provided to illuminate any parking area permitted by
this chapter shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away from adjacent
premises.
      15.   Attractive Nuisances: Any attractive nuisance dangerous to children
and other persons, including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken or
neglected household appliances, equipment and machinery, abandoned foundations
or excavations, or improperly maintained or secured pools, or improperly
maintained buildings or sheds.
      16.   Vegetation: Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds,
hedges and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation which is in a hazardous
condition, is an obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or which is
likely to harbor rats, vermin or other pests.
      17.   Dust: Any premises which causes excessive dust due to lack of
landscaping, nonmaintenance or other cause.
      18.   Obstruction Of Right Of Way: The keeping, storing, depositing or
accumulating of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete or any other materials, or
property which would damage or obstruct, or tend to obstruct, or interfere
with, or render dangerous for passage, any street, sidewalk, lake, stream,
drainage canal, gutter or basin for any period of time, without written
permission from the city.
      19.   Unsheltered/Improper Storage: The keeping, storing, depositing or
accumulating on the premises for an unreasonable period of time, old, unused,
stripped and junk machinery, stripped or junked vehicles, vehicle accessories,
implements, equipment or personal property of any kind which is no longer
safely usable for the purpose for which it was manufactured (except for
licensed junkyards), or was created for, or traditionally used in, the yard.
      20.   Garbage Containers: Permitting any garbage container, trash can,
trash bag or dumpster to remain on premises for more than twenty four (24)
hours when it has become unclean, offensive and/or a public nuisance. Failing
to keep the contents of a garbage container inside the container, creating an
unsightly and unclean environment. The leaving of any garbage can or refuse
container in the street, other than on collection day, for more than twenty
four (24) hours after the collection day.
      21.   Construction Equipment: Construction equipment, trailer or
machinery of any type or description parked or stored on a residential property
or public right of way, except while excavating, performing construction or
demolition operations covered by an active building permit.
      22.   Improper Parking Or Storage:
         a.   Parking or storage of inoperative, unregistered, abandoned,
wrecked or dismantled vehicles, boats, trailers or vehicle parts, including
recreational vehicles, on a premises or in the public right of way. Storage or
parking that is specifically allowed by the city zoning ordinance shall not be
considered a nuisance.
         b.   Parking or storage of registered vehicles, trailers or boats
longer than forty eight (48) hours in accordance with subsection 5-2-3I of this
title. Vehicles with eight (8) or more wheels touching the ground, which may
include an attached trailer, may not park in violation of city parking and
zoning ordinances which limit time to fifteen (15) minutes, two (2) hours when
loading and unloading, or eight (8) hours due to breakdown.
      23.   Hazardous Conditions: Any wall, sign, fence, gate, hedge,
excavation or structure maintained in such condition of deterioration or
disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons or property.
      24.   Graffiti: Graffiti which remains on the exterior of any building,
fence, sign or other structure and is visible from a public street. Graffiti
must be removed by the property owner or resident within seventy two (72)
hours. Failure to remove the graffiti should result in a citation and the city
removing the graffiti and taking action to recoup costs of said removal.
      25.   Improper Maintenance Of Structure: Maintenance of buildings and/or
structures in such condition as to be deemed defective or in a condition of
deterioration or disrepair, including, but not limited to:
         a.   Any building or structure which is unfit for human habitation, or
which is an unreasonable hazard to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, or which presents an unreasonable fire hazard in the vicinity
where it is located; or
         b.   Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of city
ordinances, or any use of land, buildings or premises in violation of city
ordinances; or
         c.   Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed, or left in an
unreasonable state of partial construction for a period of six (6) months or
longer. An "unreasonable state of partial construction" is defined as any
unfinished building or structure where the appearance or condition of the
building or structure does not meet the requirements for finished buildings or
structures as required by applicable city ordinances or building codes. The
building or structure shall not be considered to be a nuisance if it is under
active construction; or
         d.   Buildings having dry rot, warping, termite infestation, decay,
excessive cracking, peeling or chalking, as to render the building unsightly
and/or in a state of disrepair; or
         e.   Buildings with missing doors and/or windows containing broken
glass and/or no glass at all where the window is of a type which normally
contains glass; or
         f.   Building exteriors, walls, fences, gates, driveways, sidewalks,
walkways, signs or ornamentation, or alleys maintained in such condition as to
render them unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair; or
         g.   Buildings or conditions that violate any building, electrical,
plumbing, fire, housing or other code adopted by the city.
      26.   City Code Nuisances: Any violation of a city code section that
expressly declares a specific situation, conduct or activity to be a nuisance.
      27.   Business Nuisances: Any business related activity conducted in
violation of city zoning and business ordinances or in violation of a
conditional use permit.
      28.   Alcohol: Every property or premises not licensed under applicable
state law or city ordinance where any intoxicating liquors or alcohol are kept
for unlawful use, sale or distribution.
      29.   Offensive Discharge: Discharging or placing any offensive water,
liquid waste, chemicals, paint, oil, fuel or refuse of any kind into any
street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash, natural watercourse, ditch,
canal or any vacant lot, which, as the result of continued discharge, will
render the place of discharge offensive, a health or fire hazard, or likely to
become so.
      30.   Illegal Dumping/Littering: Depositing, throwing or placing any
trash, refuse, yard waste, construction materials or other unwanted materials
on public or private property, for the purpose of temporarily storing/staging
or permanently disposing of said items. This shall include using dumpsters or
other trash receptacles without express permission from the individual who
contracted for or has control of said container.
      31.   Failure To Provide/Maintain Trash Receptacle: Failing to keep and
maintain a dumpster or other receptacle sufficient to accommodate the waste
created by a project, construction site, business or special event; or allowing
a receptacle to become a public nuisance by overfilling, or failing to empty
the receptacle in a timely manner.
      32.   Offensive Storage: Keeping or collecting, or permitting the
accumulation of stale or putrid grease or other offensive matter, such as human
waste, and animal carcasses and manure.
      33.   Inappropriate Conduct: Every property or premises where there
exists an environment which causes, encourages or allows individuals or groups
of individuals to commit one or more of the following acts on the property,
premises or adjacent public place, including, but not limited to:
         a.   Illegally using or possessing any controlled substance,
precursor, analog, or possessing any item of drug paraphernalia;
         b.   Illegally consuming intoxicating liquor or alcohol;
         c.   Publicly urinating or defecating;
         d.   By physical action, intentionally causing or attempting to cause
another person to reasonably fear imminent bodily injury, or the commission of
a criminal act upon their person or upon property in their immediate
possession;
         e.   Engaging in acts of violence, including fighting amongst
themselves;
         f.   Discharging a firearm or explosive in violation of city ordinance
or state law; (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
         g.   It is unlawful to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any
person in his dwelling or place of business by making unreasonably loud noises,
which would disturb a person of average and reasonable sensitivities, under the
circumstances, or to continue to disturb after being informed that the noise is
having that effect.
The following acts or noise when prolonged, unusual or unnatural in their time,
place or use are examples of, but not limited to, "disturb(ing) the quiet,
comfort or repose of any person in his dwelling or place of business": horns,
stereos, yelling or shouting, motor vehicles, musical instruments,
loudspeakers, construction work or equipment used in construction, repair, or
demolition work on buildings, structures or streets.
Applications for a temporary permit for relief from foregoing restrictions on
the basis of undue hardship may be made to the city. Any permit granted by the
city shall contain all conditions upon which the permit has been granted,
including, but not limited to, the effective dates, any time restrictions,
location and any other reasonable requirements to minimize adverse effects upon
the surrounding neighborhood; (Ord. 2010-09, 4-28-2010)
         h.   Intentionally obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
         i.   Soliciting acts of prostitution;
         j.   Creating excessive noise and/or dust pollution with an all-
terrain vehicle, motorcycle, or any recreational vehicle, within six hundred
feet (600') of an inhabited dwelling;
         k.   Permitting or performing any ablutions in or near any public
drinking fountain, waterway or water feature;
         l.   Befouling water in any spring, well or water source supplying
water for culinary purposes;
         m.   Sitting, standing or loitering on or near a roadway, sidewalk,
city park or public property, for the purpose of soliciting from the occupant
of a vehicle or pedestrian:
            (1)   A ride;
            (2)   Contributions;
            (3)   Employment;
            (4)   The parking, watching or guarding of a vehicle or any
personal property; or
            (5)   Other business;
         n.   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to
a degree which renders the pedestrian a hazard, may not be on a roadway,
sidewalk or sidewalk area;
         o.   A minor who is under the influence of alcohol or metabolite to
any degree. A minor found within the city limits under the influence of alcohol
or metabolite to any degree is prima facie evidence of unlawful activity
occurring in the city.
      34.   Dangerous Conditions: Any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage,
building, structure or any part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole or
smokestack; or any excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk, subspace,
dock or loading dock; or any lot, land, yard, premises or location which, in
its entirety, or in any part thereof, by reason of the condition in which the
same is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health,
safety, life, limb or property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience,
discomfort, damage or injury to any one or more individuals in the city, in any
one or more of the following particulars:
         a.   By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general
health and safety of the community;
         b.   By reason of being a fire hazard;
         c.   By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon,
about or around the aforesaid property;
         d.   By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the
property, and/or being vacant, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and use
of the property in the immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful
to the community in which such property is situated or such condition exists.
(Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-3-4: EXCEPTIONS:
No act which is done or maintained under the express authority of an
authoritative statute, ordinance or court ruling shall be declared a nuisance.
(Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-3-5: RESPONSIBILITY FOR NUISANCES:
The responsible person is responsible for abating nuisances pursuant to this
chapter. Any person, whether as owner, agent or occupant, who creates, aids in
creating, or contributes to a nuisance, or who supports, continues or retains a
nuisance, is responsible for the nuisance and is therefor a responsible person
pursuant to this chapter. Every successive owner or tenant of a property or
premises who fails to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such
property or premises caused by a former owner or tenant is responsible therefor
in the same manner as the one who first created it. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-3-6: ENFORCEMENT; ADMINISTRATION:
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the police department. In
case of nuisances involving dangerous buildings or violations of codes
typically administered and enforced by the community development and public
works departments, this chapter may also be administered and enforced by the
community development and public works departments. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-8-2012)
5-3-7: FINDING OF NUISANCE:
If a public safety official finds that a nuisance exists, the public safety
official shall attempt to have the responsible person abate the nuisance.
Although the public safety official's first step in correcting or abating the
nuisance will always be to obtain voluntary compliance, the public safety
official may pursue any remedy or combination of remedies available pursuant to
this chapter, state law or common law in order to abate the nuisance. Nothing
in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit the city from engaging in its
standard prosecution practices. Therefore, the city may prosecute violators of
city ordinances or state laws without first having to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, even though the activity or conduct prosecuted may
also constitute a nuisance under this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted to prevent the city from enforcing applicable city ordinances,
building codes or the abatement of dangerous buildings code without first
treating the offending conduct, situation or activity as a nuisance pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-3-8: VOLUNTARY CORRECTION:
This section applies whenever the public safety official determines that a
nuisance exists.
   A.   Contact: Before taking other steps to abate the nuisance, the public
safety official shall make a reasonable attempt to secure voluntary correction
or abatement of the nuisance by:
      1.   Contacting the responsible person, where possible;
      2.   Explaining the nuisance;
      3.   Requesting the responsible person to abate the nuisance; and
      4.   Agreeing to terms with the responsible person to abate the nuisance:
         a.   Verbal Agreement: The responsible person and the official may
agree verbally as to what actions must be taken to abate the nuisance. Failure
to abide by the verbal agreement can result in further action being taken, as
outlined in this chapter.
         b.   Voluntary Correction Agreement: The responsible person and the
official may memorialize the terms of their agreement as set forth in this
section.
   B.   Voluntary Correction Agreement: If the public safety official and the
responsible person agree to terms for abating the nuisance, they may enter into
a voluntary correction agreement. The voluntary correction agreement is a
contract between the city and the responsible person in which the responsible
person agrees to abate the nuisance within a specified time and according to
specified conditions. The voluntary correction agreement shall include the
following terms:
      1.   The name and address of the responsible person;
      2.   The street address of the nuisance, or a description sufficient to
identify the building, structure, premises or land upon or within which the
nuisance is occurring;
      3.   A description of the nuisance;
      4.   The necessary corrective action to be taken, and a date or time by
which correction must be completed;
      5.   An agreement by the responsible person that the city may inspect the
premises as may be necessary to determine compliance with the voluntary
correction agreement;
      6.   An agreement by the responsible person, in which the city may abate
the nuisance and recover its costs and expenses to abate the nuisance, as well
as a monetary fine pursuant to this chapter from the responsible person, if
terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met;
      7.   An agreement by the responsible person acknowledging that he/she
waives the right to appeal the public safety official's finding that a nuisance
exists and waives the right to appeal the specific corrective action required
in the voluntary correction agreement; and
      8.   An agreement by the responsible person that failure to comply with
the voluntary correction agreement may be grounds for criminal prosecution. The
public safety official may grant an extension of the time limit for correcting
or abating the nuisance if the responsible person has shown due diligence and/
or substantial progress in correcting or abating the nuisance, but unforeseen
circumstances render abatement under the original conditions unattainable. If
the responsible person complies with the terms of the voluntary correction
agreement, the city shall take no further action against the responsible person
related to the nuisance described in the voluntary correction agreement, unless
the nuisance recurs.
   C.   No Agreement: If the public safety official and the responsible person
cannot agree to terms for correcting or abating the nuisance, the public safety
official may still set a deadline and abate the nuisance using one or more of
the procedures set forth in this chapter, state law or common law. (Ord. 2006-
27A, 9-27-2006)
5-3-9: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
   A.   Citation: When the public safety official determines that a nuisance
exists, and is unable to secure voluntary correction pursuant to section
5-3-8 of this chapter, the public safety official may issue a citation to the
responsible person each and every day the nuisance exists. The public safety
official may issue a citation, or seek other remedies without having attempted
to secure voluntary correction as provided in section
5-3-8 under the following circumstances:
      1.   When an emergency exists; or
      2.   When the public safety official is unable to locate or determine the
identity of the responsible person; or
      3.   The violation is of the nature that a voluntary abatement agreement
or administrative citation would not be effective or appropriate.
   B.   Service Of Citation: The public safety official shall serve the
citation upon the responsible person. If the responsible person cannot, after
due diligence, be personally served within Washington County, and if an address
for service cannot, after due diligence, be ascertained, or the responsible
person cannot be reached by the long form process, notice shall be served by
posting a copy of the citation conspicuously on the affected property or
structure. Proof of service shall be made by a written declaration under
penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the
time and date of service, the manner by which the service was made, and if by
posting, the facts showing that due diligence was used in attempting to serve
the person personally. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-3-10: OTHER REMEDIES:
The city may take one or more of the following actions against any responsible
person who fails to comply with the terms of a voluntary consent agreement, a
citation, or an order of the judge:
   A.   Abatement By City:
      1.   The city may abate a nuisance when:
         a.   The terms of a voluntary correction agreement have not been met;
or
         b.   The requirements of a citation have not been complied with, or,
if the citation is appealed to a judge and the terms of the citation are
amended by the judge, the terms of the judge's order have not been complied
with; or
         c.   The condition is subject to summary abatement as provided for in
subsection A2 of this section.
      2.   Whenever a nuisance is occurring which constitutes an immediate and
emergent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the environment,
the city may summarily and without prior notice abate the condition. Notice of
such abatement, including the reason for it, shall be given to the responsible
person as soon as reasonably possible after the abatement.
      3.   Using any lawful means, the city may enter upon the subject property
and may remove or correct the condition which is subject to abatement. The city
may seek, but is not required to seek, such judicial process as it deems
necessary to effect the removal or correction of such condition.
      4.   During an abatement proceeding, any personal property constituting a
"nuisance", as defined by this chapter, may be confiscated as part of the
abatement process. Any property that has been confiscated by the city as part
of an abatement will be held pending the resolution of the nuisance. The owner
of the abated property may recover the property upon showing that the nuisance
has been corrected or that substantial efforts, as determined by the public
safety officials, have been made to correct the nuisance. The property owner
shall pay the cost of storage of the property. If, after ninety (90) days of
the property being confiscated, the property owner fails to claim the
confiscated property, after complying with the requirements of Utah Code
Annotated section 77-24a-5, the city may dispose of the property, to include
sale at auction, disposal, etc., and seek to collect the cost of storage from
the property owner and any other remedies as provided by law.
      5.   The costs, including incidental expenses, of correcting or abating
the violation shall be billed to the responsible person and/or the owner,
lessor, tenant or other person entitled to control, use and/or occupy the
property and shall become due and payable to the city within ten (10) days of
actual receipt of the bill (within 15 days of the mailing date if the bill is
mailed). The term "incidental expenses" includes, but is not limited to:
         a.   Personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorney
fees and costs;
         b.   Costs incurred in documenting the violation;
         c.   Hauling, storage and disposal expenses;
         d.   Actual expenses and costs for the city in preparing notices,
specifications and contracts, and in accomplishing and/or contracting and
inspecting the work; or
         e.   The costs of any required printing and mailing.
   B.   Monetary Fine:
      1.   The responsible person shall pay the city a monetary fine for each
day the nuisance continues past the designated completion date. The nuisance
shall be considered to continue until the public safety official approves the
responsible person's actions to correct or abate the nuisance. The amount of
the monetary fine shall be as follows:
One hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day during the period that the
nuisance remains uncorrected or unabated after the completion date.
      2.   The monetary fine shall be cumulative and may not be waived by the
public safety official. Payment of a monetary fine pursuant to this section
does not relieve the responsible person from the duty to abate the nuisance as
required by the voluntary consent agreement or the citation. The monetary fine
constitutes a personal obligation of the responsible person. Any monetary fine
assessed must be paid to the city.
      3.   The city attorney or his designee is authorized to take appropriate
action to negotiate the amount of the monetary fine, collect the monetary fine,
determine the time period in which the fine shall be paid and take any other
action necessary to resolve the fine. In determining the time period in which
to pay, the city attorney or his designee may take into consideration the
number of days between the required completion date and the actual completion
date, public safety official input, the responsible person's cooperation, etc.
      4.   The city may also seek to collect reasonable attorney fees and costs
incurred in collecting the monetary fine where allowed by law.
   C.   Civil Actions: Either the city or any private person directly affected
by a nuisance may bring a civil action to abate or enjoin the nuisance, or for
damages for causing or maintaining the nuisance (including the cost, if any, of
cleaning the subject property). The civil action may be brought pursuant to
this chapter or pursuant to state law.
   D.   Criminal Actions: Criminal actions may be initiated by criminal
citation from the public safety official or by long form information. (Ord.
2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
      1.   Any person who maintains or assists in maintaining a nuisance is
guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. No person shall be prosecuted under this subsection unless
the public safety official first attempted to obtain voluntary correction as
provided in section
5-3-8 of this chapter, except where the nuisance requires immediate emergency
abatement and/or the responsible party is uncooperative in facilitating said
abatement.
      2.   If the alleged nuisance is also a violation of a provision of city
code (other than this nuisance chapter) or state law, the responsible person
may be charged under the specific provision of city code or state law, even if
the public safety official did not first attempt to obtain voluntary correction
as provided in section of
5-3-8 of this chapter.
      3.   Any person who knowingly obstructs, impedes or interferes with the
city or its agents, or with the responsible person, in the performance of
duties imposed by this ordinance, or a decision and order issued by the judge,
or a voluntary correction agreement, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Abatement By Eviction: Whenever there is reason to believe that a
nuisance under subsections 5-3-3B1 through B6 of this chapter is kept,
maintained or exists in the city, the city attorney or any citizen residing in
the city, or any person or entity doing business in the city, in his or their
own names, may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate
the nuisance and obtain an order for the automatic eviction of the tenant of
the property harboring the nuisance. The eviction shall take place as specified
in state law.
   F.   Lien For Costs: Any person failing to pay any fines or costs related to
nuisance abatement when due, the city may record a lien on the property or
premises for the full amount of the unpaid fines and costs.
   G.   Nonexclusive Remedies: The city may take any or all of the above
mentioned remedies (civil or criminal) to abate a nuisance and/or to punish any
person or entity creating, causing or allowing a nuisance to exist. The
abatement of a nuisance does not prejudice the right of the city or any person
to recover damages or penalties for its past existence. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-
2006)
5-3-11: HABITUAL NUISANCE:
   A.   Penalty For Habitual Nuisance: Any property determined to be a habitual
nuisance shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per
day.
   B.   Notice Of Nuisance: A building or premises may not be declared a
habitual nuisance nor may the two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine be
collected unless notice to the responsible person has been given. Notice that a
property may be declared a habitual nuisance shall be stated in a notice or
through some other documentation delivered to the responsible person. The
notice shall state that future responses to the property may result in the
property being declared a habitual nuisance, subject to a fine. (Ord. 2006-27A,
9-27-2006)
5-3-12: APPEALS:
   A.   Grounds: Any person receiving a voluntary abatement agreement or
citation may appeal to the justice court judge. Only the following issues may
be appealed to the justice court judge:
      1.   The person charged in the citation as the responsible person, is not
the "responsible person", as defined by this chapter.
      2.   The method required to abate the nuisance is inappropriate or is not
the most cost effective method of effectively correcting or abating the
nuisance.
      3.   The public safety official refused to approve a corrective action
that met the requirements of the administrative citation.
      4.   The responsible person claims that the requirements of this chapter
violates his/her constitutional rights.
   B.   Filing; Considerations:
      1.   The person desiring to appeal a voluntary abatement agreement or
citation must do so in writing at the city justice court within no less than
five (5) and no more than fifteen (15) days of being served with the citation
or within fifteen (15) days of the mailing date if the citation is mailed.
      2.   The justice court judge may consider:
         a.   Whether the appellant responded to the public safety official's
attempts to contact the appellant and cooperated with efforts to correct the
nuisance;
         b.   Whether the appellant has shown due diligence and/or substantial
progress in correcting the nuisance;
         c.   The financial ability of the appellant and the amount, if any,
that the appellant has benefited financially by maintaining the nuisance;
         d.   Any other relevant factors.
      3.   If the appellant appeals the public safety official's refusal to
approve appellant's corrective action, the judge may visit the site, review the
photographic evidence, or order new pictures be taken to determine if the
appellant complied with the requirements of the administrative citation.
   C.   Order: The court shall issue a written or verbal order to the appellant
and the city notifying them of the judge's decision. The order shall include
the judge's findings of fact and ultimate decision. If the judge modifies or
waives provisions of the citation, the order shall specify which portions are
modified and how they are modified. The court shall mail a copy of the order to
the appellant and the city within five (5) working days of the close of the
hearing.
   D.   Appeal To District Court: Either the city or the appellant may appeal
the judge's order by filing a petition for review of the order. The petition
must be filed in the fifth district court within thirty (30) calendar days from
the date the judge's order was mailed to the appellant. In the petition, the
plaintiff may only allege that the judge's order was arbitrary, capricious or
illegal. The justice court shall transmit to the reviewing court the record of
its proceedings, including any minutes, findings, orders and, if available, a
true and correct transcript of its proceedings. If, in the opinion of the
district court, there is a sufficient record to review the judge's order, the
court's review is limited to the record provided by the justice court. The
district court may not accept or consider any evidence outside of the justice
court's record unless the evidence was offered to the justice court and the
court determines that it was improperly excluded by the judge. If, in the
opinion of the district court, there is not a sufficient record to review the
judge's order, the court may call witnesses and take evidence. No petition or
appeal may be filed in district court unless the responsible person first
appeals to the justice court pursuant to the terms set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
CHAPTER 4
WEEDS AND OFFENSIVE ACCUMULATIONS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Inspection And Notice
5-4-2: Compliance With Notice
5-4-3: Abatement By City
5-4-4: Appeals
5-4-5: Administrative Charge
5-4-1: INSPECTION AND NOTICE:
Undeveloped lots which have weeds, grass or other growth which constitute an
existing or potential fire hazard shall be abated by the owner of the property.
Weed abatement compliance shall be accomplished by disking, plowing or mowing
weeds within four inches (4") of the ground. The city shall survey properties
within the city and identify those needing abatement and then serve notice in
writing upon the owner or occupant of such land in person or by mailing notice,
postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or occupant at the last known mailing
address as indicated by the records of the county assessor. The notice shall
require the owner or occupant as the case may be to abate the weeds by a
specific time, which shall not be less than ten (10) days from the date of
service of such notice. One notice shall be deemed sufficient on any lot or
parcel of property for the entire season of weed growth during that year. The
city shall make proof of service of such notice under oath, and file the same
in the office of the city recorder. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-4-2: COMPLIANCE WITH NOTICE:
The failure of any person to comply with a notice issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
5-4-3: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
If any owner or occupant of land described in the notice issued pursuant to
section
5-4-1 of this chapter shall fail or neglect to eradicate or destroy and remove
weeds or growth in accordance with such notice, the city may employ the
necessary assistance and cause such weeds to be removed or destroyed. The city
shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in their removal
and destruction, and shall mail a copy thereof to the owner demanding payment
within twenty (20) days of the date of the mailing. The notice shall be deemed
delivered when mailed by registered mail addressed to the property owner's last
known address. In the event the owner fails to make payment of the amount set
forth in the statement to the city treasurer's office within the twenty (20)
days, the city may cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law. In
the event collection of the costs are pursued through the courts, the city may
sue for and receive judgment upon all of the costs of removal and destruction,
together with reasonable attorney fees, interest and court costs. The city may
execute on such judgment in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-
2006)
5-4-4: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by a weed abatement decision is entitled to a hearing by
filing a request for such in the office of the police chief within ten (10)
days of receiving notice from the city. The hearing shall be held before a
hearing official appointed by the city manager. The hearing official shall have
authority to uphold or overturn any decision properly brought before him or her
regarding weed abatement under this chapter. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-8-2012)
5-4-5: ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGE:
An administrative charge in the amount of itemized actual costs incurred by the
city pursuant to city abatement procedures shall be levied on all property
owners who do not abate identified problems located on their property within
the required time allotted them under this chapter, in cases where the problems
are subsequently abated by the city. This action shall include any civil action
needed, up to and including liens levied on the property. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-
2006)
CHAPTER 5
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Declaration Of Nuisance
5-5-3: Liability For Abatement Of Nuisance
5-5-4: Penalty
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
DISCHARGE: Leakage, seepage or other release.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: A substance or material in a quantity and form determined
by the United States department of transportation to be capable of posing an
unreasonable risk to health and safety or property.
PERSON: Any natural person or individual, governmental body, firm, association,
partnership, copartnership, joint venture, company, corporation, joint stock
company, trust, estate or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assigns. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-5-2: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
The actual or threatened discharge of hazardous materials within the city is
hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-5-3: LIABILITY FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
Any person who owns, leases, operates or controls any facility, equipment or
vehicle from which a discharge of hazardous materials has occurred, or is
threatened to occur, shall be liable to the city for any expenses incurred by
the city in connection with preventing, assessing, containing, cleaning up or
disposing of any hazardous material discharged or threatened to be discharged.
(Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006)
5-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class C
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-27A, 9-27-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
TITLE 6
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Street Department
6-1-2: Regulations Generally
6-1-1: STREET DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created a department of streets, which shall
have general supervision of the streets, sidewalks, bridges and other public
ways.
   B.   Administration: The department shall be under the direction and control
of the public works director. (1989 Code § 11-311; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Powers And Duties: The department shall:
      1.   Have charge of the construction, maintenance and repair of streets,
sidewalks, bridges, curbs, gutters, culvert, drains, waterways and other public
ways. It shall have control of all waters flowing on the streets, sidewalks and
public ways, whether originating from storm, flood, drainage or irrigation
waters.
      2.   Keep a record of and promptly investigate all complaints of
defective streets, culverts, drains, ditches, sidewalks and other public ways
and, when proper, repair, replace or take such action as deemed best, and shall
record the action taken on each complaint.
      3.   Enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances
relating to the maintenance and use of streets, culverts, drains, ditches,
waterways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other public ways.
      4.   Repair, or cause to be repaired, all defects coming to the
department's attention and take reasonable precautions to protect the public
from injuries due to such defects pending their repair. (1989 Code § 11-312)
6-1-2: REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
   A.   Removal Of Snow:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessor or agent of any
property, abutting on a paved sidewalk, to fail to remove, or have removed from
such paved sidewalk, all hail, snow or sleet thereon within a reasonable time
after such snow, hail or sleet has fallen. In the case of a storm between the
hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., such sidewalks
shall be cleaned before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of the same day.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person removing snow from the sidewalk
to deposit snow, dirt, leaves or any other material in the gutter so as to clog
or prevent the free flow of water therein. (1989 Code § 11-361)
   B.   Placing Trash Or Other Obstructions: It shall be unlawful for any
person owning, occupying or having control of any premises to place, or permit
to be placed, upon or in any portion of any city right of way, whether improved
or unimproved, including, but not limited to, the streets, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks and parking areas, or the areas to be used for such improvements:
      1.   Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, sweepings, refuse matter,
ice, snow, water, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances.
      2.   Any wagons, lumber, wood boxes, fencing, building material, dead
trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other thing which shall obstruct such public
street, gutter, parking area or sidewalk, or any part thereof, or the passage
over and upon the same, or any part thereof, except as expressly authorized by
ordinance, without the permission of the governing body first had and obtained.
      3.   Any permanent or temporary structure, mechanism, device, vehicle or
other thing of any kind or character, except trees planted pursuant to the
provisions of applicable ordinances. (1989 Code § 11-362)
   C.   Openings In Street:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building
having a cellar which opens upon any street or sidewalk to fail to keep the
door or other covering in good repair and safe for the passage of the customary
traffic on the street or sidewalk. If the owner or occupant of any such
building shall neglect or refuse to repair properly any such door or covering
within twenty four (24) hours after notice from the public works director to do
so, the public works director shall forthwith cause such repairs to be made at
the expense of the owner or occupant.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain coal holes or other
openings in streets or sidewalks, except with the special permission of the
governing body, and under the direction and supervision of the superintendent
of streets. (1989 Code § 11-363)
   D.   Doors Opening Into Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation owning or having the control or management of any alley, road or
passageway to construct or hang gates or doors thereto which, when open, shall
project outwardly more than two feet (2') over or upon the sidewalk beyond the
property line. (1989 Code § 11-364)
   E.   Discharge Of Water: It shall be unlawful for any person owning,
occupying or having control of any premises to fail, refuse or neglect to
prevent water from the roof or eaves of any house, building or other structure,
or from any other source under the control of such person, to be discharged
upon the surface of any sidewalk. (1989 Code § 11-365)
   F.   Crossing At Intersections: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive
or park a self-propelled vehicle, or lead, drive or ride any animal, upon any
sidewalk except across a sidewalk at established crossings. (1989 Code § 11-
366)
   G.   Business To Keep Sidewalk Clean: It shall be unlawful for any owners or
occupants of any place of business to refuse, neglect or fail to cause the
sidewalk abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned each morning before the hour
of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (1989 Code § 11-367)
   H.   Placing Goods For Sale Or Show: No goods, wares or merchandise shall be
placed, maintained or permitted for sale or show in or on any parking area,
street or sidewalk beyond two feet (2') from the front line of the lot, without
first obtaining the written approval of the governing body. Such approval shall
be granted only when such sale or show shall be a promotional activity not
exceeding forty eight (48) hours and when participated in by a majority of
firms seeking approval in their business areas. The governing body's written
approval shall specifically provide that no goods, wares or merchandise shall
be placed in such a manner as to leave less than a six foot (6') passageway for
pedestrians. (1989 Code § 11-368)
   I.   Placing Goods For Receipt Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, or suffer to be placed or kept upon any sidewalk, any goods,
wares or merchandise which he may be receiving or delivering, without leaving a
foot passageway upon such sidewalk. It shall be unlawful for any person
receiving or delivering such goods, wares or merchandise to suffer the same to
be or remain on such sidewalk for a longer period than two (2) hours. (1989
Code § 11-369)
   J.   Playing On Sidewalks: Every person who obstructs the sidewalk or street
by playing any game or engaging in any activity which obstructs the free travel
thereon is guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 11-370; amd. 2007 Code)
   K.   Congregating On Sidewalks: It is an infraction, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person or persons to congregate about or upon any
sidewalk, stairway, doorway, window or in front of any business or dwelling
house, theater, lecture room, church or elsewhere and by so doing to obstruct
or interfere with the free passage of persons entering, leaving or occupying
such building or premises. (1989 Code § 11-371; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 2
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
6-2-1: Use And Control
6-2-2: Disposal Of Excess City Property
6-2-1: USE AND CONTROL:
   A.   Unlawful Use: Unless authorized by permit or other written
authorization issued by the city, or unless authority is granted by provisions
of this code or other ordinance of the city, now or hereafter enacted, it shall
be a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to: (1989 Code § 8-111; amd. 2007 Code)
      1.   Property Controlled By City: Construct, lay, excavate, erect,
operate or maintain over, under, across, in or through any property owned or
controlled by the city, any utility, canal, ditch, construction or building.
      2.   Restricted Areas: Enter upon any property of the city contrary to
any posting or marking restricting or prohibiting use of the area.
      3.   Damage To Property: Intentionally use or perform acts upon property
of the city which materially impairs, alters or damages the property. (1989
Code § 8-111)
   B.   Repair After Unlawful Use: The governing body, in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed, may order any person who has damaged, altered or
changed any property of the city to repair or restore the property to its
original condition prior to the damage, alteration or change. (1989 Code § 8-
112)
   C.   Franchise; Easement:
      1.   Provisions: The governing body may grant to any person a franchise
or easement on such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable for the purpose
of entering upon, constructing, building, operating and maintaining any
business or for other use of the property of the city, and the provisions of
subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to the extent such
provisions are waived, qualified or made inapplicable to the rights or
privileges granted in the franchise ordinance or easement.
      2.   In Writing: Any franchise or easement granted by the city shall be
in writing, and any franchise or easement not in writing shall be void. (1989
Code § 8-113)
   D.   Acts Exempted: It shall not be a violation of this section where any
person uses the public property of the city in the manner or for the purpose
for which such property has been made available for public use. (1989 Code § 8-
114)
6-2-2: DISPOSAL OF EXCESS CITY PROPERTY:
   A.   Scope: The sale, conveyance or transfer of real or personal property or
any interest in such property shall be conducted at a public sale by public
bid, closed bid, public auction or otherwise. (1989 Code § 8-102.1)
   B.   Notice: Said sale shall be conducted only after fourteen (14) days'
previous notice given at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation or
posted in three (3) conspicuous places within the city not less than fourteen
(14) days prior to appointed time for the sale of such property.
   C.   Conveyance; Title:
      1.   All real property disposed of pursuant to this chapter shall be
conveyed, transferred or sold in accordance with bid instructions, which shall
be made available to interested bidders by the city recorder prior to the date
of selection of the successful interested bidder. Such bid instructions may
include, but shall not be limited to, nondiscriminatory bidder requirements,
minimum acceptable bid amounts and bid deposits. The successful bidder shall be
the highest qualified bidder and must pay the full bid amount and comply with
any successful bidder conditions of the bid instructions within seventy two
(72) hours or three (3) full business days, whichever is longer, to the city,
unless a longer period is allowed per the bid instructions. The city may cancel
any proposed disposal of property, and reserves the right to reject any bids
under this chapter. (Ord. 2005-19, 5-25-2005)
      2.   All personal property (equipment, materials, supplies) shall be
conveyed, transferred or sold to the highest bidder. Payment in full is due
within ten (10) days or at the time of possession, whichever comes first.
      3.   Title shall be conveyed or transferred as it was received by the
city, except as otherwise provided by law.
      4.   The city reserves the right to reject any or all bids.
   D.   Minimum Bid May Be Set: The city council may set minimum bid prices on
property, real and personal, based upon professional appraisals or by
recommendations made by city departments involved in the sale.
   E.   Alternative Options: If, after an attempt is made, the property is not
sold at public sale, the city council, or its designee, may negotiate a sale,
may list with the local multiple listings service for sale, or may use such
other methods as may, to the benefit and interest of the city, be available to
dispose of the property at or above the appraised value.
   F.   Trade Acceptable: The city, by action of the city council, may trade
real or personal property for real or personal property of a corresponding
appraised value when it is found to be in the best interest of the city. (1989
Code § 8-102.1; amd. 2007 Code)
   G.   Significant Parcel Defined: A "significant parcel" under this section
shall be defined as any parcel of real property with an estimated fair market
value of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more, which fair market
value shall be determined by appraisal or other method reasonably estimated to
determine fair market value.
   H.   Public Comment: The public shall be allowed to comment on any proposed
disposal of a significant parcel of city owned real property. Comment shall be
made in the following manner to be designated by the city manager prior to the
disposal:
      1.   In writing submitted to the city recorder by the time and date set
by the city manager; or
      2.   In a public meeting, the time and date of which shall be set by the
city council. (Ord. 2005-19, 5-25-2005)
CHAPTER 3
CEMETERY
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Name Of Cemetery
6-3-3: Applicability
6-3-4: Cemetery Sexton Powers And Duties
6-3-5: Regulation Of Cemetery And Burials
6-3-6: Memorial Stone And Memorials
6-3-7: Regulations And Prohibited Uses
6-3-8: Fees And Charges
6-3-9: Sale Of Burial Rights
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
                             The location, by section and block, identified in
BURIAL PLOT:                 a city cemetery for the future exercise of a
                             burial right, or the memorial to a deceased
                             person.
                             The limited right of a specific individual to be
BURIAL RIGHT:                buried in a specific burial lot in any land
                             designated by the city as a cemetery or a
                             columbarium niche.
BURIAL VAULT:                A structure used to hold a casket or container of
                             cremated remains.
CEMETERY OFFICIAL:           The Cemetery Sexton or other authorized City
                             employee.
CERTIFICATE OF BURIAL RIGHT: A document issued by the city identifying the
                             individual who may be buried in a burial plot.
CREMATED REMAINS:            The remains of a deceased human that have been
                             reduced to ashes.
DISINTERMENT:                The permanent removal of a casket or cremated
                             remains from a burial plot.
EXHUMATION:                  The temporary removal of human remains from a
                             burial plot.
                             A burial plot in which human remains, including
GRAVE:                       cremated remains, have been buried or which has
                             been excavated in anticipation of burial.
                             A memorial marker that is flat, flush to the
MARKER:                      natural grade of a grave identifying the person
                             whose remains are buried in the grave.
MEMORIAL STONE:              A marker or monument stone used to identify the
                             person interred in a burial plot.
MEMORIALS:                   Items placed on a burial lot as a remembrance.
                             Washington City residency shall be determined by
                             proof shown, such as recorded property ownership,
RESIDENCY:                   voting records, Washington City utility accounts,
                             or other acceptable proof of residency. (Ord.
                             2022-53, 9-28-2022)
 
6-3-2: NAME OF CEMETERY:
The burial ground of the City shall be known and designated by the name of
Washington City Cemetery. (Ord. 2022-53, 9-28-2022)
6-3-3: APPLICABILITY:
The City may maintain a cemetery in any location owned by the City and
designated as a cemetery by the City Council. Any designation by the City
Council of a cemetery shall be permanent. (Ord. 2022-53, 9-28-2022)
6-3-4: CEMETERY SEXTON POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Sexton, subject to the direction of the City Council and any department
head placed over the Sexton by the City Manager, has entire charge of the
cemetery and is authorized to enforce the rules and regulations pertaining
thereto. The Sexton may take such action as may be necessary, though not
expressly set forth herein, in order to protect the property of grave and lot
owners, and the cemetery, from injury, and to preserve the peace, economy, and
good order of the cemetery. The Sexton shall keep the cemetery plat and related
records up to date and cooperate with the City Treasurer in maintaining records
of charges and payments made pursuant to this chapter. The Sexton or a
competent deputy shall attend every interment in a cemetery and shall register
the names and ages of all persons interred therein and the place of their
interment. The Sexton shall open and close graves, maintain the cemetery, and
perform such other duties as may be required elsewhere in this chapter or
directed by the City Council. (Ord. 2022-53, 9-28-2022)
6-3-5: REGULATION OF CEMETERY AND BURIALS:
   A.   Burial Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of
a deceased person in the municipal cemetery without first obtaining a
certificate of burial right for the lot used, or producing satisfactory
evidence of a right to burial based on a properly acquired certificate of
burial right. The certificates shall be issued and signed by the mayor and
shall be attested by the City Recorder.
   B.   Registration Of Burials: No remains shall be interred, or remains
received, unless a statistics report is received from a licensed mortician and
signed by the funeral director, which shall be an acknowledgment of the
mortuary’s obligation to pay for the burial, or unless the burial charges have
been paid in advance to the City Treasurer and receipt therefor is presented to
the Sexton as a permit for the burial. The burial report or receipt shall
reflect the full name of the deceased, the date and place of birth, the date
and place of death, and the name and address of the person responsible for
disposal.
   C.   Burials And Disinterment: The scheduling of disinterments,
disinterments, or exhumations shall be at the discretion of the Sexton. The
Sexton may refuse to disinter any remains that would endanger the health and
safety of cemetery employees or the public. Disinterments may be postponed
without notice if the Sexton deems it necessary in order to maintain the
regular operations of a cemetery
   D.   Vaults: Before a casket is accepted for burial, it must be housed
within a concrete vault having fixed top and side panel edge restraints
incorporated into the construction and having a strength capable of uniformly
withstanding a stress of seven and one-half (7-1/2) pounds per square inch. If
a particular type or construction of a vault is rejected by the Sexton, the
mortician or party utilizing the vault shall bear the burden of proving
compliance with the strength requirements of this section.
   E.   Burial Hours: No graveside service or interment will be allowed in the
cemetery on Sunday or on any of the holidays officially observed by the City.
On all other days, graveside services or interments will be allowed between the
hours of nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. and four o’clock (4:00) P.M. All graveside
services and interments must be arranged through the Sexton forty-eight (48)
hours in advance of the time set, and, if there is an intervening holiday or
Sunday, arrangements must be made seventy-two (72) hours in advance. The Sexton
may approve exceptions to the times designated herein and shall charge a
reasonable fee, as established by the City Council on the City’s duly enacted
fee schedule, to cover expenses related to off-hours graveside services or
interments.
   F.   Restrictions on Burials:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of a deceased
person within the City limits, except in a cemetery as described in section
6-3-3 of this chapter. No grave in the cemetery shall be opened or filled,
refilled or sodded, except by employees of the cemetery under the direction of
the Sexton.
      2.   All parts of a burial or cremation vault shall be at least two feet
(2') below the surface of the ground. One (1) interment only shall be allowed
in a casket except for a parent with their infant child, two (2) infants who
are buried at the same time, one (1) cremated remains placed in or on the
casket, or three (3) cremated remains in one plot. No double depth burials
shall be allowed. (Ord. 2022-53, 9-28-2022)
6-3-6: MEMORIAL STONE AND MEMORIALS:
   A.   Memorial Stones:
      1.   All graves shall be identified by monument stone placed at the foot
of the grave. A burial lot containing multiple graves will have a single
memorial stone. No more than one (1) memorial stone shall be permitted for each
grave, except where a traditional military marker is appropriate in addition to
another monument. Monuments shall be allowed only in designated areas; all
other areas of a cemetery are limited to markers.
      2.   All memorial stones must comply with the cemetery standards.
      3.   In the event a memorial stone is not placed on the grave within
ninety (90) days after interment, the Sexton may, but is not required to,
install a memorial stone in a form and size selected by the Sexton at the
Sexton’s sole discretion.
   B.   Grave Adornments:
      1.   Adornments: All adornments should be placed on the headstone or in a
prescribed receptacle within the concrete foundation of the headstone. Items
should not be placed on or in the grass surrounding the headstone, thus
allowing staff to trim and edge without incident or movement of items. Shepard
hooks are allowed, but are restricted to one per headstone. Adornments,
including but not limited to potted plants, flags, floral wreaths, and flowers
in vases are allowed, but will be removed without notice by cemetery employees
when they become withered, discolored, torn, broken or vandalized. Funeral
flowers will be allowed to remain for five (5) business days, after which
cemetery employees may remove them based on the above criteria. Other temporary
adornment items such as glass containers, wires, sticks, iron rods, pegs,
ceramic pots or other containers that may pose safety hazards will be removed
by cemetery employees. (Ord. 2022-53, 9-28-2022)
6-3-7: REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITED USES:
   A.   Park Regulations Govern: Insofar as they may be applicable, those
regulations adopted by the City to govern operation of its parks shall apply to
the cemetery. However, it shall be unlawful for any person to be in a cemetery
during hours of darkness. A person will be considered to be “in a cemetery” if
he or she is upon any portion of the property set aside as present or future
cemetery property as designated in the appropriate records of the City and
County.
   B.   Policies Adopted - Conflicting Provisions: The City Council may also
adopt policies, rules and regulations to govern operation of a cemetery. If
adopted, such policies, rules and regulations will control over a less specific
or conflicting provision of the park rules and regulations.
   C.   Patrons - Children: Cemetery patrons only are allowed in a cemetery.
Children under twelve (12) years of age must be accompanied at all times on
cemetery property by a parent or some supervising adult eighteen (18) years of
age or older.
   D.   Recreational Activities - Animals: It shall be unlawful to engage in
any active recreational activity such as, but not limited to, soccer, baseball
and football, or to bring or allow any animal on cemetery property.
   E.   Burial Of Animals Or Nonhuman Items: It shall be unlawful to bury
animals or other nonhuman items in a cemetery, unless the Sexton is directed
otherwise by the City Council in a particular instance.
   F.   Motor Vehicles: No motor vehicle shall travel off clearly designated
roadways in a cemetery for any reason without consent of the Sexton, and where
such consent is given, the owner or operator of the vehicle shall either repair
any and all damage, including tire marks, which the Sexton determines to have
been caused by such vehicle, or they shall reimburse the City for the cost of
such repair.
   G.   Sod Disturbance: In no event shall the sod of a cemetery be disturbed
without prior approval of the Sexton.
   H.   Penalty: Violation of this section shall constitute a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   I.   Landscaping By Private Persons: Except as provided by the rules and
regulations of the governing body, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect
or maintain any fence, corner post, coping or boundary of any kind, to plant
any vegetation upon any lot or lots, street, alley or walk in the cemetery or
to grade the ground or land thereof. (Ord. 2022-53, 9-28-2022)
6-3-8: FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Purchase Prices And Fees: The governing body shall from time to time by
Resolution fix the size of lots, the price at which burial rights shall be sold
and the fees which shall be charged for the various cemetery services to be
provided.
   B.   Burial Fee: Upon the exercise of a burial right, the City shall charge
a reasonable fee, as established by the City Council on the City’s duly enacted
fee schedule, to cover the cost of burial.
   C.   Disinterment Fee: Upon a request for disinterment authorized by the
laws of the State of Utah, the City shall charge a reasonable fee, as
established by the City Council on the City’s duly enacted fee schedule, to
cover the cost of disinterment. If the request includes that a disinterment
shall include the vault, the City shall charge an additional reasonable fee, as
established by the City Council on the City’s duly enacted fee schedule.
Notwithstanding such surcharge, the City does not guarantee in such an event
that the vault will be intact or undamaged.
   D.   Specialty Fees: Full-Time City Employees of 15+ years and Veterans may
purchase plots at a discounted rate determined by the City Council and Staff.
   E.   Other Services: The City may charge reasonable fees, as established by
the City Council on the City’s duly enacted fee schedule, for other services
rendered by the Sexton or the City related to a cemetery or a burial right.
(Ord. 2022-53, 9-28-2022)
6-3-9: SALE OF BURIAL RIGHTS:
The City is authorized to sell burial rights only to individuals. Upon a sale
of a burial right, the City shall issue a certificate of burial right, which
shall grant to the individual named therein the right to be buried in the
burial lot identified therein. The certificate of burial grants only a license
to be buried and is not a conveyance of any title, fee, or other ownership or
possessory interest in burial lot. An individual may purchase more than one (1)
burial right so long as each issued certificate of burial right identifies the
individual who is entitled to be buried in the burial lot identified therein.
One (1) individual may be named in no more than two (2) certificates.
   A.   Limitation On Transferability Of Burial Rights: Burial rights may not
be transferred in any manner, except the individual named in a certificate of
burial right may (1) subdivide a burial right as provided in subsection B. of
this section and (2) conditionally surrender the burial right covered in the
certificate of burial right as provided in subsections C. and D. of this
section.
   B.   Subdivision Of Burial Rights: A burial right includes the right to
allow the burial of additional human remains in a burial lot in the following
combinations:
      1.   One (1) casket buried at normal depth, with up to one (1) container
of cremated remains buried above the casket.
      2.   Up to three (3) containers of cremated remains. A stillborn
interment may be substituted in place of cremated remains.
   C.   Voluntary Sale Of Burial Rights: At any time prior to sixty (60) years
from the date of issuance of a certificate of burial right, the individual
named in a certificate of burial right, or the legally recognized guardian of
the individual named in a certificate of burial right, may surrender the burial
right to the City by delivering to the City a signed and notarized document
indicating an intent to surrender. Upon surrender, the City shall refund the
original purchase price of the burial right to the surrendering individual.
   D.   Abandonment Through Nonuse - Reclamation: If a burial right, including
any subdivided burial right, remains unexercised for more than sixty (60) years
from the date of issuance, the burial right shall be deemed abandoned and the
City may reclaim the associated burial lot in any manner authorized by the laws
of the State of Utah. The City may sell a burial right for any reclaimed burial
lot. (Ord. 2022-53, 9-28-2022)
CHAPTER 4
SHADE TREES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Purpose and Intent
6-4-2: Definitions
6-4-3: Designation Of A Shade Tree Advisory Board
6-4-4: Ordinance Administration
6-4-5: Shade Tree Maintenance And Care By The City
6-4-6: Shade Tree Maintenance And Care By Citizens
6-4-7: Other Plantings
6-4-8: Shade Trees In New Development
6-4-9: Shade Trees In Previously Developed Areas
6-4-10: Care And Maintenance Of Private Trees Affecting Public Property
6-4-11: Appeals
6-4-12: Penalties And Enforcement
6-4-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose. Washington City recognizes and attributes substantial
economic, environmental and aesthetic value to the trees and other plantings
within the community. It is in the best interests of the citizens and public
that a plan be developed to standardize the planting and maintenance of trees
within easements, in rights-of-way and all other public places within the City.
   B.   Intent. It is the intent of the Washington City Council that the terms
of this chapter shall be construed as to promote:
      1.   The planning, planting, maintenance, restoration, protection and
survival of desirable trees within the City; and,
      2.   The protection of community residents from personal injury and
property damage, and the protection of Washington City from property damage
caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees
located in and upon public areas and rights-of-way within Washington City.
If any provision or clause of this chapter or application thereof to any person
or entity or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other
sections, provisions, clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented
without the invalid provision(s), clause(s) or application(s) hereof, and to
this end the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be
severable.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication or posting, as
required by law. (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
OTHER       Any shrubs, grass or ground cover planted within street rights-of-way or
PLANTS OR   easements or in proximity thereto.
PLANTINGS:
            Any trees or other woody vegetation in public parks having individual
PARK TREE:  names, and all areas owned by the City, or areas to which the public has
            free access as a park.
PARKS       The person or designee responsible for maintenance of Shade Trees.
DIRECTOR:
RESPONSIBLE A Developer who has chosen to install Shade Trees in a residential,
DEVELOPER:  commercial, industrial or multi-family development.
SHADE TREE: Any tree planted within the City right-of-way on either side of all
            streets, lanes, trails or ways within the City.
            A manual prepared by the Shade Tree Advisory Board and the Parks Director,
SHADE TREE  or designee, pursuant to this chapter containing regulations and standards
MANUAL:     for the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees in and upon public
            areas and rights-of-way within the City.
TOP OR      The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in
TOPPING:    diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree as to remove the normal
            canopy and disfigure the tree.
            The removal of plant parts to control growth and enhance performance or
TREE        function in the landscape by developing and preserving tree structure and
TRIMMING:   health. The removal of water sprouts, sucker growth, and hanging limbs is
            not considered tree trimming according to the provisions of this Chapter.
            (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
 
6-4-3: DESIGNATION OF A SHADE TREE ADVISORY BOARD:
   A.   Shade Tree Advisory Board. The Parks Director, or designee, in
consultation with City Staff shall designate a Shade Tree Advisory Board. The
Board shall consist of members of the community interested in promoting the
benefit, growth and health of the urban forest. Board members should include,
but not be limited to, persons with expertise in the field of urban forestry,
Parks Board members, City Staff such as the City Planning Office, Department of
Public Works and the Department of Parks or any other appropriate City
personnel.
   B.   Assist The City. It shall be the responsibility of the Shade Tree
Advisory Board to study, investigate, counsel and assist the Parks Director, or
designee with the development of a plan for the care, preservation, pruning,
planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees in parks, along streets
and in other public areas. The Shade Tree Advisory Board shall also assist the
City in the preparation and revision of its Shade Tree Manual including
recommendations on tree species, tree planting locations and other related
matters. The Shade Tree Advisory Board shall write and implement an annual
community forestry work plan to qualify and be deemed a Tree City USA.
   C.   Recommendation. The Shade Tree Advisory Board, when requested by the
Parks Director, or designee, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report
and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of
its work.
   D.   Officers. The Shade Tree Advisory Board shall choose its own officers,
make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings.
   E.   Service Without Pay. All members of the Shade Tree Advisory Board shall
serve without pay. (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
6-4-4: ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Authority. The Parks Director, or designee shall be responsible for
notifying code enforcement to administer and enforce the Shade Tree Ordinance.
He or she shall:
      1.   Have supervision of all trees planted or growing in public rights-
of-way or City-owned places within the City.
      2.   Supervise the planting, trimming, spraying, preservation and removal
of Shade Trees and other plants in public streets, in City cemeteries and in
City parks to promote safety, protect city utilities and preserve the beauty of
such public places.
      3.   Supervise the maintenance of Shade Trees, Park Trees and Other
Plants or Plantings consistent with the language of this chapter.
      4.   Review all development applications for proper design and planting
of Shade Trees, Park Trees and Other Plants or Plantings in new development.
   B.   Desirable Shade Tree List. The Shade Tree Advisory Board under the
direction of the Parks Director, or designee, shall prepare a “Suggested Shade
Tree List” containing the botanical and common names of all trees approved to
be planted in streets, trails, parks or easements. The Shade Tree Advisory
Board shall also develop an undesirable Shade Tree list containing the botanic
and common names of all trees NOT approved to be planted in streets, trails,
parks or easements. These lists may be revised from time to time by the Shade
Tree Advisory Board, to include other suitable or undesirable trees, or trees
to be planted for evaluation purposes only. This list shall be included in the
Shade Tree Manual.
   C.   Public Awareness. The Parks Director or designee, shall make copies of
the Shade Tree Ordinance and the Shade Tree Manual available to any interested
persons, through the City Office and on the City Website. Copies shall also be
available electronically and one copy of the Shade Tree Manual will be
available in the Washington City Library. (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
6-4-5: SHADE TREE MAINTENANCE AND CARE BY THE CITY:
   A.   Care and Maintenance, The Shade Tree Advisory Board under the direction
of the Parks Director, or designee shall initiate and administer a program to
encourage the planting, maintenance, care, removal and replacement of Shade
Trees, consistent with resources available.
   B.   Standards. All trees located within City streets, parks, rights-of-way,
landscape borders, or on City-maintained property shall be maintained according
to standards set by the Washington City Shade Tree Manual.
   C.   City Tree Planting and Maintenance, The City shall have the right to
plant, prune, maintain and remove Shade Trees located within the public rights-
of-way.
   D.   Tree Replacement. The City may replace Shade Trees or Other Plantings
which have died or been removed for any reason, or plant additional Shade Trees
deemed appropriate and consistent with available resources.
   E.   Tree Topping. A person shall obtain approval to top any Shade Tree,
Park Tree, or other tree on public property including but not limited to
electrical, gas, telephone and cable companies. Trees damaged by storms or
other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where
other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this chapter at
the determination of the Parks Director, or designee.
   F.   Debris Removal. The person working on trees on a street, highway, or
public area shall remove all debris from the rights-of-way by sunset of the
same day, unless specifically authorized to do otherwise by the Parks Director,
or designee. The acceptable standard shall be a broom clean finish or better.
   G.   City Authority. The City may condemn and remove, or order to be removed
any tree, tree stump, shrub, or plant upon any of the public owned property
within this City where the same is dead, diseased or for any reason whatsoever
deemed undesirable or unsafe by the Parks Director, or designee.
   H.   Root Guard. Root guard products, devices, or that accomplish the same
or similar results as a root guard application, shall be used on all trees
planted near sidewalks or asphalt. (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
6-4-6: SHADE TREE MAINTENANCE AND CARE BY CITIZENS:
   A.   Planting. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization of
any kind, must obtain written approval from the Parks Director, or designee
prior to planting a tree that may infringe upon or impact any public right-of-
way, whether by canopy, truck, or underground roots. Said approval shall
specify with a drawing/plan providing for each individual tree, the location
and variety of trees to be planted.
   B.   Trimming. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization of
any kind, must obtain approval from the Parks Director, or designee prior to
trimming any designated Shade Tree. Approval is not required for removing
sucker growth, water sprouts, minor limbs causing obstructions, or for removal
of less than ten percent (10%) of the tree canopy in any public right of way.
   C.   Adjacent Property Owners to Maintain Trees on Their Property. Trees and
other plantings on adjacent property shall not inappropriately overhang or
encroach upon sidewalks, streets, public rights-of-way or other designated
pedestrian ways, nor obstruct the view of traffic signs or any street
intersection. Trees and other plantings that project over any street or access
road that may be used for emergency purposes shall be trimmed to a safe height
and shape. Adjacent property owners, at their own expense and in accordance
with this Chapter, shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, or
broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to public safety. Adjacent
property owners, at their own expense and in accordance with this Chapter,
shall also prune to eliminate encroachment on sidewalks and streets.
   D.   Removing Stumps, Any tree that shall be removed from any of the public
streets or places within the City, shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the level of the
ground, unless permission to leave a projecting stump is granted by the Parks
Director, or designee.
   E.   Abuse or Mutilation, It shall be unlawful to intentionally damage,
deface, destroy, injure or mutilate Shade Trees or Park Trees as defined in
this Chapter. Any individual that intentionally violates this subsection shall
be found guilty of a class C misdemeanor criminal act of criminal mischief as
defined in Utah Code 76-6-106(2)(c) the penalty for which shall be as defined
in Washington City Code
1-4-1.
   F.   Considerations on Removing or Replacing a Shade Tree. In determining
whether a tree may be removed and replaced, the Parks Director, or designee,
shall consider, among other things, the following:
      1.   Whether the tree(s) pose a potential for safety problems despite a
sound maintenance program;
      2.   Whether the roots from adjacent park strip trees are interfering
with sewer lines servicing the adjacent property to the extent that the
property owner requires frequent repair of said sewer lines;
      3.   Whether the tree is dead, dying or incurably diseased;
      4.   Whether the tree is diseased and weakened by age, storm, fire or
other injuries so as to pose a danger to persons, property, improvements or
other trees;
      5.   Whether the tree(s) is identified by the City as an undesirable
species;
      6.   Whether the tree poses a hardship to the adjacent property owner
such as, but not limited to, the cracking or raising of a garage floor or, in
the case of a handicapped person, special circumstances exist which cause the
location of the tree to become a hindrance for vehicle and handicapped access;
      7.   Whether removal is necessary for construction of a street widening
or other public improvement project, or necessary street or public improvement
repair work.
   G.   Exceptions. Shade Trees, Park Trees, or other plantings which are
required by the City Council or Planning Commission to be planted by a
Developer, City Crews or Contractor may be planted without approval, provided
however, that such trees, species, and plantings shall conform in all respects
to the terms and details of the approved plans and specifications and shall
also be planted according to the Shade Tree Manual. (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
6-4-7: OTHER PLANTINGS:
Considerations for Other Plantings. For plantings in planting strips and public
easement areas, a mixed variety of species that are classified as drought
tolerant and approved for water-efficient landscape use shall be used and
should not be varieties that will mature to a height not to exceed two feet
(2') in height and which will not interfere with the functioning of any curb,
gutter, sidewalk, water meter, fire hydrant, or other public facility, and will
not interfere with or impair the growth of any approved Shade Tree, and will
not constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
6-4-8: SHADE TREES IN NEW DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Responsible Developers. Where right-of-way park strip improvements
require trees in accordance with an approved Development Plan/Agreement, the
Developer shall install all Shade Trees and conform in all respects to the
terms and details of approved development plans and shall bond with the City
for the Shade Tree improvements. The bond will be sufficient to cover
installation, maintenance and warranty of the trees for one year after
planting.
   B.   Shade Tree Manual. All Shade Trees will be planted in accordance with
the Shade Tree Manual. The Parks Director, or designee will inspect Shade Tree
Plantings.
   C.   Planting Shade Trees. To ensure adequate care, irrigation, and
landscape management, Shade Trees shall not be planted in planter strips in
front of a home until construction of the development along any street in a new
development is at least eighty percent (80%) complete or the home is occupied.
   D.   Watering Shade Trees. It will be the responsibility of the Developer to
water and maintain Shade Trees for the first year after planting. After that
time, the property owner, or their agent, will be responsible.
   E.   Root Guard. Root Guard as defined in subsection
6-4-5(8) hereof, shall be installed as described. (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
6-4-9: SHADE TREES IN PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED AREAS:
   A.   Planting. Planting of Shade Trees in previously developed areas will be
approved and supervised by the Parks Director, or designee. Trees planted in
these areas will be of suggested species where possible. Private Citizens may
only plant Shade Trees in these areas with the approval of the Parks Director,
or designee. The City, at the owner’s expense, may remove unapproved plantings.
   B.   Miscellaneous. Planting of Shade Trees in previously developed areas
will generally occur according to the Suggested Tree Selection Lists found in
the Shade Tree Manual. Areas with planter strips too narrow may not receive new
Shade Trees, even if existing trees are removed. (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
6-4-10: CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE TREES AFFECTING PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Property owners shall maintain their responsible park strips by
watering Shade Trees and removing fallen leaves and branches from the adjacent
gutter.
   B.   The City may remove, or suggest to be removed, any tree or part thereof
which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its presence is injurious
to sewer, electrical power lines, natural gas lines, water lines, or other
public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other
pest.
   C.   The City shall have the authority to condemn and remove, or order to be
removed any tree, tree stump, shrub, or plant upon private property when the
Parks Director, or designee, shall find such action necessary for public safety
or to prevent the spread of disease or insects to public trees. Where no
apparent emergency exists, the Parks Director, or designee, shall give at least
fifteen (15) calendar days notice to adjacent property owners of the City’s
intent to remove any Shade Tree. (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
6-4-11: APPEALS:
Any person may appeal the decision of the Parks Director or designee. The
appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant with a statement of reasons
supporting the appeal. The appeal shall be filed with the City, no later than
the fifteenth (15th) calendar day following delivery of the notice of the
City’s intent to remove a Shade Tree. The Shade Tree Advisory Board shall
consider the appeal and render a written opinion within forty-five (45)
calendar days after the appeal is filed.
Any person objecting to the decision rendered by the Shade Tree Advisory Board
may appeal to the City Council, in writing, within ten (15) calendar days after
the date of mailing of the decision to the applicant. (Ord. 2022-09, 3-9-2022)
6-4-12: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
Any individual, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise that intentionally violates or causes the violation of this Chapter
shall be found guilty of a class C misdemeanor and subject to the penalty for
which shall be as defined in Washington City Code
1-4-1. Any such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of any
violation of this Chapter is committed, continues or is permitted by such
person, firm or corporation. The provisions of this Section may be enforced by
either civil or criminal actions in courts of appropriate and competent
jurisdiction. The City’s choice to pursue a civil judicial case shall not
interfere with the City’s right to prosecute violations of this Section as
criminal offenses. The City may bring actions for civil and equitable relief,
including enjoining specific land uses and affirmative injunctions. (Ord. 2022-
09, 3-9-2022)
CHAPTER 5
PUBLIC PARKS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
6-5-2: Penalty
6-5-3: Special Events
6-5-3-1: Definitions
6-5-3-2: Permit Required
6-5-3-3: Application Requirements And Procedures
6-5-3-4: Insurance Requirement
6-5-3-5: Fees
6-5-3-6: Application Review, Approval, And Issuance
6-5-3-7: Grounds For Denial
6-5-3-8: Appeal Procedures
6-5-3-9: Violation
6-5-1: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverages, Drugs, Or Gambling: The sale, consumption or
possession of intoxicating liquors or beverages and dangerous or narcotic
drugs, or gambling of any kind, is prohibited in any and all parks and
recreation facilities and areas. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the sale,
possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages may be permitted at public
recreation facilities and areas where permitted by a valid beer and/or alcohol
license issued by the city council and state agency.
   B.   Animal Control: Animals are prohibited in all public parks and public
squares except in public parks expressly designated for that purpose or
expressly permitted by the city. Dogs or cats are allowed in groomed public
parks, public squares, playgrounds, paved and unpaved trails and paths,
athletic fields, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian or bicycle paths, open
space, and wilderness areas if the dog or cat is on a leash no more than six
feet (6') in length and under the control of a person. Dogs are allowed off-
leash in a park designated as a dog park. The person in control of the dog or
cat is responsible for the removal of the animal's waste.
   C.   Athletic Games; Permit Required: Permits for playing league or team
organized sports on athletic fields or courts may be secured on a priority-
based system from Washington City. A valid permit shall be displayed upon
request in order to avoid conflicts in the use of facilities. Persons failing
to honor a valid permit may be denied future permits to use the facilities.
   D.   Camping Or Sleeping Overnight: Camping or sleeping overnight in city
parks is prohibited without a special event permit from Washington City.
   E.   Destruction; Dumping: In any park owned or operated by the city, it
shall be unlawful to cut, break, move, take, or otherwise injure, destroy or
deface any trees, shrubs, plants, turf, rock or any building, fence, bridge,
sign or other structure, or foul any spring or stream or leave waste items or
rubbish of any kind. No person shall dump any earth, rubbish or other substance
or material in or upon any park without written permission from Washington
City.
   F.   Encroachment: No person or persons shall willingly encroach upon lands
administered by the leisure services department.
   G.   Entertainment And Similar Activities: No entertainment, demonstration,
exhibition, meeting, concert or tournament, whether public or private, shall be
given in any park without having obtained the proper permit from Washington
City.
   H.   Fireworks And Explosives: No person shall discharge or set off in parks
or recreation facilities any firecrackers, rockets, or any other fireworks or
explosives without advance written consent of Washington City.
   I.   Golf And Archery: Practicing, playing or using park areas for golf and
archery is prohibited.
   J.   Group Usage: No commercial group or group of two hundred (200) or more
persons shall use a park area without first obtaining a special event permit
from Washington City. Group usage shall be limited to designated areas.
Permission shall be obtained no less than forty-five (45) days prior to usage.
No person shall use loudspeakers, amplifiers or public address systems in a
park without a special event permit from Washington City.
   K.   Motor Vehicles; Speed Limit: No person shall ride in or drive any motor
vehicle which is self-propelled upon any park land except upon the roads. It is
prohibited for any person to commit any act, by use or operation of any motor
vehicle on any park land, which if committed upon a public highway or street in
the state, would be prohibited and unlawful. Speed limits within all parks
shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour unless otherwise posted. No one shall test
or repair any vehicle or mechanical device in any park. There shall be no
parking at any time except in areas designated for such purposes. Abandoned
vehicles shall be towed at the owner's expense.
   L.   Nighttime Use: No persons are permitted in any park between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following morning
except in those areas designated for extended use activities, or unless a
special event permit is obtained from Washington City for after-dark programs.
The city shall reserve the right to lock any gate, chain any door, offering
access to any park, facility or building in order to restrict nighttime usage
thereof.
   M.   Nuisances: It shall be unlawful for any person to use threatening,
abusive, insulting or indecent language; to commit any obscene or indecent act;
to fight; or to create a public disturbance or nuisance in any park. Any person
who loiters in a park under the influence of alcohol or drugs or who otherwise
disturbs the peace of park users by begging, soliciting, or engaging in
disruptive activities shall be deemed to create a nuisance.
   N.   Open Fires: No person shall make or kindle any open fire except in
fireplaces and grills provided for this purpose or in private portable
commercially manufactured grills or grills approved safe by Washington City.
Grills provided for public use shall be on a first come, first served basis,
unless reserved in advance at a fee through Washington City.
   O.   Personal Profit Or Financial Gain: No person or group may utilize any
park area or facility for personal for personal profit or financial gain
without a proper permit from Washington City. The sale of anything or the
solicitation of funds or donations within any park is forbidden, except upon
receiving proper permitting from Washington City.
   P.   Skating: Roller Skating, rollerblading and skateboarding within or on
the public parks of the city is prohibited, except in parks specifically
designated for their use. City trails, whether located within park boundaries
or elsewhere, are exempted from the prohibition detailed in this subsection.
   Q.   Signs And Advertising: No person shall, without a proper permit from
Washington City, erect, paint, paste, or otherwise affix or distribute any
signs, advertisements or circulars on park property.
   R.   Swimming: Swimming is prohibited in all parks except in facilities
expressly designated for that purpose, such as The Boilers - A Natural Spring
and Conservation Garden park, which permits swimming in the swimming hole
without a lifeguard. Swimming is permitted only during park hours with
lifeguard services provided by Washington City. Authorized lifeguards shall
have the authority to enforce all posted swimming pool rules and regulations
and shall expel any or all person(s) violating any safety rules. Animals within
any swimming areas are prohibited.
   S.   Temporary Closure: The city manager or his designee may temporarily
close or curtail activities upon any lands or waters, or any portions thereof,
when it has been deemed to be in the best interest of public safety, conduct,
health or order.
   T.   Trapping Or Injuring Animals: No person shall, in any park, set a trap
or snare, or shoot, injure, annoy, disturb or poison any wild animal or bird,
or injure or destroy any nest.
   U.   Weapons: While in a park, no person shall discharge a firearm nor
brandish or cause a menacing display of any weapon in a manner that is likely
to cause public alarm or risk of personal or public injury.
   V.   Weddings, Ceremonies, Receptions, Etc.: Permits for weddings,
ceremonies, receptions, etc., may be secured from Washington City after the fee
is paid in full for use at Nisson Park, Highland Park, and Veteran's Park only.
Permits will be only for specific areas, and the park will remain open to the
general public for use during the event.
   W.   Vendor Sub-License: Should any event or rental licensee provide an
opportunity for other sub-licensees to participate in an activity by way of
contracting, encouraging, or requesting the participation of sub-licensees who
will be conducting business-related activities, the event or rental licensee
shall be responsible for making sure all city, state, and federal regulations
are followed. The event or rental licensee must also submit for each sub-
licensee a payment which can be found on the Master Fee Schedule. (Ord. 2012-
03, 3-14-2012; amd. Ord. 2019-10, 4-24-2019; Ord. 2022-33, 6-8-2022; Ord. 2024-
07, 3-13-2024)
6-5-2: PENALTY:
Anyone found guilty of violating this chapter shall be fined a sum not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 2012-03, 3-14-2012; amd. Ord.
2024-07, 3-13-2024)
6-5-3: SPECIAL EVENTS:
6-5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be
defined as set forth in this section:
 
APPLICANT: The individual event organizer or organization responsible for the event and the
           payment of fees.
           An organized competitive or recreational event in which a group of people
ATHLETIC   collectively engage in a non-field sport or form of physical exercise, including,
EVENT:     but not limited to, running, jogging, walking, bicycling or skating, held on any
           public or private property.
CITY       A special event that is organized and operated by the City, whether directly or by
EVENT:     contract with a third party operator.
FILMING    Filming of a media broadcast (other than for news purposes), filming of a motion
EVENT:     picture, or television broadcast and digital media production.
OUTDOOR    An organized event in which a group of people or an organization engages in the sale
SALES      of product including, but not limited to, displays and exhibitions, farmers'
EVENT:     markets, craft fairs, outdoor sales, tent sales, and other similar activities.
           A.   A temporary event of any of the following or a combination of the following
           acts with a gathering of more than two hundred (200) people, or advertised for
           attendance by the general public: Any athletic event, entertainment event, parade,
           carnival, circus, dance, musical event, rodeo event, fighting event, racing event,
           live shows, fairs, concerts, block parties, filming event, or outdoor sales event,
           whether held for profit, nonprofit or charitable purposes held on private or public
           property within the City.
           B.   Any organized assemblage at any public park, public square or other City
           property which gathers for a common purpose or event under the direction and control
           of a person or entity and which uses more services, amusement devices such as
           stages, inflatable devices or temporary structures, or equipment, whether provided
SPECIAL    by the City or a third party, than normally provided to groups which reserve park
EVENT:     facilities or other City-owned facilities.
           C.   Large filming events that are professional in nature.
           D.   Events held at the following are not special events under this chapter:
              1.   A building that has a business located in it that has a current annual
           business license as an event business;
              2.   A building with an assembly group classification under the International
           Building Code, as adopted by the City, so long as the event does not exceed the
           posted occupant load as approved by the City and has a current annual business
           license, if required; and
              3.   A government owned facility.
           E.   For purposes of this chapter, City events are not special events, however
           events sponsored by the City are special events. (Ord. 2022-23, 5-11-2022; amd. Ord.
           2024-07, 3-13-2024)
 
6-5-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity, public or private, to promote, advertise or hold a special event
without first obtaining a special event permit. (Ord. 2022-23, 5-11-2022; amd.
Ord. 2024-07, 3-13-2024)
6-5-3-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Submission: A completed application on City forms shall be submitted to
the City at least forty-five (45) calendar days before the event is scheduled
to take place, in order to allow sufficient time to process the application and
to allow timely appeal to the City Council in the event the application is
denied. Applications for new events or recurring events with changes that
submit the application less than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to the
scheduled event shall not be accepted. Applications are not considered complete
until all required information has been submitted to the City.
   B.   Advertising: No advertising of a special event shall be permitted until
City approval of the special event is granted and a special event permit is
issued.
   C.   Inspections: Authorized law enforcement officers, fire control
officers, and other government personnel shall be permitted free access to the
event to make inspections to ensure compliance with all City, State, and
Federal Laws. All government personnel shall comply with the Fourth Amendment
of the United States Constitution at all times during an inspection.
   D.   Security Plan: For large events, to be determined at time of
application, the police department requires a security plan to be in place. The
information will be required as part of the online application. (Ord. 2022-23,
5-11-2022; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 3-13-2024)
6-5-3-4: INSURANCE REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Users are required to provide a certificate of insurance with a minimum
limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person in any one occurrence
and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate. Limits for property damage
are one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in any one occurrence. Washington City
must be named as an additional insured. A copy of this certificate of insurance
must be submitted to Washington City.
      1.   The name and address of the insured.
      2.   City shall be named as an additional primary insured and
noncontributory on the general liability certificate.
      3.   The location of the operations to which the insurance applies.
      4.   The number of the policy and the type or types of insurance in force
thereunder on the date of the certificate.
      5.   The expiration date of the policy and the limit or limits of
liability thereunder on the date of the certificate.
      6.   A statement that all coverage is on an occurrence basis rather than
a claims basis.
      7.   Notice of cancellation of policy will be delivered in accordance
with policy provisions.
      8.   Name, address, and telephone number of the insurance company's
agent.
   B.   Workers' Compensation Insurance: Applicant shall procure and maintain
workers' compensation insurance as required by Utah law.
   C.   Certificate Of Insurance: No special event permit shall be issued until
the applicant has submitted their certificate of insurance to the City as
required in this chapter. (Ord. 2022-23, 5-11-2022; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 3-13-
2024)
6-5-3-5: FEES:
Application And Cost Recovery Fees: Along with the application for a special
event permit, the applicant shall pay any applicable special event application
fees and City cost recovery fees.
   A.   City Cost Recovery Fees: Extra City services will be provided for
special events as determined by the City to be needed to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public and shall be paid by the applicant.
      1.   City costs include, but are not limited to, police, fire, park
maintenance, power, water, road closures, and cleanup of City facilities
before, during, or after the event, and other costs to the City directly
attributable to the special event.
      2.   Before City approval is granted to hold the event, the applicant
shall pay the deposit and estimated City fees as determined by the City based
on the application, the applicant's past event history with the City, and
experience with similar events.
   B.   Invoice: The City will charge for any services incurred by the City in
restoring the site. If the amount exceeds the City cost recovery fees paid in
advance, the applicant shall be charged the unpaid portion with the card on
file. If the amount is less than the City cost recovery fees paid prior to
issuance of the permit, then the remaining amount shall be returned to the
applicant. (Ord. 2022-23, 5-11-2022; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 3-13-2024)
6-5-3-6: APPLICATION REVIEW, APPROVAL, AND ISSUANCE:
The City Manager, or a designee, shall review and either approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the request for a special event permit. The City Manager
may refer the request for a special event permit to the City Council for
approval. (Ord. 2022-23, 5-11-2022)
6-5-3-7: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
   A.   Grounds For Denial: The special event application may be denied by the
City if:
      1.   The proposed special event violates a law, ordinance, policy,
procedure, or regulation or poses a danger or threat to the public health,
safety or welfare, or causes unreasonable inconvenience or cost to the public;
      2.   The proposed special event is not consistent with the intended
nature and use of the requested City property;
      3.   The proposed special event is scheduled at a place and time that
could disrupt or interfere with an already approved special event;
      4.   The proposed location or building is not adequate to accommodate the
proposed special event such as parking, sanitation facilities, and health or
safety codes, or the nature of the proposed special event is such that the
City, or the applicant does not have sufficient resources available to ensure
the health, safety, and welfare of special event participants or the general
public;
      5.   The permit application contains a material falsehood or
misrepresentation;
      6.   The applicant has failed to pay a debt to the City including costs
incurred during a prior special event;
      7.   Incomplete permit applications; and
      8.   The applicant or any person on whose behalf the application for a
permit was made has on prior occasions:
         a.   Damaged City property, if the applicant is for an event on City
property; or
         b.   Made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of
an event or activity previously permitted; or
         c.   Has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on behalf of
the applicant.
   B.   Notice: If a special event permit application is denied, the City shall
notify the applicant in writing of the reason or reasons for the denial. (Ord.
2022-23, 5-11-2022)
6-5-3-8: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any applicant for a special event permit desiring to appeal an administrative
decision concerning the denial or modification of a special event permit may
petition the City Council if the decision was made by the City Manager. Any
decision made by the City Council is final. All appeals shall be in writing,
shall state the specific grounds for the appeal, and shall be delivered to the
City Recorder within five (5) calendar days after the date the applicant
received notice of the denial. An applicant may appeal the City Council’s
decision by seeking judicial review with the district court, which review shall
be limited to a review of the record. The district court shall presume the City
Council’s decision is valid and shall review the record to determine whether or
not the decision was arbitrary, capricious or illegal. (Ord. 2022-23, 5-11-
2022)
6-5-3-9: VIOLATION:
Any person or entity who maintains or assists in maintaining a violation of
this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provision in Section
1-4-1 of the Washington City Code. Violation of this chapter shall be an
infraction. (Ord. 2022-23, 5-11-2022)
CHAPTER 6
CAMPING WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY AND CERTAIN PRIVATE PROPERTY
SECTION:
6-6-1: Camping Defined
6-6-2: Regulation
6-6-3: Signage
6-6-4: Penalty
6-6-1: CAMPING DEFINED:
"Camping" is defined as:
   A.   Occupying a designated camping facility.
   B.   Erecting a tent or other shelter, or arranging bedding, or both, for
the purpose of, or in such a manner as will permit persons, remaining
overnight.
   C.   Use of a travel trailer, camper, recreational vehicle, semitruck or any
other vehicle for the purpose of sleeping overnight. (Ord. 2001-12, 9-26-2001)
6-6-2: REGULATION:
No person shall camp within any road rights of way or within any commercial
zone in the city, except within a designated camping facility approved for that
use. (Ord. 2001-12, 9-26-2001)
6-6-3: SIGNAGE:
   A.   Required: Each commercial establishment or commercial center located
within any commercial zone which has thirty five (35) or more required parking
spaces shall be required to post metal signs, in quantities, location and in a
manner approved by the chief of police. Said signs shall be placed so as to be
clearly visible to the average person situated as a driver of a vehicle
utilizing the parking lot. The face of the sign shall have a white background
with the message text printed in a dark color. The size of the sign shall be of
sufficient size to be visible to the average person from a distance of twenty
feet (20'). The text on the sign shall state "Overnight Camping Prohibited",
"Overnight Camping In Commercial Parking Lots Is Prohibited By Washington City
Ordinance" or similar wording. In addition, below the text shall be a reference
to the city ordinance number. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-8-2012)
   B.   Property Owner Responsible: The property owner shall be responsible for
procurement of signs meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-12,
9-26-2001; amd. 2007 Code)
6-6-4: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. Each overnight use constitutes a separate offense.
Enforcement shall be by the local law enforcement officer or other official
charged with and responsible for the duties of enforcing local laws.
Additionally, any parcel in any commercial zone which has previously been
granted a conditional use permit which set specific conditions on the owner to
not permit overnight camping shall not be excused (by the requirements of this
chapter) from their obligation to routinely and adequately monitor their
property and to specifically advise users of their property that overnight
camping is in violation of a city ordinance and is also not permitted under the
property owner's conditional use permit. (Ord. 2001-12, 9-26-2001; amd. 2007
Code)
CHAPTER 7
STANDARDIZED STREET ADDRESSING
SECTION:
6-7-1: Purpose
6-7-2: Street Name Approval
6-7-3: Street Naming
6-7-4: Assignment Of Street names And Numbers
6-7-5: Building Identification
6-7-6: Multiple Family Residential
6-7-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is established to provide a standard system for consistent and
logical numbering and naming of streets and properties to avoid the duplication
of street names within Washington City and Washington County. This chapter
shall establish standard procedures for street naming, address numbering, and
keeping addressing numbers clearly identifiable. (Ord. 2019-27, 12-11-2019)
6-7-2: STREET NAME APPROVAL:
   A.   Approval of Street Names, New Developments: All proposed public and
private street names and types must be submitted and approved by the community
development department and the public works department at the time the plats
are under review by Washington City.
   B.   Approval of Street Names, Existing Developments: When it is necessary
to change the name or type of an existing public or private street, the street
name and type or number and the corresponding intersection coordinates must be
approved by the community development department and the public works
department to eliminate confusion and duplication with other streets throughout
the county. When a city determines to change the name of a street, it should
schedule a public hearing to convey information about proposed name changes to
citizens who are affected, and to eliminate capricious actions. (Ord. 2019-27,
12-11-2019)
6-7-3: STREET NAMING:
   A.   Duplication: Proposed street names that duplicate existing street names
in the city or elsewhere in Washington County shall be avoided. Having a
different street type suffix does not make the name different, e.g. Washington
Street and Washington Ave.
   B.   Confusion: In accordance with the goal of minimizing confusion for
street names containing locational and other characteristics, the following
criteria shall apply:
      1.   Proposed street names that sound very similar to existing names or
street names that have unconventional spellings shall be avoided.
      2.   The four compass directions shall not be used as part of the street
name (e.g. Eastwood). This is to eliminate the occurrence of double
directionals in assigning the address (e.g. 1229 W. Eastwood Drive).
      3.   The standard street type designators shall not be used as part of
the street name (e.g. Springlane Road). This is to eliminate the occurrence of
double street type designators in the address.
      4.   Abbreviations of part or the entire street name shall not be
allowed.
   C.   Continuity: Proposed street name are encouraged to have the following
characteristics:
      1.   Historic significance.
      2.   Local color and sense of place.
      3.   Overall theme.
      4.   Compatibility with adjacent streets.
   D.   Street Name Length: The length of a street name shall not be more than
fifteen (15) characters including one space and two words, but not to include
the street type designator.
   E.   Street type designators: Proposed street names and street types should
be matched as follows:
      1.   Boulevard and Parkway - arterials and collectors with planted or
other physically separate medians.
      2.   Drive and Way - a meandering, curvilinear or diagonal street usually
longer than one thousand feet (1,000') and most always connect to other rights-
of-way).
      3.   Road - streets longer than one thousand feet (1,000').
      4.   Street and Avenue - straight directional streets.
      5.   Lane - short collector or minor streets which are usually less than
one thousand feet (1,000') in length and may not always connect other rights-
of-ways. May be used in names for private rights-of-way.
      6.   Circle, Court, Place, Cove - cul-de-sacs and permanent dead-end
streets usually less than one thousand feet (1,000') in length. May be used
effectively in planned unit developments, condominiums or other conditional use
developments where streets with short branching configurations are proposed.
      7.   Alley - a small or narrow street, especially one running between or
behind buildings permitting access from the street to backyards or garages.
(Ord. 2019-27, 12-11-2019)
6-7-4: ASSIGNMENT OF STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS:
A street shall not be assigned a name and a number. This is to avoid persons
using both interchangeably with their official situs address. When a street is
designated with a an alphabetic name, only its intersection with other streets
are assigned numbers as coordinates for the purpose of displaying them on
intersection signs.
   A.   Streets which shall be assigned alphabetic names:
      1.   Streets that change direction at oblique angles to the address grid
system axes.
      2.   Streets that are diagonal to the address grid system axes.
      3.   Circled or looped thorough-fares which return to themselves. If
frontage number to be assigned for addresses on buildings are all on the
outside of the loop, or all on the inside of the circle, the street may be
given a single name, otherwise, a break shall be made at a distinct point at
the back of the loop and multiple names assigned. This is to avoid duplicate
and parallel address ranges for the same street name.
      4.   Horseshoe shaped thoroughfares that are not in alignment with the
countywide grid system shall be assigned at least two names with the breaks
occurring at the most distinct bends on the street.
      5.   Private streets which are proposed within private developments such
as condominiums and planned unit developments shall be named.
   B.   Streets which shall be assigned numbers:
      1.   Major collector streets or collector streets which are in continuous
alignment with the address grid system axes shall be assigned street numbers.
      2.   Marginal access streets which parallel major collector streets and
collector streets in alignment with Countywide Grid System shall be assigned
numbers.
   C.   Street numbering: When calculating street numbers and intersection
coordinates, all numbers shall be measured to the centerline of the roadway and
shall end with the digit “0" or “5". Private numbering systems shall be
avoided.
   D.   Property numbering: The following standards shall be applied to the
numbering of properties in the city:
      1.   Juxtaposition: Building numbers should be comparable (but not
duplicated) on parallel streets and should be in consecutive order.
      2.   Even-odd: Building numbers should be assigned to opposite sides of
the street as determined under the city address grid system.
      3.   Compass direction: On streets that do not conform to the four
compass directions, building numbers should be assigned from the axis that most
nearly matches the principal direction of the thoroughfare.
      4.   Corner lots: Dual addresses on corner lots shall be avoided. A final
address will be assigned when a site plan showing building footprint is
submitted.
      5.   Buildings without public frontage: Buildings that are hidden behind
other buildings or do not have public frontage shall be numbered from the
centerline of the principal access or driveway. (Ord. 2019-27, 12-11-2019)
6-7-5: BUILDING IDENTIFICATION:
All buildings shall have approved address numbers, and shall be identified
using the following standards:
   A.   Background: Numbers shall be set on a background of a contrasting
color.
   B.   Size: Numbers shall be Arabic numeral or alphabetic letters. Numbers
shall be a minimum of four inches (4") high with a minimum stroke width of one-
half inch (.5")
   C.   Visibility: Numbers shall be placed in a position that is plainly
legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. When a
building is some distance from a street or when view of the building is blocked
by trees or shrubs, numbers should be displayed on a sign attached to a fence,
gate, street mailbox, or lawn stake, in addition to being placed on the
building.
   D.   Corner lots: On corner lots, house numbers should face the street named
in the Address. (Ord. 2019-27, 12-11-2019)
6-7-6: MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL:
Building Identification sequence will start on the right side of the “main”
approved addressed entrance and flow in a counterclockwise spiral direction
consecutively numbering each building from outward to the inward. Individual
unit identification numbers will begin with the first and most outward building
on the right side of the main approved entrance and flow in a counterclockwise
spiral direction consecutively numbering each unit.
   A.   When multiple buildings exist on one property, the following standards
will be upheld:
      1.   Letters are to be used on the buildings on the furthest pop out to
maximize visibility.
      2.   Letters on the building should be legible and placed in the front of
the building facing the parking lot/roadway. If there is more than one entrance
into the building(s) letters need to be placed on all entrances that are from
the parking lot.
      3.   When a complex has multiple units, letters should be consistently
placed on the buildings in the same location.
      4.   Letters should be in contrast with the background of the building
color.
      5.   Size of letters shall be fifteen inches (15") high for single story
buildings, twenty-one inches (21") high for two story buildings, and twenty-
seven inches (27")) high for three story and higher buildings. Letters should
be placed near the top of the building to avoid obstruction and maximize
visibility. Trees shall not be permitted to be planted below the attached
letters or in a way that could potentially obstruct the letters when fully
mature.
      6.   Letters shall be lighted for night-time visibility, whether by
independent letter lighting or by illumination from an alternative light
source.
      7.   Numbers are to be used on the units (internally) and should be
Arabic or alphabetical letters. (Ord. 2019-27, 12-11-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-22,
7-28-2021)
TITLE 7
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
7-1-1: Water Department And System
7-1-2: Nonowner Applicants
7-1-3: Rates And Fees; Delinquency
7-1-4: Regulations And Requirements
7-1-5: Scarcity Of Water
7-1-6: Waste Of Water
7-1-7: Water Meters
7-1-8: Fire Hydrants
7-1-9: Installation Of Water Lines
7-1-10: Extension Of Water Mains
7-1-11: Discontinuance Of Service
7-1-12: Nonliability For Damages
7-1-13: Service Outside City
7-1-14: Time Of Day Watering
7-1-1: WATER DEPARTMENT AND SYSTEM:
   A.   Created: The water department of the city is hereby created. It shall
administer the operation and maintenance of the water system of the city. (1989
Code § 14-110)
   B.   Superintendent:
      1.   Created: There is hereby created the position of superintendent of
the water department. (1989 Code § 14-111)
      2.   Duties:
         a.   The superintendent of the water system shall manage and supervise
the city water system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and pursuant
to resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the governing body from time
to time prescribing his powers and duties and directing the manner and
frequency with which he shall make reports to the public works director
relating to the water system. All of the functions and activities of the
superintendent shall be carried on under the direction of the public works
director. (1989 Code § 14-112; amd. 2007 Code)
         b.   After review by the public works director, the superintendent
shall have the responsibility to establish policies, rules and regulations that
are not inconsistent with this chapter that he feels are necessary to protect
the integrity of the system and to govern its operation. (1989 Code § 14-113;
amd. 2007 Code)
7-1-2: NONOWNER APPLICANTS:
Application for water service must be made by the tenant desiring service on
forms provided by the city. The monthly water bill for said service will be
automatically mailed to the owner of the premises or his duly authorized agent;
however, the owner may choose to have the monthly bill sent directly to the
tenant, in which case the owner shall sign a statement guaranteeing payment of
said bill. The statement shall be in substantially the following form:
In consideration of the acceptance of the application for water service
submitted by (tenant), I will pay for all water services for any such tenant or
any other occupant of               premises in case such tenant or occupant
shall fail to pay for the same according to the ordinances, rules, regulations
or resolutions enacted by the city.
Dated this            day of                 20        .
Owner
(1989 Code § 14-116)
7-1-3: RATES AND FEES; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Generally: The rates, penalty fee for delinquency in payment,
connection fee, inspection fee and other charges incidental to connection and
services from the city water system shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution enacted by the governing body. The governing body may from time to
time promulgate rules for levying, billing guaranteeing and collecting charges
for water services and all other rules necessary for the management and control
of the water system. Rates for services furnished shall be uniform with respect
to each class or classes of service established or that may hereafter be
established. (1989 Code § 14-117; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Special Rates: The governing body may from time to time fix by
agreement or resolution special rates and conditions for users using
exceptionally large amounts of water service or making use of the water system
under exceptional circumstances, upon such terms and conditions as they may
deem proper. (1989 Code § 14-118)
   C.   Board Of Equalization: The governing body is hereby constituted a board
of equalization of water rates to hear complaints and make corrections of any
assessments deemed to be illegal, unequal or unjust. They may, if they see fit,
rebate all or any part of the water bill of any indigent person. (1989 Code §
14-119)
   D.   Culinary Water Rates:
      1.   Definitions: The following words and phrases used in this subsection
shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context:
    DROUGHT MANAGEMENT PLAN STAGING: The four (4) stage drought management
plan, as defined and adopted in ordinance 2002-09, and as amended from time to
time, referred to herein as the "drought management plan ordinance".
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT OR ERU: The equivalent of fifteen thousand
(15,000) gallons per month of metered water usage.
      2.   Water Rates:
         a.   Minimum Amount Per Month Fee/Base Rate: Seventeen dollars fifty
cents ($17.50) per ERU.
 
Base Rate Structure
Base rate    $17.50/ERU
Includes     0 gallons
 
         b.   Water Usage/Overage Fee: Water usage rates for usage shall be in
accordance with the following table and in accordance with the drought
management plan stage in effect at the time of billing:
Overage Steps Cost/1,000 Gallons
              Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4
Overage Steps       Cost/1,000 Gallons
                    Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3  Stage 4
0   –   4,99   $0.   $0.   $1.   $1.35
5,000   –      1.0   1.1   1.2   1.50
10,000   –  �   1.1   1.2   1.3   1.65
15,000   –  �   1.2   1.3   1.5   1.80
20,000   –  �   1.3   1.4   1.6   1.95
25,000   –  �   1.4   1.5   1.7   2.10
30,000   –  �   1.5   1.7   1.9   2.33
35,000   –  �   1.7   1.8   2.1   2.55
40,000 and over        1.8   2.0   2.3   2.78
 
         c.   Drought Management Plan Staging Schedule Fee: The usage/overage
fee schedule to be used shall be based upon the then effective drought
management plan stage as found in the drought management plan ordinance. The
following is a summary of the four (4) stages of the drought management plan
ordinance:
 
Drought Management Plan Staging
Stage Rate Increase Description
1     –           Normal usage/normal rate
2     10 percent    Reduction goal is 5–10 percent of peak use
3     25 percent    Reduction goal is 10–25 percent of peak use
4     50 percent    Reduction goal is 25–60 percent of peak use
 
         d.   Yearly Adjustment Review: The culinary water rates are to be
reviewed and adjusted annually based on the consumer price index.
      3.   Drought Management Staging Plan: The drought management plan
ordinance, as amended from time to time, is incorporated into this chapter by
reference and the four (4) stages of water availability/scarcity as referred to
therein is incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2007-03, 1-24-2007)
   E.   Delinquency; Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   The city treasurer or utilities superintendent shall furnish to each
user, or mail to, or leave at his place of residence or usual place of
business, a written or printed statement stating thereon the amount of water
service charges assessed against him once each month or at such other regular
interval as the governing body shall direct.
      2.   The statement shall specify the amount of the bill for the water
service and the place of payment and date due. If any person fails to pay the
water charges within thirty (30) days of the date due, the city treasurer or
utilities superintendent shall give the customer notice in writing of intent to
discontinue the service to the customer unless the customer pays the bill in
full within five (5) days from the date of notice.
      3.   All charges for water shall be paid for monthly by the customer. Any
customer failing, neglecting or refusing to pay such charges by the twentieth
day of the month shall be assessed a five percent (5%) penalty on the unpaid
balance. Customers whose accounts are delinquent in excess of thirty (30) days
shall also be subject to having their water turned off by the department. (1989
Code § 14-121; amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Restoration Fee: In all cases of nonpayment where water is turned off
by the city, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged to restore water
service to the affected property.
   G.   Relocating Or Capping Fee: In case of building being demolished or
moved, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged for relocating and/or
capping water line. Any additional costs incurred by the city as the result of
above mentioned relocating or capping, shall be assessed to property owner at
cost.
   H.   Notice Requirements: Forty eight (48) hours' notice will be required
for all turn off or turn on service.
   I.   Unpaid Obligations: In the event that there is an unpaid obligation for
utilities (water, sewer and/or solid waste) at any residence or business and a
request or application is made to the city to change the responsible party or
to reconnect a disconnected water line, the city shall not change the
responsible party nor shall the city connect the water line until an amount is
paid to the city equal to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or the amount of the
unpaid obligation, whichever is less, plus an application fee of fifteen
dollars ($15.00). (1989 Code § 14-155)
7-1-4: REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Use Without Payment Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person by
himself, family, servants or agents to utilize the city water or sewer system
without paying therefor as herein provided or, without authority, to open any
fire hydrant, stopcock, valve or other fixtures attached to the system of water
supply unless it is done pursuant to proper application, agreement or
resolution. It shall be unlawful to injure, deface or impair any part or
appurtenance of the water or sewer system, or to cast anything into any
reservoir or tank belonging to the water system. (1989 Code § 14-120)
   B.   Turning On Water After Being Turned Off Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful for any person, after the water has been turned off from the premises
for nonpayment of water charges or other violation of the ordinances, rules,
regulations or resolutions pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or allow
the water to be turned on or used without authority from the water
superintendent or city recorder. (1989 Code § 14-122)
   C.   Separate Connections: It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more families
or service users to be supplied from the same service pipe, connection or water
meter unless special permission for such combination usage has been granted by
the governing body and the premises served are owned by the same owner. In all
such cases, a failure on the part of any one of the users to comply with this
subsection shall warrant a withholding of a supply of water through the service
connections until compliance or payment has been made, and in any event, the
property owner shall be primarily liable to the city for all water services
utilized on all such premises. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the
power of the city to require separate pipes, connections or meters at a
subsequent time. (1989 Code § 14-123)
   D.   Unauthorized Users: It shall be unlawful for any water service user to
permit any person from other premises or any unauthorized person to use or
obtain water services regularly from his premises or water facilities, either
outside or inside his premises. (1989 Code § 14-124)
   E.   Period For Visitors: Individuals visiting the premises of an authorized
user in a recreational vehicle, not including a mobile home, and continuing to
live therein during the period of visitation may receive water service from the
service pipes or facilities of the host during the visitation period which
shall not exceed three (3) months. Continued use thereafter shall be deemed
unauthorized and violative of the provisions of this section relating to
separate connections and unauthorized use. (1989 Code § 14-125)
   F.   Pipes To Be Kept In Good Repair: All users of water services shall keep
their service pipes and connections and other apparatus in good repair and
protected from frost at their own expense. No person, except under the
direction of the water superintendent, shall be allowed to dig into the street
for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe. (1989 Code §
14-126)
   G.   Quality Of Service Pipe:
      1.   All service and other pipe used in conjunction with the water
services of the city shall be of such material, quality and specifications as
the governing body may from time to time by resolution provide, and shall be
installed at such distances belowground as may be specified by regulations
relating to the water department. All work, alterations or extensions affecting
water pipes shall be subject to the acceptance of the water superintendent, and
no connections with any water mains shall be made without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the public works director.
      2.   No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water pipes across lots or
buildings to adjoining premises without permission from the water
superintendent and subject to such requirements relating to controls as may be
imposed by him. (1989 Code § 14-127; amd. 2007 Code)
   H.   Faulty Equipment: It shall be unlawful for any water user to:
      1.   Waste water.
      2.   Allow it to be wasted by stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes,
or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow.
      3.   Wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets or stops, or through
basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus.
      4.   Use the water for purposes other than for those which he has
applied, or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for
controlling the water supply. (1989 Code § 14-128)
   I.   Sprinkling Vehicles: Vehicles for sprinkling shall be regulated and
controlled by the water department, through the superintendent of the water
department. (1989 Code § 14-129)
   J.   Department To Have Free Access: The water superintendent and his agents
shall at all ordinary hours have free access to any place supplied with water
services from the city system for the purpose of examining the apparatus and
ascertaining the amount of water service being used and the manner of its use.
(1989 Code § 14-130)
   K.   Water Not Supplied For Motors, Syphons, Etc.: No water shall be
supplied from the pipes of the city water system for the purpose of driving
motor, syphon, turbine or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines or elevators,
or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind whatsoever, nor shall any
license be granted or issued for any such purpose, except by special permission
of the governing body. (1989 Code § 14-132)
7-1-5: SCARCITY OF WATER:
In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the mayor
and the governing body be necessary, the mayor shall by proclamation limit the
use of water to such extent as may be necessary. It shall be unlawful for any
person, his family, servants or agents to violate any proclamation made by the
mayor in pursuance of the drought management plan. (1989 Code § 14-134; amd.
2007 Code)
7-1-6: WASTE OF WATER:
   A.   Prohibited: Users of water from the city water system shall not permit
water to continue to run wastefully and without due efforts to conserve water.
If, in the judgment of the water superintendent or of any of the officers of
the city, a user of city water engages in practices which result in the
needless waste of water and continues so to do after reasonable notice to
discontinue wastefulness has been given, the superintendent or any officer may
refer the matter to the governing body.
   B.   Termination Of Use; Hearing: The governing body may thereupon consider
terminating the right of the individual to use culinary water. If it elects to
consider the matter of termination, it shall give notice to the water user of
the intention to terminate his water connection at least five (5) days prior to
the meeting of the governing body at which termination of water service is to
be considered. The notice shall inform him of the time and place of the meeting
and of the charges which lead to the consideration of the termination.
   C.   Appearance: A water user whose right to utilize city water is being
reviewed shall have opportunity to appear with or without counsel and present
his reasons why his water service should not be discontinued.
   D.   Determination: After due hearing, the governing body may arrive at a
determination. If the determination is to discontinue the wasteful water user's
service connection, it shall notify him of the decision and of the period
during which the service will remain discontinued. (1989 Code § 14-135)
7-1-7: WATER METERS:
   A.   Required: Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, all
structures, dwelling units, establishments and persons using water from the
city water system must have such number of water meters connected to their
water system as are necessary in the judgment of the water superintendent to
adequately measure use and determine water charges to the respective users.
   B.   Furnished By City: Meters will be furnished by the city upon
application for a connection, and upon payment of such connection fees and
other costs as may be established by the governing body from time to time by
resolution.
   C.   Meters Property Of City; Disputes: Meters shall be deemed to be and
remain the property of the city. Whenever a dispute between water
superintendent and the property owner arises as to the appropriate number of
meters to be installed on any premises, the matter shall be heard and
determined by the governing body after due notice in writing to the parties
involved. (1989 Code § 14-136)
   D.   Readings: The water superintendent shall cause meter readings to be
taken regularly and shall advise the utilities billing department thereof for
the purpose of recording the necessary billings for water service. (1989 Code §
14-136; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Inspections; Adjustments: Meters may be checked, inspected or adjusted
at the discretion of the city, and they shall not be adjusted or tampered with
by the customer. Meter boxes shall not be opened for the purpose of turning on
or off the water except by an authorized representative of the city, unless
special permission is given by the city through its representatives to the
customer to do so.
   F.   Testing: If a customer submits a written request to the water
superintendent to test his water meter, the city may, if under the
circumstances it deems it advisable and in its discretion, order a test of the
meter measuring the water delivered to such customer. If such request is made
within twelve (12) months after the date of the last previous test, the
customer may be required to pay the cost of such test. If the meter is found in
such test to record from ninety seven percent (97%) to one hundred three
percent (103%) of accuracy under methods of testing satisfactory to the
governing body, the meter shall be deemed to accurately measure the use of
water. In the event a meter is found to be recording less than ninety seven
percent (97%) or more than one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy, the
city shall make such adjustments in the customer's previous bills as are just
and fair under the circumstances.
   G.   Meter Failure: If the city's meters fail to register at any time, the
water delivered during the period of failure shall be estimated on the basis of
previous consumption during a period which is not questioned.
   H.   Damages: All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other materials
of the city on or near the customer's premises caused by any act or neglect of
the customer shall, in the discretion of the city, be repaired by and at the
expense of the customer, and the customer shall pay all costs and expenses,
including reasonable attorney fees, which may arise or accrue to the city
through its efforts to repair the damage to the lines, meters or to other
equipment of the department, or collect such costs from the customer. (1989
Code § 14-136)
7-1-8: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Water for fire hydrants for the purpose of fighting fires will be furnished
free of charge by the city. Installation and repairs on such hydrants shall be
at the expense of the city and shall be made under the direction of the city.
All customers shall grant the city, upon demand, a right of way or easement to
install and maintain such hydrants on their premises if the city concludes that
hydrants shall be so installed for the protection of the residents of the city.
Only authorized city employees shall open or operate any fire hydrant, or
attempt to draw water therefrom, without written permission from the city. All
water drawn from fire hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting shall be
metered with a hydrant meter supplied by the city. (1989 Code § 14-142; amd.
2007 Code)
7-1-9: INSTALLATION OF WATER LINES:
   A.   Permits For Installation: It shall be unlawful for any person to lay,
repair, alter or connect any water line to the city culinary water system
without first having received a construction permit from the public works
director. (1989 Code § 14-137; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Applications For Installation Permit:
      1.   Applications for permits to make water connections or other
alteration, or for laying or repairing lines connected directly or indirectly
to the city water system, must be made in writing by a licensed plumber, his
authorized agent, or by the owner of the premises, who shall describe the
nature of the work to be done for which the application is made.
      2.   The application shall be granted if the superintendent determines
that:
         a.   The connection, repair, alteration or installation will cause no
damage to the street in which the water main is laid, or that it will not be
prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or may
thereafter be connected to the water main.
         b.   The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations,
specifications and standards of materials required by the city.
      3.   All connections, alterations or installations shall be to the line
and grade designated by the water superintendent.
      4.   Fees for permits or for inspection service shall be of such amounts
as the governing body shall from time to time determine by resolution. (1989
Code § 14-138)
7-1-10: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS:
   A.   Petition: Any person or persons, including any subdivider, who desires
to have the water mains extended within the city, and is willing to advance the
whole expense of such extension and receive the return of an agreed portion
thereof, as hereinafter provided, may make application to the governing body by
petition. The petition shall contain a description of such proposed extension,
together with an offer to advance the whole expense thereof, which cost shall
be verified by the utilities superintendent. The governing body may grant or
deny the petition as in its discretion deems best for the welfare of existing
water users in the city. (1989 Code § 14-143; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Cost Of Extensions Determined: Upon the receipt of such petition and
map, and before the petition is granted, the governing body shall obtain from
the utilities superintendent a certified statement showing the whole cost and
expense of making such extension. (1989 Code § 14-144; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Amount Deposited: If the governing body grants the petition, the amount
of the cost of making the extension, as certified by the utilities
superintendent, shall be deposited with the city recorder before any work shall
be done on such extension. The deposit shall be made within thirty (30) days,
or such other time as the governing body shall indicate, after the granting
thereof. (1989 Code § 14-145; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Return Of Any Money; Forfeiture:
      1.   At the time the governing body decides whether or not to grant
petition for an extension, it shall also decide whether or not any portion of
the costs is to be refunded and the manner and circumstances under which such
refund shall be made or credited to the applicant, his successors or
representatives. Such determination shall be duly recorded in writing and a
copy thereof furnished to the applicant.
      2.   In the event any deposit remains unclaimed for a period of five (5)
years after the depositor has discontinued water service, the deposit may be
forfeited and then transferred to the water utility fund. (1989 Code § 14-146)
   E.   Ownership Of Extension: Any such extension shall be deemed the property
of the city. (1989 Code § 14-147)
7-1-11: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Any customer desiring to discontinue service shall notify the city in writing
of such fact at least ten (10) days before the date when such service shall be
discontinued. On giving such written notice, the customer shall not be
responsible for water bills incurred after the date specified in the notice.
Any credit balance in favor of the customer as a result of an advance payment
of bills or a deposit made will be refunded upon discontinuance of service.
(1989 Code § 14-141)
7-1-12: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The city shall not be liable for any damage to a water service user by reason
of stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply service caused by fires,
scarcity of water, accidents to the water system or its mains, or which occurs
as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other
unavoidable cause. This section shall not be construed to extend the liability
of the city beyond that provided in the governmental immunity act. (1989 Code §
14-131)
7-1-13: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Authorized: The city may furnish water service from its water system to
persons outside the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1989 Code § 14-151)
   B.   Petition For Service: Any person located outside the city limits who
desires to be supplied with water service from the city water system and is
willing to pay in advance the whole expense of extending the water system to
his property, including the cost of extending any water main beyond its present
location, may make application to the governing body by petition containing:
      1.   A description of the proposed extension.
      2.   A map showing the location thereof.
      3.   An offer to pay the whole expense incurred by the city in providing
such extension and to advance such expense as shall be verified by the public
works department. The governing body and the person or persons seeking such
extension may enter into an agreement providing in detail the terms under which
the extension may be utilized by others in the future and the terms under which
all or any portion of the cost of installing such extension may be refunded.
      4.   An acknowledgment that the city, in granting the petition, need
supply only such water to the petitioner which from time to time the governing
body deems beyond the requirements of water users within the city limits, and
that such extension shall be the property of and subject to the control of the
city. (1989 Code § 14-152; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Extensions May Be Master Metered: When an extension supplying more than
one house or user outside the city limits is connected to city water mains, the
public works department may require a master meter to be installed near the
point where the connection is to be made to the city main. This installation
will be at the expense of the persons served by such extension according to the
regular rates for meter installation. Responsible parties must agree to pay all
bills for water served through the meter at the applicable water rates. (1989
Code § 14-153; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Cost Of Extensions To Be Determined By Public Works Department: Upon
receipt of such petition and map, and before the petition is granted, the
governing body shall determine what portion, if any, of the extension of the
city water mains to the city limits the city shall construct, and shall obtain
from the public works department a verified statement showing the whole cost
and expense of making such extension. Such costs and expenses shall include
administrative and supervisory expenditures of the public works department,
which shall in no event be deemed to be less than ten percent (10%) of the cost
of materials and labor. (1989 Code § 14-154; amd. 2007 Code)
7-1-14: TIME OF DAY WATERING:
   A.   Prohibited Hours: Sprinkler irrigation of all lawns and landscapes is
prohibited between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:
00) P.M. from the first Sunday of April of each year to the last Sunday of
October of each year (daylight saving time).
   B.   Applicability; Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall apply
to all landscapes within the city. This section does not apply in the following
situations:
      1.   New lawns that require frequent irrigation for establishment
purposes within ninety (90) days of planting;
      2.   Short cycles required for testing, inspecting and maintaining
irrigation systems;
      3.   Landscape water is allowed on any day if using a handheld hose, a
soaker hose, a five (5) gallon or less capacity bucket, a watering can, bubbler
or drip irrigation system;
      4.   Private wells, wastewater effluent, aerobic septic systems, nursery
plant stock and the watering of golf course greens that do not require the use
of potable water are exempt from these restrictions.
   C.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation or other entity found in
violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as follows:
      1.   The first offense will generate the issuance of a warning only;
      2.   The second offense will require an appearance before the Washington
City justice court for a judgment not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      3.   The third offense will be a mandatory one hundred dollar ($100.00)
fine; and
      4.   The fourth offense, and each offense thereafter, will be a fine of
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2004-23, 6-23-2004)
ARTICLE A. WATER SUPPLY/SHORTAGE AND DROUGHT MANAGEMENT PLAN
SECTION:
7-1A-1: Plan Implementation
7-1A-2: Stage 1 Voluntary Restrictions On Nonessential Water Use
7-1A-3: Stage 2 Mandatory Restrictions On Nonessential Water Use
7-1A-4: Stage 3 Mandatory Restrictions On All Culinary Water Uses
7-1A-5: Stage 4 Water Rationing Plan For All Available Culinary Water Resources
7-1A-1: PLAN IMPLEMENTATION:
   A.   If a culinary water shortage or drought is expected, the city will
implement the following four (4) stage shortage of culinary water conservation
management plan. The implementation will be under the approval and direction of
the city council and city manager. The city staff (city department heads and
city manager) shall meet on a regular basis to discuss the drought conditions
and ensure all city departments are doing their part to comply, enforce and
encourage the outlined water conservation measures.
   B.   The following shortage or drought indicators will be used to decide
what stage or level should be implemented:
      1.   Stage 1:
         a.   If total culinary supply exceeds the total daily demand by only
two percent (2%) to three percent (3%) (i.e., water tanks cannot recover).
         b.   Water resources are reduced by two percent (2%) to three percent
(3%) due to equipment failure or lack of supply.
      2.   Stage 2:
         a.   Total culinary water resources are reduced by five percent (5%)
of peak capacity due to equipment failure or any other loss.
         b.   Total culinary demand exceeds supply by one percent (1%) to three
percent (3%) and stage 1 restrictions fail to meet goal.
      3.   Stage 3:
         a.   Total culinary water resources are reduced by ten percent (10%)
of peak capacity due to equipment failure or any other loss.
         b.   Total culinary water demand exceeds supply by five percent (5%)
and stage 2 restrictions fail to meet goal.
      4.   Stage 4:
         a.   Total culinary water resources are reduced by twenty five percent
(25%) of peak capacity due to equipment failure or any other loss.
         b.   Total culinary water demand exceeds supply by ten percent (10%)
and stage 3 restrictions fail to meet goal. (Ord. 2002-09, 4-24-2002)
7-1A-2: STAGE 1 VOLUNTARY RESTRICTIONS ON NONESSENTIAL WATER USE:
   A.   Goal: Estimated reduction goal is two percent (2%) to three percent
(3%) of peak use.
   B.   Procedure: Publish following news release in local newspaper, on the
web site and have radio stations announce the release.
News Release: The city of Washington is currently experiencing a shortage of
water supply. The supply cannot meet the current demands. The city adopted a
water shortage drought management plan on           . This plan involves four
(4) stages of water conservation/reduction. Due to the current conditions, the
city has decided to implement stage 1 of this plan. Stage 1 involves voluntary
restrictions on nonessential water use. This stage requests that all city,
county, state and federal organizations also follow these criteria. All
citizens are to conserve water wherever possible (inside and outside) and
suggest the following as guidelines for water conservation efforts:
Inside:
Fix dripping and leaking faucets and toilets. A leak in the toilet can waste
more than 100 gallons of water a day.
Don't let the water run while shaving. Filling the sink basin when shaving uses
1 gallon of water, letting the water run uses 5–10 gallons.
Don't flush the toilet unnecessarily. Water saving toilets use 1.6 gallons of
water, standard toilets use 5 to 7 gallons of water each time it's flushed.
Take shorter showers or fill bathtub only part way. Long showers waste 5 to 10
gallons of water every minute.
Don't run the water while brushing teeth. Turning the water off while brushing
your teeth can save 1.5 to 3.5 gallons of water.
Don't run the tap to make water hot or cold.
Keep a bottle of drinking water in the refrigerator so you don't have to run
the tap to get a cool drink of water.
Wash only full loads of dishes and laundry. A dishwasher uses approximately 25
gallons of water, a washing machine uses 30–35 gallons of water per cycle.
Install water saving plumbing fixtures. A water saving showerhead can save 1.5
gallons of water per minute.
Wash fruits and vegetables in a basin instead of under running water.
Outside:
Raise your lawn mower cutting height. Longer grass needs less water.
Don't plant any new grass or sod.
Don't fill swimming pools. If possible, cover the swimming pool. An uncovered
pool will lose 900–3,000 gallons of water a month to evaporation, a covered
pool loses 300–1,000 gallons a month.
Use mulch around shrubs and garden plants to save soil moisture.
Don't wash cars, or wash at a facility that recycles water. Washing the car
with the hose running uses 100–200 gallons of water.
Sweep sidewalks and steps rather than hosing.
Water lawns and gardens every 3 or 4 days, to 1 inch deep. Deep watering
encourages deep root growth. If the water is running off, turn off the
sprinkler, let the water soak in and start watering again. A typical sprinkler
system uses 20 gallons of water every minute.
Avoid watering on windy days or midday when the evaporation rate is the
highest. Water after 7:00 P.M.
Keep fire hydrants closed.
Adjust sprinklers to not spray road or sidewalk.
Repair leaks in hoses, pipes, faucets and connections.
If the implementation of these voluntary restrictions does not reduce the water
demand enough to meet the supply, the city will have to go to stage 2, 3 or 4
of the drought shortage of culinary water and drought management plan, which
involves mandatory restrictions.
   (Ord. 2002-09, 4-24-2002)
7-1A-3: STAGE 2 MANDATORY RESTRICTIONS ON NONESSENTIAL WATER USE:
   A.   Goal: Estimated reduction goal is five percent (5%) to ten percent
(10%) of peak use.
   B.   Procedure: By authority of the city manager and the city council, the
following water conservation measures, along with those of stage 1, will be
implemented:
      1.   All parks currently on culinary water will be allowed to water every
three (3) days at a reduced level of demand.
      2.   Residential and commercial users will be allowed to water outside
areas based on odd/even concept. (If the address is even or odd will determine
the day of watering.)
      3.   Use of water for noncommercial car washing, street washing or
driveway washing will not be allowed.
      4.   Use of water for ornamental fountains, waterfalls or reflection
pools will not be allowed.
      5.   During this stage, the approval of any new developments will be
delayed until the conservation restrictions are lifted.
   C.   Enforcement: If any person or entity violates these restrictions,
citations could be issued, or the city may elect to remove the water service
from the property. (Ord. 2002-09, 4-24-2002)
7-1A-4: STAGE 3 MANDATORY RESTRICTIONS ON ALL CULINARY WATER USES:
   A.   Goal: Estimated reduction goal is ten percent (10%) to twenty five
percent (25%) of peak use.
   B.   Procedure: By authority of the city manager and the city council, the
following water conservation measures, along with those of stage 1 and 2, will
be implemented:
      1.   The use of fire hydrants for purposes other than fire protection
will not be allowed, or for use by municipal departments, contractors and all
others.
      2.   Water use for the following nonessential uses will not be allowed:
         a.   Noncommercial washing of automobiles and trucks.
         b.   The washing of streets, driveways and sidewalks.
         c.   Ornamental water use, including, but not limited to, fountains,
artificial waterfalls and reflecting pools.
         d.   The use of water to fill and top off swimming pools, hot tubs,
etc.
      3.   Users will be allowed seventy five percent (75%) of use levels for
the same month of the preceding year. All users will reduce demand by twenty
five percent (25%).
   C.   Enforcement:
      1.   If any person or entity violates these restrictions, citations could
be issued, or the city may elect to remove the water service from the property.
      2.   The utility billing department will monitor usage by using triggers
and computer alarms for notification.
   D.   Exemptions Or Variance:
      1.   If compliance with the nonessential use of water restrictions would
result in extraordinary hardship upon a water user, the water user may apply
for an exemption or variance. For purposes of this section, "extraordinary
hardship" means a permanent damage to property or other personal or economic
loss, which is substantially more severe than the sacrifices borne by other
water users subject to the nonessential use of water restrictions.
      2.   A person or business entity believing he suffers an extraordinary
hardship and desiring to be wholly or partially exempt from the restrictions on
the nonessential use of water shall submit a written request with full
documentation supporting the need for the requested relief to the city. The
application shall contain information specifying:
         a.   The nature of the hardship claimed and reasons for the requested
exemption or variance.
         b.   The efforts taken by the applicant to conserve water and the
extent to which the applicant, without extraordinary hardship, may reduce water
use.
      3.   The city shall advise the applicant of its decision regarding the
application. An exemption or variance will be granted only to the extent
necessary to relieve extraordinary hardship. (Ord. 2002-09, 4-24-2002)
7-1A-5: STAGE 4 WATER RATIONING PLAN FOR ALL AVAILABLE CULINARY WATER
RESOURCES:
   A.   Goal: Estimated reduction goal is twenty five percent (25%) to sixty
percent (60%) of peak use.
   B.   Procedure: By the authority of the city manager and city council, the
following water rationing plan will be implemented, along with those of stages
1, 2 and 3:
      1.   General:
         a.   It is imperative that water customers within the city area
achieve an immediate and further reduction in the water use in order to extend
existing water supplies and, at the same time, assure that sufficient water is
available to preserve the public health and sanitation, and provide fire
protection service.
         b.   The objective of this local water rationing plan is to effect an
immediate twenty five percent (25%) reduction in water usage. Should drought
conditions continue, further reductions in usage may be required. If it is
necessary to implement further reductions, this plan will be modified to reduce
the levels more. It is the water department responsibility to continually
monitor on hand quantities to determine if amendments are required.
         c.   The plan provides for equitable reductions in water usage on the
part of each water customer. The success of this plan depends on the
cooperation of all water customers.
         d.   During this stage, the approval of any new building permits will
be delayed until the conservation restrictions are lifted.
      2.   Prohibited Nonessential Water Uses: The following water uses are
declared nonessential and will not be allowed within the city:
         a.   The watering of lawns.
         b.   The watering of outdoor gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs
and other outdoor plants, except by means of a bucket, pail or handheld hose
equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle between the hours of five o'clock (5:
00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
         c.   The watering of golf course fairways with culinary water.
         d.   The noncommercial washing of automobiles and trucks.
         e.   The washing of streets, driveways and sidewalks.
         f.   The serving of water in restaurants, clubs or eating places
unless specifically requested by the individual.
         g.   Ornamental water use, including, but not limited to, fountains,
artificial waterfalls and reflecting pools.
         h.   The use of water for flushing sewers or hydrants by
municipalities or any public or private individual or entity, except as deemed
necessary and approved in the interest of public health or safety by the city.
         i.   The use of fire hydrants by the fire department for testing fire
apparatus and for fire department drills, except as deemed necessary in the
interest of public safety and specifically approved by the city.
         j.   The use of fire hydrants by the street department, contractors
and all others, except as necessary for firefighting or protection purposes.
         k.   The use of water to fill and top off swimming pools, hot tubs,
etc.
      3.   Water Use Restrictions For All Water Customers: Customers include
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, public and all other users,
with the exception of hospitals and healthcare facilities.
         a.   Water customers shall reduce their water usage by a minimum of
twenty five percent (25%) of use levels for the same quarter of the preceding
year.
         b.   It is the primary responsibility of each water customer to meet
its mandated water use reduction goal in whatever manner possible.
         c.   The city will establish a water allotment for each water
customer, based upon a required twenty five percent (25%) reduction of water
usage from the rate of water used by the customer in the same quarter of the
preceding year or the last recorded use level if no meter readings record the
rate of the customer's use in the same quarter of the preceding year.
         d.   Each water user shall provide access to the city personnel for
purposes of meter reading and monitoring of compliance with this plan. The city
shall make all reasonable efforts to contact customers to arrange for access.
      4.   Water Use Restrictions For Hospital And Healthcare Facilities:
         a.   Hospitals and healthcare facilities shall comply with all
restrictions imposed on water customers as may be applicable to each individual
institution, to the extent compliance will not endanger the health of the
patients or residents of the institution.
         b.   Each hospital and healthcare facility shall survey its water
usage patterns and requirements and implement such additional conservation
measures as may be possible without endangering the health of patients or
residents to achieve a twenty five percent (25%) reduction in the institution's
water usage. The level of conservation arrived at will be recommended to the
city for billing and record. The established level that does not endanger the
health of the patients will be provided to the city for record.
   C.   Enforcement:
      1.   If any person or entity violates these restrictions, citations could
be issued or the city may elect to remove the water service from the property.
      2.   The utility billing department will monitor usage by using triggers
and computer alarms for notification.
   D.   Exemptions Or Variance:
      1.   If compliance with the nonessential use of water restrictions would
result in extraordinary hardship upon a water user, the water user may apply
for an exemption or variance. For purposes of this section, "extraordinary
hardship" means a permanent damage to property or other personal or economic
loss, which is substantially more severe than the sacrifices borne by other
water users subject to the nonessential use of water restrictions.
      2.   A person or business entity believing he suffers an extraordinary
hardship and desiring to be wholly or partially exempt from the restrictions on
the nonessential use of water shall submit a written request with full
documentation supporting the need for the requested relief to the city.
      3.   The application shall contain information specifying:
         a.   The nature of the hardship claimed and reason for the requested
exemption or variance.
         b.   The efforts taken by the applicant to conserve water and extent
to which water use may be reduced by the applicant without extraordinary
hardship.
      4.   The city shall advise the applicant of its decision regarding the
application. An exemption or variance will be granted only to the extent
necessary to relieve extraordinary hardship. (Ord. 2002-09, 4-24-2002)
ARTICLE B. DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION PLAN
SECTION:
7-1B-1: Title, Applicability And Authority
7-1B-2: Purpose And Intent
7-1B-3: Definitions
7-1B-4: Establishment Of Drinking Water Source Protection Zones
7-1B-5: Allowed Uses
7-1B-6: Prohibited Uses
7-1B-7: Administration
7-1B-8: Miscellaneous
7-1B-1: TITLE, APPLICABILITY AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   Title: This chapter shall be known as the "Washington City Drinking
Water Source Protection Ordinance". The provisions of this ordinance shall be
effective within the boundaries of Washington City, Utah, and shall set
prohibitions and restrictions to prevent contamination of the public drinking
water supply in the City as a result of hazardous and toxic substances entering
the groundwater, including wells not owned by the City. This ordinance shall be
liberally construed to affect the purposes set forth herein.
   B.   Applicability: It shall be the responsibility of any person owning real
property and/or owning or operating a business within the jurisdiction of the
City to conform and comply with the applicable provisions contained in this
chapter. Ignorance of this provision shall not excuse any violations of the
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Authority: Washington City has the authority to adopt this ordinance to
facilitate compliance with drinking water source protection regulations
pursuant to Utah Administrative Rule R309 600, Drinking Water Source Protection
for Ground-Water Sources and other such authorities and provisions as in the
statutory and common law of the State of Utah. (Ord. 2022-14, 3-23-2022)
7-1B-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve and maintain existing and
potential public drinking water sources in order to safeguard the public
health, safety and welfare of City residents and visitors. The intent of this
ordinance is to establish and designate drinking water source protection zones
for all sources of public drinking water within the City's boundaries and
jurisdiction. This chapter establishes criteria for regulating the storage,
handling, use or production of hazardous or toxic substances within identified
areas where groundwater is, or could be affected by potential contamination
sources. This shall be accomplished by the designation and regulation of
property uses and conditions that may be maintained within such zones. Unless
otherwise specified, the provisions of this ordinance apply to new development
and or handling, movement and storage of potential hazardous materials.
The degree of protection afforded by this ordinance is considered adequate for
regulatory purposes. This ordinance does not ensure that public drinking water
sources will not be intentional contamination, nor does it create liability on
the part of the City, or an officer or employee thereof, for any damages to the
public drinking water supplies from reliance on this ordinance nor any
administrative order lawfully made thereunder.
A notice to cease or an exemption issued under this ordinance shall not relieve
the owner of the obligation to comply with any other applicable federal, state,
regional or local regulations, rules, ordinances or requirements, nor shall
said notice or exemption relieve any owner of any liability for violation of
such regulations, rules, ordinances or requirements. (Ord. 2022-14, 3-23-2022)
7-1B-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
BEST          A practice or combination of practices determined to be the most effective
MANAGEMENT    practicable (including technological, economic and institutional considerations)
PRACTICES     means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution to a level compatible
(BMPS):       with water, soil and air quality goals.
CFR:          Code of Federal Regulations.
CITY:         City shall mean Washington City, Utah.
COUNCIL:      The City Council of Washington City, Utah.
              The public agency, division, or department designated by Washington City to
DEPARTMENT:   enforce the provisions of this chapter For Washington City, the Department is the
              Public Works Department.
DESIGN        Design standard means a control that is implemented by a potential contamination
STANDARD:     source to prevent discharges to the groundwater. Spill protection is an example
              of a design standard.
              Discharge shall mean and include, but not be limited to, spilling, leaking,
              seeping, pouring, injecting, emitting, emptying, disposing, releasing or dumping
              regulated substances to the soils, air, groundwater or surface water of the City.
DISCHARGE:    Release does not include the use of a regulated substance in accordance with the
              appropriate use intended or specified by the manufacturer of substances, provided
              that such use is not prohibited by federal, state or local regulations. Release
              shall not include release specifically authorized by federal or state permits.
EPA:          U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
GROUNDWATER   Groundwater source means any well, spring, tunnel, adit, or other underground
SOURCE:       opening from or through which groundwater flows or is pumped from subsurface
              water-bearing formations.
GROUNDWATER   The topographic and/or the geologic strata that physically divide the groundwater
DIVIDE:       flow of one recharge area from another.
HAZARDOUS     A hazardous waste as defined by the EPA.
WASTE:
              Land management strategies means zoning and non zoning controls which include,
              but are not limited to, the following: zoning and subdivision ordinances, site
LAND          plan review, design and operating standards, source prohibitions, purchase of
MANAGEMENT    property and development rights, public education programs, groundwater
STRATEGIES:   monitoring, household hazardous waste collection programs, water conservation
              programs, memoranda of understanding, written contracts and agreements, and so
              forth.
              Point source means any discernible, confined and discrete source of pollutants or
              contaminants, including but not limited to any site, pipe, ditch, channel,
POINT SOURCE: tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, animal feeding
              operation with more than ten animal units, landfill, or vessel or other floating
              craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
              Pollution source means point source discharges of contaminants to groundwater or
              potential discharges of the liquid forms of "extremely hazardous substances"
              which are stored in containers in excess of "applicable threshold planning
              quantities" as specified in SARA Title III, Examples of possible pollution
              sources include, but are not limited to, the following: storage facilities that
              store the liquid forms of extremely hazardous substances, septic tanks, drain
              fields, class V underground injection wells, landfills, open dumps, landfilling
              of sludge and septage, manure piles, salt piles, pit privies, drain lines and
              animal feeding operations with more than ten animal units. The following clarify
              the definition of pollution source:
              A.   Animal feeding operation means a lot or facility where the following
              conditions are met: animals have been or will be stabled or confined and fed or
              maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12 month period, and crops,
POLLUTION     vegetation forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the
SOURCE:       normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. Two or more animal
              feeding operations under common ownership are considered to be a single feeding
              operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a common area, or if they use a
              common system for the disposal of wastes.
              B.   Animal unit means a unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation
              calculated by adding the following numbers: the number of slaughter and feeder
              cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus the number of manure dairy cattle multiplied by
              1.4, plus the number of swine weighing over 55 pounds multiplied by 0.4, plus the
              number of sheep multiplied by 1.0, plus the number of horses multiplied by 2.0.
              C.   Extremely hazardous substance means those substances which are identified in
              the Sec. 302(EHS) column of the "Title III List of Lists: Consolidated List of
              Chemicals Subject to the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act
              (EPCRA) and Section 112(R) of the Clean Air Act, as Amended" (550B98017). A copy
              of this document may be obtained from: NCEPI, PO Box 42419, Cincinnati, OH 45202.
              Online ordering is also available at http://www.epa.gov/ncepilhom/orderpub.html
POTENTIAL     Potential contamination source means any facility or site that employs an
CONTAMINATION activity or procedure which may potentially contaminate groundwater. A pollution
SOURCE:       source is also a potential contamination source.
REGULATORY    Regulatory agency means any government agency with jurisdiction over hazardous
AGENCY:       waste as defined herein.
SANITARY      Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible
LANDFILL:     wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover
              thereon.
SARA TITLE    The Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act section found in 40 CFR 300-302,
III:          pertaining to emergency response and right-to-know.
SEPTIC TANK/  Septic tank/drain field system means a system that is comprised of a septic tank
DRAIN FIELD   and a drain field that accepts domestic wastewater from buildings or facilities
SYSTEM:       for subsurface treatment and disposal. By their design, septic tank/drain field
              system discharges cannot be controlled with design standards.
              Wellhead means the physical structure, facility, or device at the land surface
WELLHEAD:     from or through which groundwater flows or is pumped from subsurface water-
              bearing formations. (Ord. 2022-14, 3-23-2022)
 
7-1B-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONES:
There are hereby-established use districts to be known as zones one, two, three
and four of the drinking water source protection area, identified and described
as follows:
   A.   Zone one is the area within a one hundred (100)-foot radius from the
wellhead or margin of the spring collection area.
   B.   Zone two is the area within a two hundred and fifty (250)-day
groundwater time of travel to the wellhead or margin of the spring collection
area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater
source, or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer. If the available data
indicate a zone of increased groundwater velocity within the producing aquifer
(s), time-of-travel calculations shall be based on this data.
   C.   Zone three is the area within a three (3)-year groundwater time of
travel to the wellhead or margin of the spring collection area, the boundary of
the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source, or the
groundwater divide, whichever is closer. If the available data indicate a zone
of increased groundwater velocity within the producing aquifer(s), time-of-
travel calculations shall be based on this data.
   D.   Zone four is the area within a fifteen (15)-year groundwater time of
travel to the wellhead or margin of the spring collection area, the boundary of
the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source, or the
groundwater divide, whichever is closer. If the available data indicate a zone
of increased groundwater velocity within the producing aquifer(s), time-of-
travel calculations shall be based on this data. (Ord. 2022-14, 3-23-2022)
7-1B-5: ALLOWED USES:
The following uses shall be allowed within drinking water source protection
zones:
   A.   Any use permitted within existing agricultural, single-family
residential, multi-family residential and commercial districts so long as uses
conform to the rules and regulations of the regulatory agencies.
   B.   Any other land use where any building located on the property is
incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. (Ord. 2022-14, 3-23-
2022)
7-1B-6: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within the
designated drinking water source protection zones, whether or not such use or
condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use allowed under
7-1B-5.
   A.   Zone one - The location of any uncontrolled potential contamination
source.
   B.   Zone two - The location of a pollution source unless its contaminated
discharges can be controlled with design standards.
   C.   Zones three and four - The location of a potential contamination source
unless it can be controlled through land management strategies. (Ord. 2022-14,
3-23-2022)
7-1B-7: ADMINISTRATION:
The rules, policies and procedures for administration of any source protection
zone established under this ordinance, including without limitation those
applicable to enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the
existing zoning ordinance for Washington. (Ord. 2022-14, 3-23-2022)
7-1B-8: MISCELLANEOUS:
   A.   If any provision or clause of this ordinance or the application thereof
to any person or entity or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall
not affect other sections, provisions, clauses or applications hereof which can
be implemented without the invalid provision(s), clause(s) or application(s)
hereof, and to this end the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared
to be severable.
   B.   This chapter supersedes or repeals the provision(s) of any ordinance(s)
or resolution(s) that is (are) inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   This chapter shall take effect upon publication or posting. (Ord. 2022-
14, 3-23-2022)
ARTICLE C. CULINARY WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-1C-1: Adoption By Reference
7-1C-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
A certain document, a copy of which is on file at the city's public works
office and designated as the "Rules For Water Service", is hereby adopted by
reference and made part of this article as if the same were fully set forth
herein. (Ord. 2014-11, 3-12-2014)
CHAPTER 2
BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Purpose
7-2-2: Definitions
7-2-3: Contamination And Backflow Prevention
7-2-4: Water Service Connection
7-2-5: Cross Connection Prevention
7-2-6: Backflow Prevention Assemblies
7-2-7: Water System Inspection
7-2-8: Discontinuance Of Service
7-2-9: Enforcement
7-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted to:
   A.   Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the
possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's
internal distribution system such contaminants or pollutants which could
backflow into the public water system, either by back pressure or back
siphonage.
   B.   Eliminate or control existing cross connections, actual or potential,
between the customer's in plant potable water system and nonpotable water
system, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping system.
   C.   Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection
control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or
pollution of all potable water systems. (Ord. 90-17, 12-13-1990)
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: That assembly which is accepted by the Utah
department of health as meeting an applicable specification or as suitable for
the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than Washington City public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include
water from another public potable water supply or any natural sources such as a
well, spring, river, stream, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids".
These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and
constitute an unacceptable water source over which Washington City does not
have authority for sanitary control.
BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system
from any source other than the intended source.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source
other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the
potable water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow. Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained
within the international residential code, part VII, plumbing chapter 29, and
replacements thereof, and the cross connection control program for Utah. All
backflow prevention assemblies shall be approved by the Utah department of
health prior to installation. A listing of these approved backflow prevention
assemblies is available from the Utah department of health.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the potable water supply by
sewage, industrial fluids, water liquids, compounds or other materials to a
degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through
poisoning or through the spread of disease.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures
between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains
potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of
questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur
into the potable water system. This shall include any temporary connections,
such as swing connections, removable sections, four (4) way plug valves,
spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding
multiport tubes.
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow
assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is
physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or
control all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water
system. It shall also include isolation by the installation of an approved
backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a
portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross
connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point
of the cross connection.
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system and a
nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly
installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection
commensurate with the degree of hazard. (Ord. 90-17, 12-13-1990)
7-2-3: CONTAMINATION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person having control in any degree over
any premises, or for any user of potable water supplied by the city, to permit
the existence or occurrence of: 1) back pressure or back siphonage causing
contamination; 2) backflow; or 3) contamination of the city potable water by an
auxiliary water supply. It shall be unlawful for any person having control in
any degree over any premises, or for any user of potable water supplied by the
city, to allow cross connection of the city potable water system with any
auxiliary water supply or other plumbing system which contains fluids not
originating within the city potable water system, unless such cross connection
is made with an approved backflow prevention assembly in compliance with this
chapter.
   B.   Each city water system customer shall be responsible for the protection
of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution
due to the backflow of contamination or pollutants through its water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the city council an approved backflow
prevention assembly is required (at the customer's water service connection or
within the customer's private water system) for the safety of the water system,
the water superintendent shall give notice in writing to said customer to
install such an approved backflow prevention assembly at a specific location on
his premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly at
the customer's own expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the part of
the customer to install, have tested and maintain said assembly shall
constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such
requirements have been satisfactorily met. (Ord. 90-17, 12-13-1990)
7-2-4: WATER SERVICE CONNECTION:
No water service connection to any premises, including an auxiliary water
supply connection, shall be installed or maintained by the water superintendent
unless the water supply is protected as required by state and local laws,
regulations, codes and this chapter. (Ord. 90-17, 12-13-1990)
7-2-5: CROSS CONNECTION PREVENTION:
   A.   The building inspector, in reviewing building plans and inspecting
plumbing as it is installed, shall prevent cross connections from being
designed and built. Where the review of building plans suggests or detects the
potential for a cross connection being made an integral part of the plumbing
system, the building inspector shall require such cross connections be either
eliminated or provided with an approved backflow prevention assembly in
accordance with the applicable codes.
   B.   The building inspector's authority to review and specify shall begin at
the point of service (the downstream side of the meter) and carry throughout
the entire length of the customer's water system. The building inspector shall
inquire about the intended use of water at any point where it is suspected that
a cross connection might be made or where one is actually called for by the
plans. When such a cross connection is discovered, it shall be mandatory that a
suitable, approved backflow prevention assembly be required by the plans and be
properly installed, in accordance with the applicable codes. (Ord. 90-17, 12-
13-1990)
7-2-6: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   Installation: Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly
shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system, at or
near the property line or immediately inside the building being served. In all
cases, the assembly shall be installed before the first branch line leading off
the service line.
   B.   Specifications: Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in
water supply lines to provide at least the degree of protection stipulated in
the international residential code, or replacements thereof. All backflow
prevention assemblies shall be exposed for easy observation and be readily
accessible.
   C.   Maintenance: It is the responsibility of the person or persons
(including owners and lessees) having control of backflow prevention assemblies
installed in a potable water supply system for protection against backflow to
assure that such assemblies are maintained in good working condition. Upon
inspection, any assembly found to be defective or inoperative shall be replaced
or repaired. No assembly shall be removed from use, relocated or substituted
without the approval of the water superintendent.
   D.   Testing:
      1.   Only certified backflow assembly technicians shall do the testing,
maintenance and/or repair of backflow prevention assemblies. The certified
technician shall tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced
pressure backflow assembly and air gap, showing the serial number of the
assembly, date tested and by whom. The technician's license number shall also
be on this tag. Tests are made according to the regulations set forth by the
state department of health, bureau of drinking water/sanitation.
      2.   A technician making any test shall report the results of that test
to the customer, the water superintendent and the bureau of drinking water/
sanitation. If such a commercially tested assembly is in need of repair, a
licensed plumber shall make the actual repair.
      3.   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be inspected and tested at
least once per year at the expense of the owner, lessee or user of the
premises. In those instances where the water superintendent deems the hazard to
be great, he may require certified inspections and tests at a more frequent
interval. These inspections and tests shall be performed by a certified
backflow assembly technician.
      4.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten (10)
working days of initial installation.
      5.   No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so as to create a
safety hazard or in violation of any plumbing, building or other codes.
   E.   Nonconforming Backflow Prevention Assemblies: All presently installed
backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this
chapter but were approved assemblies for the purposes described herein at the
time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for
the inspection and maintenance requirements under this chapter, be excluded
from the requirements of these rules if the water superintendent determines
they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. The unit shall be
replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements
of this chapter whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present
location or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the water
superintendent finds that the maintenance of this assembly constitutes a hazard
to health. (Ord. 90-17, 12-13-1990)
7-2-7: WATER SYSTEM INSPECTION:
The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to
the water superintendent to determine whether cross connections or other
structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this chapter, exist.
When such a condition becomes known, the water superintendent shall deny or
immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical break
in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition in
conformance with state and city statutes relating to plumbing, water supplies
and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 90-17, 12-13-1990)
7-2-8: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water
superintendent if any violation of this chapter is suspected, or if a backflow
prevention assembly required by this chapter for control of backflow and cross
connections is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a
backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected
cross connection exists on the premises. Service shall not be restored until
such conditions or defects are corrected. (Ord. 90-17, 12-13-1990)
7-2-9: ENFORCEMENT:
The water superintendent is vested with the authority and responsibility for
the implementation of an effective cross connection control or cross connection
containment program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 90-17, 12-13-1990)
CHAPTER 3
IRRIGATION WATER
SECTION:
7-3-1: Irrigation Water Use
7-3-2: Irrigation Water Share Fee
7-3-1: IRRIGATION WATER USE:
   A.   Use By Nonmembers: It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a
member of an irrigation district to use irrigation water unless that person has
received express permission from the city or its designated representatives.
   B.   Members Unauthorized Use: It shall be unlawful for members of an
irrigation district to use irrigation water at times other than their
designated watering turns unless said person has received express permission
from the city or its designated representatives.
   C.   Operation Of Main Irrigation Valve: It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate any main irrigation valve located within corporate limits of the
city without the express written approval from the city or its designated
representatives. For the purposes of this section, a "main irrigation valve" is
defined as any valve which directs the flow of irrigation water through the
distribution system. A valve located at a residence or at the entrance to
private property shall not be defined as a main irrigation valve for the
purposes of this chapter.
   D.   Tampering: It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, damage
or harm in any way a main irrigation valve used in conjunction with an
irrigation water distribution system.
   E.   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 86-28, 9-24-1986, eff. 9-24-1986; amd. 2007 Code)
7-3-2: IRRIGATION WATER SHARE FEE:
   A.   Fee per share, per annum, sixty dollars ($60.00).
   B.   Minimum fee to be collected for any portion of a share, up to and
including one-half (1/2) share per annum, thirty dollars ($30.00).
   C.   Any portion of a share, less than one-half (1/2) share, will be
charged, in all instances, at a one-half (1/2) share rate of thirty dollars
($30.00) per annum.
   D.   In no instance will the fee be levied other than in applicable
multiples of thirty dollars ($30.00) per annum as is defined in subsections A
through C of this section.
   E.   Annually paid fees shall become due and payable on July 15, 1996, and
on the same day each succeeding year thereafter.
   F.   Annually paid fees shall become delinquent on and after August 15
following the annual due date and will be assessed a late charge of ten percent
(10%). (Res. 96-14, 6-26-1996)
CHAPTER 4
SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Sewer Department And System
7-4-2: Nonowner Applicants
7-4-3: Rates And Fees; Delinquency
7-4-4: Use Of System Mandatory
7-4-5: Regulations And Requirements
7-4-6: Prohibited Uses
7-4-7: Ownership Of Connecting Lines
7-4-8: Extension Of Mains
7-4-1: SEWER DEPARTMENT AND SYSTEM:
   A.   Created: The sewer department is hereby created. It shall comprise all
of the property, equipment and personnel necessary to the maintenance and
operation of the city sewage collection and disposal system. The department
shall administer the operation and maintenance of the city sewer system. (1989
Code § 14-211)
   B.   Superintendent: The director of the department of public works shall be
designated as the superintendent of the sewer department. (1989 Code § 14-212)
   C.   Duties Of Superintendent: The superintendent of the sewer department
shall manage and supervise the city sewer system under the general supervision
of the city manager and in accordance with city policies and procedures. (1989
Code § 14-213)
   D.   City Engineer: The person appointed by the municipality to be the
municipal engineer or the person designated to act for and in behalf of the
city. (2007 Code)
7-4-2: NONOWNER APPLICANTS:
Application for sewer service must be made by the tenant desiring service on
forms provided by the city. The monthly sewer bill for said service will be
automatically mailed to the owner of the premises or his duly authorized agent;
however, the owner may choose to have the monthly bill sent directly to the
tenant, in which case the owner shall sign a statement guaranteeing payment of
said bill. The statement shall be in substantially the following form:
In consideration of the acceptance of the application for sewer service
submitted by (tenant), I or we will pay for all sewer services for any such
tenant or any other occupant of                   premises in case such tenant
or occupant shall fail to pay for the same according to the ordinances, rules,
regulations or resolutions enacted by the city.
Dated this            day of           ,           .
Owner
   (1989 Code § 14-215)
7-4-3: RATES AND FEES; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Rates And Connection Fees: The rates, penalty fee for delinquency in
payment and connection fees for sewer services from the city sewer system shall
be fixed from time to time by resolution or ordinance of the governing body.
The governing body may from time to time enact rules for levying, billing,
guaranteeing and collection charges for sewer services and all other rules
necessary for the management and control of the sewer system. All connections
to the city sewer system shall be classified as residential or as commercial.
Each residential connection shall be billed a minimum of one equivalent
residential unit (ERU). Each commercial connection shall be billed based upon a
determined number of ERUs. ERUs shall be based upon metered water usage for
interior use during the months of December, January and February. One ERU is
equivalent to six thousand (6,000) gallons per month. Connection shall be
reviewed annually and ERUs and rates adjusted as required to assure adequate
revenue to cover cost incurred. (Ord. 99-16, 6-9-1999; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Special Rates: The governing body may from time to time fix by
agreement or resolution special rates and conditions upon such terms as they
may deem proper for users of the sewer service discharging wastes of unusual
characteristics or making use thereof under exceptional circumstances. (1989
Code § 14-217)
   C.   Board Of Equalization For Sewer Rates: The governing body is hereby
constituted a board of equalization of sewer rates to hear complaints and make
corrections of any assessments or charges deemed to be illegal, unequal or
unjust. (1989 Code § 14-218)
   D.   Delinquency; Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   The utility billing department, or such other persons as the
governing body may designate, shall furnish to each user or mail or leave at
his place or residence or usual place of business, a written or printed
statement stating the sewer service charges assessed against him once each
month or at such other regular intervals as the governing body shall direct.
The statement shall specify the amount of the bill, the place of payment and
the date due. (Ord. 99-3, 2-10-1999; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   If any person fails to pay his sewer charges within thirty (30) days
of the date due, the city recorder or the sewer superintendent shall give the
customer notice in writing of the intent to discontinue the service of water to
the premises unless the customer pays the bill in full within five (5) days
from the date of notice.
      3.   If the water service is thereafter discontinued for failure to make
payment of the sewer service charges, before the water service to the premises
shall again be provided, all delinquent sewer charges must have been paid to
the city treasurer or arrangements made for their payment that are satisfactory
to the city.
      4.   In the event water is turned off for nonpayment of sewer charges,
before the water service to the premises shall again be provided, the customer
shall pay, in addition to all delinquent and interest charges, such extra
charge for turning the water on and off as the governing body may have
established by resolution or ordinance.
      5.   If any person fails to pay his sewer charges within thirty (30) days
of the due date, the city recorder or the sewer supervisor is hereby authorized
to take all action necessary to enforce collection, including, but not limited
to, the commencement of legal proceedings in a court of proper jurisdiction
seeking judgment for the amount of the delinquent fees, service charges,
interest charges, and all costs of collection, including court costs and
attorney fees. (Ord. 99-3, 2-10-1999)
   E.   Sewer Inspection Fees:
      1.   The following sewer inspection fee schedule is hereby imposed:
 
Lateral Size  Inspection Fee
 
4 inches      $150.00
6 inches      200.00
Over 6 inches 250.00
 
      2.   The inspection fee is payable when a building permit is obtained, or
when an existing structure is connected to the city wastewater system. The
inspection fee is only payable if the property is, or can be, served by the
city wastewater system. (Ord. 2000-5, 4-26-2000)
   F.   Capping Fee For Demolished Or Moved Buildings: In the case of building
being demolished or moved, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged for
capping sewer line. Any additional costs incurred by the city as the result of
above mentioned demolition or relocation, shall be assessed to the property
owner at cost. (1989 Code § 14-241)
7-4-4: USE OF SYSTEM MANDATORY:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person occupying or having
charge of any premises within the city which is located within three hundred
feet (300') of a sewer main to dispose of sewage therefrom by any means other
than by use of the city sewer system. It shall be unlawful to construct or to
continue the use of any other sewage disposal system such as a privy vault,
cesspool or septic tank on the property except by written approval of the
governing body in cases of undue hardship. (1989 Code § 14-220)
7-4-5: REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Qualified Plumbing Necessary: It shall be unlawful for any person to
connect any drain or sewer pipe with the city sewer system unless the person is
a duly licensed plumber or unless, in the absence of a duly licensed plumber,
any proposed connection to, alteration of, or change of connection to the sewer
system shall be first submitted to the sewer superintendent for review and
approval. After such approval, the installation or work done shall be subject
to inspection by the superintendent or his agent. (1989 Code § 14-221)
   B.   Permits For Installations:
      1.   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to directly or
indirectly engage in the laying, repairing, altering or connecting of any drain
or sewer pipe connected with or part of the city sewer system without first
having received a permit from the office of the city recorder or the sewer
superintendent. (1989 Code § 14-222)
      2.   When Permits Shall Not Be Issued: Permits to connect to the city
sewer system shall not be issued unless the plumbing in the house or building
to be connected is in accordance with the provisions of the building and
plumbing codes of the city. (1989 Code § 14-223)
      3.   Revocation Of Permit: All construction permits for sewer connections
or installations shall be issued to the plumber who is to do the work or to the
owner of the property, subject to the supervision and inspection by the
superintendent or his agents. The city recorder or superintendent may at any
time revoke a permit because of defective work or because of undue delay in
completing the permitted work. (1989 Code § 14-224)
   C.   Pipes To Be Kept In Good Repair: All users of the sewer services shall
keep their service pipes, connections and other apparatus in good repair and
protected from frost at their own expense. No person, except under the
direction of the sewer superintendent, shall be allowed to dig into the street
for the purpose of removing or repairing any sewer service pipe or main. (1989
Code § 14-225)
   D.   Quality Of Service Pipe: All service and other pipes used in
conjunction with the sewer services of the city shall be of such material,
quality and specifications as the governing body may from time to time by
resolution provide and shall be installed at such distances belowground as may
be specified by regulations relating to the sewer department. All work,
alterations or extensions affecting sewer pipes shall be subject to the
acceptance of the sewer superintendent, and no connections with sewer mains
shall be made without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city recorder.
(1989 Code § 14-226)
   E.   Department To Have Free Access: The sewer superintendent and his agents
shall at all ordinary hours have free access to places supplied with sewer
services from the city system for the purpose of examining the apparatus,
ascertaining the sewer service being used and the manner of its use. (1989 Code
§ 14-227)
   F.   Trial Sewer Survey: In order to determine the feasibility of connecting
a basement or proposed basement to the sanitary sewer, the owner or plumber may
make application for a trial sewer survey, the cost of which shall be as
established from time to time by resolution of the governing body. The result
of a trial sewer survey shall not constitute a permit to connect to the sewer
and is merely for information purposes. (1989 Code § 14-228)
   G.   Sewer Manholes: It shall be unlawful for any person to open any sewer
manhole without permission from the superintendent. (1989 Code § 14-234)
   H.   Destruction: It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface,
injure or interfere with the operation of any part or appurtenance of the sewer
system. (1989 Code § 14-235)
   I.   Power To Adopt Regulations: The governing body shall have the power to
and retains the right to adopt regulations controlling the manner and
circumstances under which the sewer system may be used, in addition to the
regulatory provisions set forth expressly in this chapter. (1989 Code § 14-232)
7-4-6: PROHIBITED USES:
   A.   Inflammables: It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, break or
remove any part or portion of any sewer appliance or appurtenance, or to
discharge into a sewer any inflammable gas, gasoline or oil, any calcium
carbide or residue therefrom, or any liquid or other materials or substance
which will emit an inflammable gas when in contact with water, sewage or fire.
Oil separators installed in any building where volatile fluids are used must
not be connected directly or indirectly with a sewer.
   B.   Waste Pipes From Enumerated Establishments: The contents of waste pipes
from water filters, gas engines, air compressors, vacuum or dry cleaners,
garages, wash racks, stores or warehouses containing inflammable substances,
car barns, buildings for the stabling or keeping of horses, cows and other
animals, or plants using milk or processing milk products and all similar
establishments shall not be disposed of through connection with a sanitary
sewer unless such contents are discharged into settling tanks properly trapped
and vented. The construction of such tanks must be approved by the city
engineer, and must be subject to his inspection, approval or condemnation
before cement is poured and at all times thereafter until completion of such
construction. Upon condemnation by the city engineer, the sewage from the tanks
shall not be allowed to flow into the sewer until satisfactory alterations have
been made and the construction approved by the city engineer.
   C.   Obstructive Material: It shall be unlawful for any person to empty or
discharge into the public sanitary sewer any garbage, refuse or other similar
matter or substance likely to obstruct the sewer, or any substance, solid or
liquid other than the waste products for which the sewer is provided. (Ord. 99-
3, 2-10-1999)
   D.   Drainage Waters And Destructive Materials: It shall be unlawful for any
person to connect with a public sanitary sewer any drain or pipe which
discharges rain, water, cellar or surface water, acids, alkalies, lye or other
injurious liquids, or the contents of any spring, flowing well, creek, ditch,
or other watercourse. No boiler or heating plant shall be directly connected to
the sanitary sewer. The overflow from boilers or heating plants when cooled to
a temperature not to exceed one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F), will
be allowed to run to a sump, which sump shall be connected to the sewer. The
discharge of the contents of waste pipes from water filters, gas engines, air
compressors, vacuum or dry cleaners, garages, wash racks, stores or warehouses
which contain inflammable substances, buildings for the stabling or keeping of
horses, cows and other animals, and all similar establishments, shall not be
made into or connected with a sanitary sewer, unless such contents are
discharged into settling tanks properly trapped and vented. Settling tanks
shall be constructed of a material approved by the city engineer and shall be
at all times subject to his inspection and approval or condemnation. Upon
condemnation by the city engineer, the sewage from said tanks shall not be
allowed to flow into sewer until satisfactory alterations have been made and
the construction approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 99-3, 2-10-1999; amd.
2007 Code)
   E.   Pretreatment Regulations: All discharges into the sewer system must
meet all pretreatment requirements of chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-3, 2-
10-1999)
7-4-7: OWNERSHIP OF CONNECTING LINES:
Unless provision is expressly made for ownership of mains or lines by the owner
of the adjacent property by means of written agreement, all lines and mains
connecting the sewer system to a landowner or resident's premises which are
situated on the public way between the main and the property line shall be
deemed to be the property of the city and subject to its absolute control and
supervision even though actual installation may have been performed by the
owner or resident of the premises. (1989 Code § 14-233)
7-4-8: EXTENSION OF MAINS:
   A.   Application: Any person or persons, including any subdivider, who
desires to have the sewer mains extended within the city, and is willing to
advance the whole expense of such extension and receive the return of an agreed
portion thereof, as hereinafter provided, may make application to the governing
body by petition. The petition shall contain a description of such proposed
extension, accompanied by a map showing the location of the proposed extension,
together with an offer to advance the whole expense thereof, which cost shall
be verified by the sewer superintendent. The governing body may grant or deny
the petition as in its discretion deems best for the welfare of existing sewer
users in the city. (1989 Code § 14-236)
   B.   Cost Of Extension Determined: Upon the receipt of such petition and map
and before the petition is granted, the governing body shall obtain from the
sewer superintendent a certified statement showing the whole cost of expense of
making such extension. (1989 Code § 14-237)
   C.   Amount Of Cost Deposited: If the governing body grants the petition,
the amount of the cost of making the extension, as certified by the
superintendent, shall be deposited with the city recorder before any work shall
be done on such extension. The deposit shall be made within thirty (30) days,
or such other time as the governing body shall indicate, after the granting
thereof. (1989 Code § 14-238)
   D.   Return Of Money; Forfeiture:
      1.   At the time the governing body decides whether or not to grant the
petition for an extension, it shall also decide whether or not any portion of
the costs is to be refunded and the manner and circumstances under which such
refund shall be made or credited to the applicant, his successors or
representatives. Such determination shall be duly recorded in writing and a
copy thereof furnished to the applicant.
      2.   In the event any deposit remains unclaimed for a period of five (5)
years after the depositor has discontinued water service, the deposit may be
forfeited and then transferred to the sewer utility fund. (1989 Code § 14-239)
   E.   Ownership Of Extension: Any such extension shall be deemed the property
of the city. (1989 Code § 14-240)
CHAPTER 5
WASTEWATER/PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-5-1: General Provisions
7-5-1-1: Purpose And Policy
7-5-1-2: Administration
7-5-1-3: Abbreviations
7-5-1-4: Definitions
7-5-2: General Sewer Use Requirements
7-5-2-1: Prohibited Discharge Standards
7-5-2-2: National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
7-5-2-3: State Pretreatment Standards
7-5-2-4: Local Limits
7-5-2-5: SGRWRF’s Right Of Revision
7-5-2-6: Dilution Prohibition
7-5-2-7: Wastewater System
7-5-3: Pretreatment Of Wastewater
7-5-3-1: Pretreatment Facilities
7-5-3-2: Additional Pretreatment Measures
7-5-3-3: Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plans
7-5-3-4: Hauled Wastewater
7-5-4: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits
7-5-4-1: Wastewater Analysis
7-5-4-2: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements
7-5-4-3: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections
7-5-4-4: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections
7-5-4-5: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
7-5-4-6: Application Signatories and Certifications
7-5-4-7: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
7-5-5: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
7-5-5-1: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
7-5-5-2: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
7-5-5-3: Permit Appeals
7-5-5-4: Permit Modifications
7-5-5-5: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
7-5-5-6: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
7-5-5-7: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
7-5-5-8: Regulation Of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions
7-5-6: Reporting Requirements
7-5-6-1: Baseline Monitoring Reports
7-5-6-2: Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
7-5-6-3: Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline
7-5-6-4: Periodic Compliance Reports
7-5-6-5: Reports Of Changed Conditions
7-5-6-6: Reports Of Potential Problems
7-5-6-7: Reports From Unpermitted Users
7-5-6-8: Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting
7-5-6-9: Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste
7-5-6-10: Analytical Requirements
7-5-6-11: Sample Collection
7-5-6-12: Date Of Receipt Of Reports
7-5-6-13: Recordkeeping
7-5-6-14: Certification Statements
7-5-7: Compliance Monitoring
7-5-7-1: Right Of Entry: Inspection And Sampling
7-5-7-2: Search Warrants
7-5-8: Confidential Information
7-5-9: Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
7-5-10: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
7-5-10-1: Notification Of Violation
7-5-10-2: Consent Orders
7-5-10-3: Show Cause Hearing
7-5-10-4: Compliance Orders
7-5-10-5: Cease And Desist Orders
7-5-10-6: Administrative Fines
7-5-10-7: Emergency Suspensions
7-5-10-8: Termination Of Discharge
7-5-11: Judicial Enforcement Remedies
7-5-11-1: Injunctive Relief
7-5-11-2: Civil Penalties
7-5-11-3: Criminal Prosecution
7-5-11-4: Remedies Nonexclusive
7-5-12: Supplemental Enforcement Action
7-5-12-1: Performance Bonds
7-5-12-2: Liability Insurance
7-5-12-3: Water Supply Severance
7-5-12-4: Public Nuisances
7-5-13: Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
7-5-13-1: Upset
7-5-13-2: Bypass
7-5-14: Fats, Oils, Grease, And Soil (FOGS) Control
7-5-14-1: General
7-5-14-2: Definitions
7-5-14-3: Interceptor And Trap Installation Specifications
7-5-14-4: General FOGS Waste Discharge Limits And Requirements
7-5-14-5: Kitchen Best Management Practices (BMP) Requirements
7-5-14-6: Interceptor Operation And Maintenance Requirements
7-5-14-7: Grease Trap Operation And Maintenance Requirements
7-5-14-8: Notification Requirements
7-5-14-9: Record-Keeping Requirements
7-5-14-10: Inspections And Sampling
7-5-15: Miscellaneous Provisions
7-5-15-1: Pretreatment Charges And Fees
7-5-15-2: Severability
7-5-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
7-5-1-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for Users of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works for the St. George Regional Water Reclamation Facility and
enables Washington City (as well as the City of St. George) to comply with all
applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United
States Code [U.S.C.] section 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 403), and
the Utah Administrative Code R317-8-8. This chapter shall apply to all Users of
the Publicly Owned Treatment Works. This chapter authorizes the issuance of
individual wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and
enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires
User reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. The
objectives of this chapter are:
   A.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will interfere with its operation or contaminate the
resulting sludge;
   B.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned Treatment Works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, the atmosphere, or otherwise be
incompatible with the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
   C.   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations found in 40 CFR Part 503;
   D.   To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment, and the
general public;
   E.   To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and sludge from the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
   F.   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
and
   G.   To enable SGRWRF to comply with its Utah Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and
any other Federal or State laws to which the Publicly Owned Treatment Works is
subject. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-1-2: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the St. George Wastewater Division Manager
(hereinafter “Manager”) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Manager may
be delegated by the Manager to a duly authorized St. George Regional Water
Reclamation Facility employee. To the extent that provisions of this chapter
pertain to Washington City’s system including the responsibility of this
chapter’s “Administration”, the Washington City Public Works Director (as
applicable, hereinafter “Manager”), or his/her delegated personnel, shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. And as
applicable pursuant to the intent of this chapter and in compliance with the
referenced-applicable State and Federal laws, administration of this chapter
may be undertaken by either or both the St. George Wastewater Division Manager
and the Washington City Public Works Director. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-1-3: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
BMP    Best Management Practice
BMR    Baseline Monitoring Report
BOD    Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR    Code of Federal Regulations
COD    Chemical Oxygen Demand
DWQ    State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Water
       Quality
EPA    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
FOG    Fats, Oils and Grease
FOGS   Fats, Oils, Grease and Soil
gpd    gallons per day
IU     Industrial User
mg/L   milligrams per liter
POTW   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIU    Significant Industrial User
SGRWRF St. George Regional Water Reclamation Facility
TSS    Total Suspended Solids
UPDES  Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
U.S.C. United States Code
 
(Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT OR “THE  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended,
ACT”:        33 U.S.C. section 1251 et seq. and any subsequent amendments thereto.
APPROVAL       The State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Water Quality
AUTHORITY:     (DWQ), or its successor agency.
               (1)   If the User is a corporation:
                  a.   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in
               charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar
               policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
                  b.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities,
               provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the
               operation of the regulated facility, and is authorized to sign documents on behalf of
               the corporation in accordance with corporate procedures, and where the manager has the
               duty to:
                     (i)   make major capital investment recommendations;
AUTHORIZED OR        (ii)   initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term
DULY           environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; or
AUTHORIZED           (iii)   ensure that necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
REPRESENTATIVE complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
OF THE USER:   requirements.
               (2)   If the User is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
               proprietor, respectively.
               (3)   If the User is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or
               highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
               the activities of the government facility, or its designee.
               (4)   The individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 3, above, may designate a Duly
               Authorized Representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization
               specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the
               facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
               environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
               the Manager.
               The schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and
BEST           other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section
MANAGEMENT     7-5-2.1A and B. BMPs include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating
PRACTICES OR   procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage, leaks, sludge, waste
BMP:           disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs may be developed by the
               Pretreatment Program as a local limit to control discharges from SIU as needed.
BIOCHEMICAL    The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
OXYGEN DEMAND  standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually
OR BOD:        expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L).
BYPASS:        The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a User’s treatment
               facility.
CATEGORICAL    Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA, in accordance
PRETREATMENT   with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317), that apply to a
STANDARD OR    specific category of Users, and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
CATEGORICAL    405-471.
STANDARD:
CATEGORICAL    An Industrial User subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard or categorical
INDUSTRIAL     Standard.
USER OR CIU:
CITY:          City means the City of St. George and/or-as applicable pursuant to the intent and
               context of the specific provisions of this chapter-Washington City.
               The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to
COLOR:         distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0)
               optical density.
CHEMICAL       A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic,
OXYGEN DEMAND  in water.
OR COD:
               The samples resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at
COMPOSITE      selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time, to minimize the effect
SAMPLE:        or the variability of the individual samples. This sampling should be in accordance
               with 40 CFR Part 403 Appendix E Subpart I-Composite Method.
CONTROL        The St. George Regional Water Reclamation Facility or SGRWRF.
AUTHORITY:
DAILY MAXIMUM: The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a
               calendar day.
               The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where Daily
DAILY MAXIMUM  Maximum Limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
LIMIT:         discharged over the course of the day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in
               terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of
               the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
ENVIRONMENTAL  The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water
PROTECTION     Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized
AGENCY OR EPA: official of said agency.
EXISTING       Any source of discharge that is not a “New Source.
SOURCE:
GRAB SAMPLE:   A sample that is taken from a wastestream, without regard to the flow in the
               wastestream, and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
HAZARDOUS      Waste as defined in 40 CFR 261.3, incorporated herein and made a part hereof.
WASTE:
INDIRECT       The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source which is
DISCHARGE OR   regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (including septage waste
DISCHARGE:     discharged into the POTW).
               The maximum or minimum concentration (or load) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged
INSTANTANEOUS  at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete, grab or composite sample
LIMIT:         collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling
               event.
               A discharge that alone, or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
               sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its
               sludge processes, use or disposal; therefore, it is a violation of SGRWRF’s UPDES
               permit, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of
               the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more
INTERFERENCE:  stringent State or local regulations, including, but not limited to: 1) Section 405 of
               the Act; 2) the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as
               the RCRA; 3) any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan
               prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; 4) the Clean Air Act;
               5) the Toxic Substances Control Act; and 6) the Marine Protection, Research, and
               Sanctuaries Act.
               Specific discharge limits developed to protect the POTW in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5
               and enforced by SGRWRF upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the
LOCAL LIMIT:   general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in Section
               7-5-2.1.A and B. The technically based local limits and development documents are kept
               on file at the SGRWRF office and can be reviewed if requested.
               The person designated by the City to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is
MANAGER:       charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter. Manager also means a
               Duly Authorized Representative of the Manager.
               Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological
MEDICAL WASTE: wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
               contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY        The sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the
AVERAGE:       number of “daily discharges” measured during that month.
MONTHLY        The highest allowable average of “daily discharges” over a calendar month, calculated
AVERAGE LIMIT: as the sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month, divided by the
               number of “daily discharges” measured during that month.
               (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may
               be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
               publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under section 307(c) of the Act that
               will be applicable to such source if such Standards are thereafter promulgated in
               accordance with that section, provided that:
                  a.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at
               which no other source is located; or
                  b.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process
               or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an Existing Source;
               or
                  c.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure,
               facility, or installation are substantially independent of an Existing Source at the
               same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as
               the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the
               extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
               Existing Source, should be considered.
NEW SOURCE:    (2)   Construction on a site at which an Existing Source is located results in a
               modification rather than a New Source if the construction does not create a new
               building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of Section (1)(b)
               or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
               equipment.
               (3)   Construction of a New Source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the
               owner or operator has:
                  a.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program
                     (i)   any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
                     (ii)   significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or
               removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
               placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
                  b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or
               equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time.
               Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or modified without substantial
               loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute
               a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
NON-CONTACT    Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
COOLING WATER: intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
               A discharge which exits the POTW into Waters of the State in quantities or
PASS THROUGH:  concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
               sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of SGRWRF’s UPDES permit,
               including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
               Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, limited
PERSON:        liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
               entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
               This definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities.
PH:            A measure of the acidity or basicity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
               Any pollutant, including, but not limited to: dredged spoils; solid waste; incinerator
               residue; filter backwash; sewage; garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; medical wastes;
POLLUTANT:     chemical wastes; biological materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or
               discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; municipal, agricultural and industrial
               wastes; and, certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
               turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
               The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
               alteration of the nature of pollutant properties, in wastewater, prior to, or in lieu
PRETREATMENT:  of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be
               obtained by: 1) physical, chemical, or biological processes; 2) process changes; or 3)
               other means. Pretreatment cannot be obtained by diluting the concentration of the
               pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable Pretreatment Standard.
               The person designated by SGRWRF to coordinate the SGRWRF Pretreatment Program, charged
PRETREATMENT   with certain duties and responsibilities under the chapter as directed and delegated by
COORDINATOR:   the Manager. A technically skilled position, the Pretreatment Coordinator, or his or
               her designee, performs surveillance, administrative duties, and related work in
               monitoring compliance, and is a liaison with IUs of the SGRWRF.
PRETREATMENT   Pretreatment Standards shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
STANDARDS OR   promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, which
STANDARDS:     applies to IUs, which includes, but is not limited to, prohibited discharge standards,
               categorical Pretreatment Standards, and Local Limits.
PROHIBITED
DISCHARGE      Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
STANDARDS OR   appear in Section
PROHIBITED     7-5-2.1 of this chapter.
DISCHARGES:
               A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which
               is owned by the SGRWRF. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
PUBLICLY OWNED collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial
TREATMENT      wastes of a liquid nature, and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment
WORKS OR POTW: plant. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if they convey wastewater
               to a POTW. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the
               Act, which has jurisdiction over the Indirect Discharges to, and the discharges from,
               such a treatment works.
SEPTIC TANK    Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and
WASTE:         septic tanks.
SEWAGE:        Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
               Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this Section, a Significant Industrial User is:
               (1)   An Industrial User subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards; or
               (2)   An Industrial User that:
                  a.   Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process
               wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown
               wastewater);
                  b.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of
SIGNIFICANT    the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
INDUSTRIAL        c.   Is designated as such by SGRWRF on the basis that it has a reasonable potential
USER (SIU):    for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation, or for violating any Pretreatment
               Standard or Requirement.
               (3)   Upon a finding that a User meeting the criteria in Subsection (2) of this part
               has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation, or for
               violating any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, SGRWRF may at any time, on its own
               initiative, or in response to a petition received from an Industrial User, and in
               accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such User should not
               be considered a Significant Industrial User.
               Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the
SLUG LOAD OR   prohibited discharge standards in Section
SLUG           7-5-2.1 of this chapter. A Slug Discharge is any Discharge of a non-routine, episodic
DISCHARGE:     nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
               Discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass Through, or
               in any other way violates the POTW’s regulations, Local Limits or Permit conditions.
STORM WATER:   Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting
               from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
TOTAL
SUSPENDED
SOLIDS, OR     The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
TSS, OR        wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
SUSPENDED
SOLIDS:
               Any exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance
               with categorical Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
UPSET:         control of the User. Upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
               operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
               facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER, OR
INDUSTRIAL     A source of indirect discharge.
USER, OR IU:
               Liquid and water-carried industrial waste and sewage from residential dwellings,
WASTEWATER:    commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions,
               whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER
TREATMENT      The portion of the POTW, which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
PLANT OR       industrial waste.
TREATMENT
PLANT:
               All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water-courses, waterways, wells, springs,
               irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
               surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
WATERS OF THE  within, flow through, or border upon this state or any portion thereof. Waters of the
STATE:         State does not include bodies of water confined to, and retained within, the limits of
               private property, and which do not develop into or constitute a nuisance, or a public
               health hazard, or a menace to fish and wildlife. (See, Section 19-5-102 of the Utah
               Code). (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
 
7-5-2: GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS:
7-5-2-1: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
   A.   General Prohibitions. No User shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes Pass Through or
Interference. These general prohibitions apply to all Users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other
National, State, or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements.
   B.   Specific Prohibitions. No User shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      1.   Pollutants which will create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140° F (60° C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      2.   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW,
including, but not limited to, Discharges with a pH lower than 5.0, unless the
works is specifically designed to accommodate such Discharges;
      3.   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW,
including, but not limited to, Discharges with a pH greater than 12.0;
      4.   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in Interference;
      5.   Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which
will cause Interference with the POTW;
      6.   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 140° F (60° C), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the SGRWRF resulting in Interference,
but in no case in such quantities that cause the temperature at the SGRWRF
headworks to exceed 104° F (40° C);
      7.   Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause Interference or Pass Through;
      8.   Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, exceeding 100 mg/L;
      9.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety
problems;
      10.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW, see Section
7-5-3.4 of this chapter;
      11.   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or prevent entry into
the sewers for maintenance or repair;
      12.   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent, thereby violating SGRWRF’s UPDES permit;
      13.   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except
in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
      14.   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, Non-contact Cooling Water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Manager;
      15.   Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      16.   Any Discharge of medical waste that causes or contributes to Pass
Through or Interference:
      17.   Any wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail toxicity test; or
      18.   Any waste containing detergents, surface-active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
   C.   Discharge. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this
Section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-2-2: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, specifying quantities or
concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to
a POTW by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial
subcategories, have been established by EPA in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
Parts 405-471 and are hereby incorporated.
   B.   Users must comply with categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   C.   When wastewater subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same Standard, the Manager shall impose an
alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e). (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-2-3: STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
State of Utah Pretreatment standards, established by the Utah Administrative
Code R317-8-8, are hereby incorporated. Any User subject to a state
pretreatment standard is required to comply with the applicable standard. (Ord.
2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-2-4: LOCAL LIMITS:
   A.   The Manager is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
   B.   Local limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to
the POTW. All limits set for metallic substances are for total metal unless
indicated otherwise. The Manager may impose mass limitations in addition to the
concentration-based limitations. The development documents for local limits are
kept at SGRWRF offices and may be reviewed upon request.
   C.   The Manager may develop Best Management Practices (“BMPs”), by chapter,
or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and
the requirements of Section
7-5-2.1.
   D.   No User shall discharge pollutants in excess of the local limits
established by the Manager. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-2-5: SGRWRF’S RIGHT OF REVISION:
The SGRWRF reserves the right to establish, by chapter, or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent Standards or Requirements on
discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter. In
addition, the Manager is authorized to temporarily or permanently revoke or
suspend issuance of any type of permit at any time, in order to protect the
POTW from Pass Through or Interference, or in order to maintain compliance with
any UPDES permit requirement or pretreatment program requirement. The Manager
shall also have the right to deny new or increased contributions, or to set
additional conditions on such contributions, to protect the POTW, including
limits that may be more stringent than the approved local limits. (Ord. 2018-
27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-2-6: DILUTION PROHIBITION:
No User shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment,
to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized
by an applicable Pretreatment Standard or Requirement. The Manager may impose
mass limitations on Users who are using dilution to meet applicable
Pretreatment Standards or Requirements, or in any other case when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-2-7: WASTEWATER SYSTEM:
   A.   Application for Wastewater Service. Any person desiring to secure, or
required to secure, wastewater service, when such service is available from the
city, shall apply to the public works director, or to such other person
designated by the water services director, and shall pay the required fees
before any wastewater connection is approved. By applying for a wastewater
connection, such person agrees to be bound by this chapter and all applicable
policies and regulations pertaining to the city POTW.
   B.   Mandatory Use Of Wastewater System:
      1.   Residential:
         a.   Residential Subdivisions. Residential subdivision developments
are subject to city policy regarding use of, and connection to, the POTW, as
well as this chapter.
         b.   Residential Dwelling Unit. It is mandatory that any residential
dwelling unit shall be connected to the wastewater system at the expense of the
owner or occupant thereof.
            (1)   The sole exception shall be for single residential lot not
within a platted subdivision where said lot is one acre or greater in size. In
such case, a private wastewater disposal system may be utilized if a delay
improvement agreement is approved and executed with the city, and easements are
provided where required. Before commencement of construction of any private
wastewater disposal system, the property owner or person seeking to install a
private wastewater system shall submit plans, specifications, and other
information deemed necessary to the Utah Department of Health, and obtain a
written permit from it for installation thereof. The type, capacity, location,
and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all
requirements of the Utah Department of Health. The owner of a private
wastewater disposal system shall at all times operate and maintain the same in
a sanitary manner and at no expense to the city.
            (2)   When in the discretion of the wastewater manager, a private
wastewater disposal system ceases to operate effectively or creates a
sanitation hazard, direct connection to the public wastewater system may be
required by the Manager, in which case the private wastewater disposal system
shall be closed and its facilities disconnected and properly decommissioned.
      2.   Commercial, Industrial, and Other Buildings: It is mandatory that
all commercial, industrial, and other buildings with wastewater service be
connected to the public wastewater system. Private wastewater disposal systems
shall not be allowed.
      3.   In addition to other available enforcement actions, the city may
enforce the wastewater connection requirements imposed in this section by
disconnecting or refusing to supply the culinary water servicing the premises
until proper connection to the wastewater system has been made.
   C.   Ownership Of Connecting Lines: Unless provision is expressly made
otherwise for ownership of laterals or lines by the owner of the adjacent
property through a written agreement, all lines and laterals connecting the
city POTW to a landowner or user’s premises shall be deemed to be the property
of the landowner/user, and all operation and maintenance shall be at the
landowner’s/user’s expense. The city shall not be liable for blockage or flow
interference in laterals or connecting lines before they connect to the city
wastewater line.
   D.   POTW Connections: Connection to, or extension of, the city wastewater
main for use by a user shall be the sole responsibility of the user. Acceptance
of any wastewater facility by the city for public use and maintenance shall not
occur until such facility has been inspected and approved for compliance with
all city, state, and federal requirements.
   E.   Inspection Of POTW Connections: Any connection to, extension of, or
modification of, the wastewater system shall be under the direction of the
public works director, and inspection of such shall be made by the appropriate
inspector after installation in every case. No backfilling shall be done until
the inspection is made, and the work accepted. In the event of an installation,
repair, or alteration, where no building permit is required, there shall be no
connection, directly or indirectly, with the wastewater system without
notification to, and approval in advance from, the water services director or
his designated representative, as well as the inspection after installation
required above. A reasonable inspection fee shall be paid for any inspection
made under this subsection.
   F.   Quality Of Installations And Maintenance: All wastewater mains,
manholes, service laterals and other materials used in conjunction with the
wastewater system shall be of such quality and specifications as required by
the “WASHINGTON CITY STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION”, as
last revised. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any drain or
service line to the POTW system unless such person is a contractor properly
licensed by the state. After installation, all private service pipes,
connections and other apparatus shall be maintained in good repair at the
user’s expense. No person shall be allowed to dig into the street for purposes
of installing, repairing or maintaining any service pipes, connections or other
apparatus except under the direction of the public works director or his
designated personnel who shall at all reasonable times have free access to
drains and wastewater lines connecting with the wastewater system for the
purpose of examination and inspection. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-3: PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER:
7-5-3-1: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter, and shall achieve compliance with all categorical Pretreatment
Standards, Local Limits, and the prohibitions set out in Section
7-5-2.1 of this chapter, within the time limitations specified by EPA, the
State, or the Manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary
for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the User’s
expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the Manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the
Manager before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the User from the responsibility
of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to
SGRWRF under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-3-2: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
   A.   Whenever deemed necessary, SGRWRF may require Users to restrict their
discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and
such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW, and determine
the User’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The Manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to install
and maintain, on their property, and at their expense, a suitable storage and
flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   C.   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors, such as described by the
International Plumbing Code, shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
excessive amounts of liquid waste, floatable grease, oil, or sand; except, such
interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Manager, and shall be
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection, and away from
building entrances and exits. Such interceptors shall be cleaned, repaired, and
maintained by the User at its expense.
   D.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   E.   Sampling manholes shall be located in an area to allow for ease of
cleaning, sampling and inspection by the User and SGRWRF. If located in a
parking area, parking shall not be allowed on or over the sampling manhole.
(Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-3-3: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an
accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan, or other actions to control
Slug Discharges. The Pretreatment Coordinator may require any User to develop,
submit for approval, and implement, such a plan, or take such other action that
may be necessary to control Slug Discharges. An accidental discharge/slug
discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
   A.   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
   B.   List and description of stored chemicals;
   C.   Procedures for immediately notifying the Manager of any accidental or
Slug Discharge, as required by Section
7-5-6-6 of this chapter; and
   D.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or Slug
Discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-3-4: HAULED WASTEWATER:
   A.   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Manager and at such times as are established by the Manager.
Such waste shall not violate Section
7-5-2 of this chapter or any other requirements established by SGRWRF. The
Manager may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain individual wastewater
discharge permits.
   B.   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as “industrial septage”
requires prior approval and an individual wastewater discharge permit from the
SGRWRF. The Manager shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such
wastes, if disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operations or
violate Section
7-5-2 of this chapter. Waste haulers are subject to all other sections of this
chapter.
   C.   Waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This
form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler,
truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-4: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS:
7-5-4-1: WASTEWATER ANALYSIS:
When requested by the Pretreatment Coordinator, a User must submit information
on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of
the request. The Pretreatment Coordinator is authorized to prepare a form for
this purpose, and periodically may require Users to update this information. If
the User changes or adds a process, the User automatically is required to
update the information provided to the Pretreatment Coordinator thirty (30)
days prior to the process being changed or added. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-4-2: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No Significant Industrial User shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the
Manager, except that a Significant Industrial User that has filed a timely
application pursuant to Section
7-5-4.3 of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified
therein, unless the Manager has determined the SIU meets the requirements of 7-
5-1.4.RR (3)
   B.   The Manager may require other Users to obtain individual wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   C.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections
7-5-10 through
7-5-12 of this chapter. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and
State Pretreatment Standards or Requirements, or with any other requirements of
Federal, State, and local law. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-4-3: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING CONNECTIONS:
Any User required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
chapter, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall,
within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the Pretreatment Coordinator
for an individual wastewater discharge permit in accordance with Section
7-5-4-5 of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this
chapter, except in accordance with an individual wastewater discharge permit
issued by the Manager. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-4-4: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW CONNECTIONS:
Any User required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW, shall obtain such
permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for an
individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with Section
7-5-4-5 of this chapter, shall be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the
date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-
2018)
7-5-4-5: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS:
   A.   All Users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall submit a permit application. All permittees that will be continuing to
discharge are required to complete an application 60 days prior to the permit
expiring. The SGRWRF may require Users to submit all or some of the following
information as part of a permit application:
      1.   Identifying Information.
         a.   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
         b.   Contact information for the authorized representative and the
duly authorized representative for the facility, and
         c.   The description of activities, facilities, and plant production
processes on the premises;
      2.   Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      3.   Description of Operations.
         a.   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of
production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such User. This description should include a schematic process
diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes;
         b.   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         c.   Number and type of employees, proposed hours of operation, and
actual hours of operation;
         d.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day); and
         e.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge;
      4.   Time and duration of discharges.
      5.   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit.
      6.   Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in Section
7-5-2-2.C. (40 CFR 403.6(e)).
      7.   Measurement of Pollutants.
         a.   The categorical Pretreatment Standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for Existing
Sources;
         b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the Standard or by the
Pretreatment Coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process;
         c.   Instantaneous, Daily Maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported;
         d.   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section
7-5-6-10 of this chapter. Where the Standard requires compliance with a BMP or
pollution prevention alternative, the User shall submit documentation as
required by the Pretreatment Coordinator, or the applicable Standards to
determine compliance with the Standard; and
         e.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in Section
7-5-6-11 of this chapter.
      8.   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to evaluate the permit application.
   B.   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the User for revision.
   C.   Based on information provided by the permittee as required in 7-5-
4.5.A, the SGRWRF will determine, within 30 days: 1) if additional information
is needed; 2) if a permit is not necessary; or 3) if a permit will be required
to be issued before the IU discharge is allowed to the POTW.
   D.   Should any of the information requested or supplied be considered by
the User to be of a confidential nature, the User should request confidential
status of specific information in accordance with Section
7-5-8 of this chapter. Information regarding sampling and analysis of the
discharge is not considered confidential information. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-
2018)
7-5-4-6: APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS:
   A.   All wastewater discharge permit applications, User reports, and
certification statements shall be signed by an Authorized Representative of the
User, and contain the certification statement required in Section
7-5-6-14.A.
   B.   If the designation of an Authorized Representative is no longer
accurate, because for any reason a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters of the company, a new written
authorization must be submitted to the Pretreatment Coordinator, satisfying the
requirements of this Section, prior to or together with any reports being
signed by an Authorized Representative. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-4-7: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the User and
may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a
complete permit application, the Manager will determine whether to issue an
individual wastewater discharge permit. The Manager may approve, conditionally
approve, or deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-5: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE:
7-5-5-1: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. An
individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five (5) years, at the discretion of the Manager. Each individual wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific effective date and expiration date.
(Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-5-2: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include conditions deemed
reasonably necessary by the Manager to prevent Pass Through or Interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal,
and protect against damage to the POTW.
   A.   Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      1.   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, effective date, and expiration date;
      2.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is non transferable
without prior notification to, and approval from, the SGRWRF, and provisions
for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater
discharge permit;
      3.   Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on
applicable Pretreatment Standards in part 403 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits, State and local
law.
      4.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type, based on Federal, State, and local law.
      5.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of Pretreatment Standards and Requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable Federal, State, and local law.
      6.   Requirements to control Slug Discharge, if determined by the Manager
to be necessary.
      7.   Requirements to report to the Manager any slug discharge.
      8.   Requirements to notify the Manager of changes to the Industrial
User’s discharge 30 days prior to the change. The Manager shall approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the change prior to the User making the change
at the facility that may impact the discharge at the facility to the POTW.
   B.   Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      2.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW;
      3.   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control
plans, or other special conditions, including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
      4.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      5.   The schedule of User charges and fees, for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
      7.   A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable Federal and State Pretreatment Standards, and local standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the individual
wastewater discharge permit: and
      8.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Manager to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-5-3: PERMIT APPEALS:
An interested person or entity, including the Industrial User, may petition the
SGRWRF to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 15 days
of the issuance date.
   A.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review is a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
   B.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge provision objected to, the reason for the objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge
permit.
   C.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit is not stayed
pending the appeal.
   D.   If the SGRWRF fails to act within 15 days of a petition for
reconsideration, it is deemed denied. Denials and decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
   E.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Fifth Judicial District Court in and for Washington County, State of Utah.
(Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-5-4: PERMIT MODIFICATIONS:
The Manager may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   A.   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local Pretreatment
Standards or Requirements;
   B.   To address significant alterations or additions to the User’s
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character, since the time of the
individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   C.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; or
   D.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the POTW, related personnel, receiving waters, or sludge, as follows:
   E.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
   F.   Misrepresentations or intentional or unintentional failure to fully
disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or
in any required reporting;
   G.   Revision of, or a grant of variance from, categorical Pretreatment
Standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
   H.   To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater
discharge permit; or
   I.   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-5-5: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner and/or operator
only if the permittee gives at least 30 days advanced notice to the Manager,
and the Manager approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. Failure to
provide advance notice of such transfer to, and approval from, the Manager,
renders the wastewater discharge permit void on the date of facility transfer.
The notice to the Manager must include a written certification by the new owner
and/or operator which:
   A.   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility’s operations and processes;
   B.    Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
   C.   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit; and
   D.   Acknowledges the conditions of the permit will not change. (Ord. 2018-
27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-5-6: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION
   A.   The Manager may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      1.   Failure to notify the Manager of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      2.   Failure to provide prior notification to the Manager of changed
conditions pursuant to Section
7-5-6-5 of this chapter;
      3.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
      4.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      5.   Falsifying certification statements;
      6.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      7.   Refusing to allow the Manager and/or his or her designee timely
access to the facility premises and/or records;
      8.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      9.   Failure to pay fines;
      10.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      11.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      12.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey, or the wastewater
discharge permit application or reapplication;
      13.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility;
      14.   Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or any terms
of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter; or
      15.   Upon request by the permittee due to a change in ownership, or the
business is moving, or going out of business.
   B.   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a User are void upon the issuance of a
new individual wastewater discharge permit to that User.
   C.   Non-compliant Industrial Users will be notified of the proposed
termination of their wastewater permit, and will be offered the opportunity to
show cause under these standards why the proposed action should not be taken.
However, notwithstanding this or any other provision of this Chapter, the
Manager may in his or her sole discretion, immediately revoke any discharge
permit where the discharge reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to
the health or welfare of persons. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-5-7: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
A User with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application, in accordance with Section
7-5-4-5 of this chapter, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration
of the User’s existing individual wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2018-27,
11-14-2018)
7-5-5-8: REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
   A.   If another municipality, or User located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Manager shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
   B.   Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph A, above, the
Manager shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality:
      1.   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      2.   An inventory of all Users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      3.   Such other information as the Manager may deem necessary.
   C.   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by paragraph A, above, shall
contain the following terms and conditions:
      1.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use
chapter which is at least as stringent as this chapter and Local Limits,
including required Baseline Monitoring Reports (BMRs) which are at least as
stringent as those set out in Section
7-5-2-4 of this chapter. The requirement shall specify that such chapter and
limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City’s
chapter or Local Limits;
      2.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
User inventory on at least an annual basis;
      3.   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities,
including individual wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection,
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by: a) the contributing
municipality; b) the Manager; and c) jointly by the contributing municipality
and the Manager;
      4.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      5.   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality’s
discharge as it pertains to pretreatment;
      7.   A provision ensuring the Manager or his or her designee access to
the facilities of Users located within the contributing municipality’s
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Manager; and
      8.   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the intermunicipal agreement. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
7-5-6-1: BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
   A.   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of
a categorical Pretreatment Standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
Categorical Industrial Users currently discharging to, or scheduled to
discharge to, the POTW shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator a report
which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. At least ninety
(90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, New Sources, and sources
that become Categorical Industrial Users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical Standard, shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator a
report which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. A New
Source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical Standards. A New Source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   B.   Users described above shall submit the following information:
      1.   All information required in Section
7-5-4-5.
      2.   Measurement of pollutants.
         a.   The User shall provide the information required in Section
7-5-4-5.A.7.a. through e.;
         b.   The User shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph;
         c.   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment facility exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the
regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the User should measure the flows
and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula
in 40 CFR 403.6(e), to evaluate compliance with the Pretreatment Standards.
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit shall be submitted to the
Control Authority, along with supporting data;
         d.   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
Section
7-5-6-10 and
7-5-6-11;
         e.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data if the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures; and
         f.   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
Discharges to the POTW.
      3.   Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the User’s
Authorized Representative as defined in Section
7-5-1-4.C, and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operations and maintenance (O & M), and/or additional
pretreatment, is required to meet the Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
      4.   Compliance Schedule. After it is determined that additional
pretreatment and/or O & M will be required, User must submit a compliance
schedule within thirty (30) days. The compliance schedule shall specify the
shortest timeline for the User to provide such additional pretreatment and/or O
& M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable Pretreatment Standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this Section must meet the requirements set out
in Section
7-5-6-2 of this chapter.
      5.   Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with Section
7-5-6-14.A of this chapter, and signed by an Authorized Representative as
defined in Section
7-5-1-4.C. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-2: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS:
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
Section
7-5-6-1.B.4. of this chapter:
   A.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the User to meet the
applicable Pretreatment Standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   B.   The User shall submit a progress report to the Pretreatment Coordinator
no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate,
the steps being taken by the User to return to the established schedule; and
   C.   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the Pretreatment Coordinator. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-3: REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE:
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case of a New Source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any User subject
to such Pretreatment Standards and Requirements shall submit to the
Pretreatment Coordinator a report containing the information described in
Section
7-5-4-5.A.6. and 7. and
7-5-6-1.B.2. of this chapter. For Users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the User’s long-
term production rate. For all other Users subject to categorical Pretreatment
Standards, expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
User’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section
7-5-6-14 of this chapter. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with Section
7-5-6-10 and
7-5-6-11. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-4: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS:
   A.   All Significant Industrial Users, at a frequency determined by the
Pretreatment Coordinator, must submit reports, no less than twice per year
(June and December), indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by Pretreatment Standards, and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases
where the Pretreatment Standard requires compliance with a Best Management
Practice (BMP), or pollution prevention alternative, the User must submit
documentation required by the Pretreatment Coordinator or the Pretreatment
Standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the User.
   B.   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Section
7-5-6-14.A of this chapter.
   C.   All wastewater samples must be representative of the User’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a User to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the User to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   D.   If a User subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently
than required by the Pretreatment Coordinator, using the procedures prescribed
in Section
7-5-6-11 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-5: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
   A.   Each User must notify the Pretreatment Coordinator of any significant
changes to the User’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the
change, including changes that may affect slug discharges to the POTW.
Significant changes shall be considered to be changes beyond the typical
operating range of the User, or changes that would have significant impact on
POTW operations.
      1.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require the User to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
Section
7-5-4-5 of this chapter.
      2.   The Manager may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit
under Section
7-5-5-7 of this chapter, or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under Section
7-5-5-4 of this chapter, in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
   B.   The Manager may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the change
based on the effect the change may have on the POTW and/or the Pretreatment
Program. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-6: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
   A.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch
discharge, a Slug Discharge, or Slug Load, that might cause potential problems
for the POTW, the User shall immediately notify either in person or via a phone
conversation with the Pretreatment Coordinator of the incident. A phone message
does not satisfy this notification requirement. This notification shall include
the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if
known, and corrective actions taken by the User.
   B.   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the User shall, unless
waived by the Manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s)
of the discharge, and the measures to be taken by the User to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the User of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability, which might be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property. Such notification shall not relieve the User of any fines, penalties,
or other liability, which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   A notice shall be permanently posted on the User’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees of the notification procedures in the
event of a discharge described in paragraph A, above. Employers shall ensure
that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.
   D.   Significant Industrial Users are required to notify the Pretreatment
Coordinator immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential
for a Slug Discharge. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-7: REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS:
All Users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports as required by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
(Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-8: NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a User indicates a violation, the User shall notify
the Pretreatment Coordinator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The User shall also repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the Pretreatment Coordinator within
thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the
Industrial User is not required if: 1) SGRWRF performs scheduled sampling at
the facility at least once a month; 2) if SGRWRF performs sampling at the
facility, between the time when the initial sampling was conducted, and the
time when the User receives the results of the initial sampling; or, 3) if
SGRWRF has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the Industrial User,
then SGRWRF will perform the repeat sampling and analysis, unless it notifies
the User of the violation and requires the User to perform the repeat sampling
and analysis. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-9: NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
   A.   Any User who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the User discharges more than one
hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information: 1) an identification
of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 2) an estimation of the
mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged
during that calendar month; and 3) an estimation of the mass of constituents in
the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12)
months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty
(180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under Section
7-5-6-5 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this Section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by Users subject to categorical
Pretreatment Standards under the self-monitoring requirements of Sections
7-5-6-1,
7-5-6-3, and
7-5-6-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph A, above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15)
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen
(15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33
(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the User
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   C.   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA,
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the User shall notify the Manager,
the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous
waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of
the effective date of such regulations.
   D.   In the case of any notification made under this Section, the User shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated.
   E.   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, by a permit issued
thereunder, or by any applicable Federal, State, or local law. (Ord. 2018-27,
11-14-2018)
7-5-6-10: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application, report, permit or other
requirement by this chapter, shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical Pretreatment Standard. If 40
CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods,
or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
Pretreatment Coordinator.
   B.   All laboratory samples collected for this chapter shall be analyzed by
a laboratory that is either certified by the Utah Bureau of Laboratory
Improvements or approved by the Manager. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-11: SAMPLE COLLECTION:
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data
obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period
covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
   A.   Except as indicated in Section B and C below, the User must collect
wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by the Pretreatment Coordinator. Where time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by SGRWRF, the samples must be
representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior
to the analysis as follows: 1) for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; and 2) for
volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters, unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies, may be
authorized by SGRWRF, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required
to show compliance with Instantaneous Limits.
   B.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds, must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
   C.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in Section
7-5-6-1 and
7-5-6-3, a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities
for which historical sampling data do not exist. For facilities for which
historical sampling data are available, the Pretreatment Coordinator may
authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs Section
7-5-6-4, the Industrial User is required to collect the number of grab samples
necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable Pretreatment
Standards and Requirements. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-12: DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS:
Written reports are deemed submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which
are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United
States Postal Service, the date the report is received shall govern. (Ord.
2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-6-13: RECORDKEEPING:
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and
make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained
pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any additional
records obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the User
independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with BMPs
established under Section
7-5-2-4.C. Records shall include: 1) the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; 2) the dates
analyses were performed; 3) who performed the analyses; 4) the analytical
techniques or methods used; and 5) the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the User or SGRWRF, or where the User has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the Pretreatment Coordinator. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-
2018)
7-5-6-14: CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS:
Certification of Permit Applications, User Reports and Initial Monitoring
Waiver. The following certification statement, signed by an Authorized
Representative as defined in Section
7-5-1-4.C, shall be submitted by Users submitting permit applications under
Section
7-5-4-6: 1) Users submitting baseline monitoring reports under Section
7-5-6-1.B.5.; 2) Users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical
Pretreatment Standard deadlines under Section
7-5-6-3; and 3) Users submitting periodic compliance reports required by
Section
7-5-6-4.A-D:
   I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-7: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
7-5-7-1: RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The Manager or his or her designee shall have the right to enter the premises
of any User to determine whether the User is complying with all requirements of
this chapter, and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder. Users shall allow the Manager or his or her designee ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and/or the performance of any additional duties.
Inspections and monitoring shall be conducted as frequently as determined by
the SGRWRF and may be announced or unannounced.
   A.   Where a User has security measures in force that require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the User shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards, so, upon presentation of
suitable identification, the Manager shall be permitted to enter without delay
for the purpose of performing his or her duties.
   B.   The Manager shall have the right to set up on the User’s property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the User’s operations.
   C.   The Manager may require the User to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the User at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated at least annually, or as required per the manufacturer’s
recommendations and specifications to ensure their accuracy.
   D.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be removed promptly by the User
at the verbal or written request of the Manager and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such obstruction and providing safe and easy access shall be
borne by the User.
   E.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Manager or his or her designee
access to the User’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   F.   The location of the monitoring facility shall provide ample room in or
near the monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples and analysis. Whether constructed on public or private property, the
monitoring facility should be provided in accordance with the SGRWRF’s
requirements, and all applicable local construction standard and
specifications. Such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a manner
that enables the Manager to perform independent monitoring activities.
   G.   All Significant Industrial Users will be inspected at least annually
including review of facilities and reports.
   H.   SGRWRF may use a camera to photograph areas of the facility as
necessary for carrying out the duties of the Industrial Pretreatment Program
including, but not limited to, documentation of the User’s compliance status
and for reinforcement of written reports. The User shall be allowed to review
copies of the photographs for confidentiality claims. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-
2018)
7-5-7-2: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the Manager or his or her designee has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of SGRWRF designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, the Manager may seek issuance of a
search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-
2018)
7-5-8: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a User obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Manager inspection and sampling activities,
shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the User
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Manager, that the release of specific information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
User furnishing a report that specific information should be held confidential,
the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall be redacted and not made available for inspection by the public.
Regardless of any such assertion of confidentiality, all information,
unredacted, shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the UPDES program or pretreatment program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person or entity furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics, and other effluent data, as
defined at 40 CFR 2.302, shall not be recognized as confidential information
and shall be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-
2018)
7-5-9: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The Manager shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by POTW, a
list of the Users, which at any time during the previous twelve (12) months,
were in Significant Noncompliance with applicable Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements. The term Significant Noncompliance shall be applicable to all
Significant Industrial Users (or any other Industrial User that violates
paragraphs (C), (D) or (H) of this Section) and shall mean:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including
Instantaneous Limits as defined in Section
7-5-2;
   B.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including
Instantaneous Limits, as defined by Section
7-5-2 multiplied by the applicable TRC criteria (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
oils and grease, and TRC=1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   C.   Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as
defined by Section
7-5-2 (Daily Maximum, long-term average, Instantaneous Limit, or narrative
standard) that the Manager determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, Interference or Pass Through, including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public;
   D.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Manager exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   E.    Failure to meet within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
   F.   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   H.   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, which the Manager determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local Pretreatment Program. (Ord. 2018-27,
11-14-2018)
7-5-10: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
7-5-10-1: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
When the Manager finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the
Manager may serve upon that User a written Notice of Violation, personally or
by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested). Within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for
the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, including specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the User to the Manager. Submission of such a
plan in no way relieves the User of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation. Nothing in this Section
shall limit the authority of the Manager to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, before or without issuing a
Notice of Violation. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-10-2: CONSENT ORDERS:
The Manager may enter into Consent Orders, assurances of compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any User responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the
User to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections
7-5-10-4 and
7-5-10-5 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 2018-27,
11-14-2018)
7-5-10-3: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The Manager may order a User which has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, to appear
before the Manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. Notice shall be served on the User specifying the time and place
for the show cause hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for
such action, and a request that the User show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on
any Authorized Representative of the User as defined in Section
7-5-1-4.C. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the User. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-10-4: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the Manager finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the
Manager may issue an order to the User responsible for the discharge directing
that the User come into compliance within a specified time. If the User does
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the User of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be
a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
(Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-10-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
When the Manager finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or that
the User’s past violations are likely to recur, the Manager may issue an order
to the User directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing
the User to:
   A.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   B.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the User. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-10-6: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   A.   When the Manager finds that a User has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, the Manager may fine such User an amount not to exceed $5,000.
Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of
monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed
for each day during the period of violation.
   B.   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after sixty (60) calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid
balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one point five
percent (1.5%) per month. A lien against the User’s real and/or personal
property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
   C.   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the Manager to reconsider the fine, along with full payment of the fine amount,
within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the
Manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the User’s appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereon, shall be
returned to the User. The Manager may add the costs of preparing administrative
enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   D.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-
14-2018)
7-5-10-7: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The Manager may immediately suspend a User’s discharge whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably
appears to present, or cause, an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons. The Manager may also immediately suspend a User’s
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted
as requiring a hearing prior to any Emergency Suspension of a permit and/or
discharge to the POTW.
   A.   Any User notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a User’s failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Manager may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to persons or the environment. The Manager may allow the User to
recommence its discharge when the User has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of
the Manager, that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in Section
7-5-10-8 of this chapter are initiated against the User.
   B.   A User that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution, and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence. The written statement shall be submitted to the
Manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under
Sections
7-5-10-3 or
7-5-10-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-10-8: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
   A.   Violations Subject to Discharge Termination. In addition to the
provisions in Section
7-5-5-6 of this chapter, any User who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
      1.   Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      2.    Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      3.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      4.   Refusal of access to the User’s premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      5.   Violation of the Pretreatment Standards in Section
7-5-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Notice of Discharge Termination. User will be notified of the proposed
termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under
Section
7-5-10-3 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the Manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the User. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-11: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
7-5-11-1: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the Manager finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the
Manager may petition the Washington County Fifth District Court through the
City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
individual wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement, imposed by
this chapter on activities of the User. The Manager may also seek such other
and further relief in law or equity, including a requirement for the User to
conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
User. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-11-2: CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   A User who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, shall be liable to the City
for a maximum civil penalty of $10,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a
monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for
each day during the period of the violation.
   B.   The SGRWRF may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs,
interest, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any other actual damages
incurred by the City.
   C.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation,
any economic benefit gained by the User from the User’s violation, corrective
actions by the User, the compliance history of the User, and any other factor
as justice requires.
   D.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-
14-2018)
7-5-11-3: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
The SGRWRF will refer to the State of Utah criminal violations of any
Pretreatment Standards or permit conditions. The Attorney General’s office for
Utah will offer Washington City, wherein the violation occurred, the option to
prosecute the violator. Should the local entity decline, the State or EPA, at
their discretion, may initiate appropriate criminal action. The SGRWRF will
assist the Attorney General’s office or EPA any way it can with appropriate
support for the action. The penalties set forth herein are in addition to any
other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under
State or Federal law.
   A.   A User who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
Ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, upon conviction,
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
$25,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year,
or both.
   B.   A User who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage, upon conviction, shall be
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not more than
$25,000, per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one (1)
year, or both.
   C.   A User who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this Ordinance, individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this Ordinance, upon conviction, shall guilty of a third degree
felony, and be subject to a penalty of not more than $50,000, per violation,
per day, or imprisonment for not more than five (5) years, or both.
   D.   In the event of a second or subsequent conviction a User shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $50,000 per violation per day, or
imprisonment for not more than five (5) years, or both. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-
2018)
7-5-11-4: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The SGRWRF may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions, against a noncompliant
User, simultaneously or otherwise. Enforcement of pretreatment violations
generally will be in accordance with the SGRWRF’s enforcement response plan.
However, SGRWRF may take other action against a User when the circumstances
warrant. Further, SGRWRF is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against a noncompliant User. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-12: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
7-5-12-1: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The Manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge
permit to any User who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter,
a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, unless such User first files
a satisfactory bond, payable to Washington City, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the Manager to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
(Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-12-2: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The Manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge
permit to any User who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter,
a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, unless the User first
submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore
or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge, including, but not
limited to, liability insurance. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-12-3: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE:
Whenever a User has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, water service to the User
may be severed. Service will recommence, at the User’s expense, only after the
User has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-
14-2018)
7-5-12-4: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
Whenever a User has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, it hereby is declared a
public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Manager.
Any person or entity creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of Washington City Ordinance (Title 4 Chapter 2) governing such
nuisances, including, but not limited to, reimbursing the City for any costs
incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-
14-2018)
7-5-13: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:
7-5-13-1: UPSET:
   A.   For the purposes of this Section, upset means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
User. Upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
   B.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards, if the requirements
of paragraph (C), below, are met.
   C.   A User who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the User can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      2.   The facility at the time was being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner, and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and
      3.   The User has submitted the following information to the Manager
within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset, and, if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five (5) days:
         a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   In any enforcement proceeding, the User seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical Pretreatment Standards.
   F.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility, and until the facility
is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other situations, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-
14-2018)
7-5-13-2: BYPASS:
   A.   For the purposes of this Section:
      1.   Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a User’s treatment facility.
      2.   Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   B.   A User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause Pretreatment
Standards or Requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of paragraphs (C) and (D) of this Section.
   C.   Bypass Notifications:
      1.   If a User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Manager, at least ten (10) days before the date of the
bypass.
      2.   A User shall submit oral notice to the Manager of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable Pretreatment Standards within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five (5) days of the time the User becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain: a) a description of the bypass;
b) its cause; c) the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times;
d) if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and e) steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The Manager, in his or her sole discretion, may
waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within twenty-four (24) hours, and the facts merit the waiver.
   D.   Bypass:
      1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the Manager may take an enforcement action
against a User, unless:
         a.   Bypass was unavoidable in order to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         c.   The User submitted notices as required under paragraph (C) of
this Section.
      2.   The Manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the Manager determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in paragraph D.1. of this Section.
      3.   Bypass shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards, if the requirements
of this paragraph D. are met. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-14: FATS, OILS, GREASE, AND SOIL (FOGS) CONTROL:
7-5-14-1: GENERAL:
The following Section is applicable to Commercial and Industrial Users that
have the potential to discharge deleterious wastewaters containing elevated
levels of fat, oils, grease and/or soil to the POTW. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are supplemental to the Washington City Pretreatment
Ordinance (this chapter) and applicable to this Section:
   A.   Commercial User - Any business or public or private entity, except for
Significant Industrial Users (SIU), who causes or permits the contribution or
discharge of wastewater into the POTW; and who may be regulated, where
necessary, to comply with the Washington City Ordinance (this chapter).
   B.   Common Interceptor - One or more interceptors receiving deleterious
wastewater from more than one establishment.
   C.   FOG - Fats, oil and grease of vegetable and animal origin.
   D.   FOGS - Fats, oil, grease (of vegetable and animal origin), petroleum
oils (or crude oil origin), and soil (sand, dirt, etc.).
   E.   Food Service Establishment (FSE) - means any building, vehicle, place,
or structure, or any room or division in a building, vehicle, place, or
structure, where: 1) food is prepared, served, or sold for immediate
consumption on or in the vicinity of the premises; 2) called for or taken out
by customers; or 3) prepared prior to being delivered to another location for
consumption.
   F.   Grease Interceptor - A structure or device designed for the purpose of
removing and preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering the sanitary sewer
collection system. These devices are below-ground units in outside areas with a
minimum capacity of 1000 gallons.
   G.   Grease Trap - A device designed for the purpose of removing and
preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering the sanitary sewer collection
system. These devices are typically compact, under-the-sink units located near
food preparation areas. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-14-3: INTERCEPTOR AND TRAP INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Grease and Sand/Oil Interceptors, as described by the International
Plumbing Code (IPC), shall be required of any Commercial User when the SGRWRF
determines they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
FOGS in excessive amounts, except such interceptors shall not be required for
residential dwelling units.
   B.   Any Commercial User utilizing a three compartment sink shall be
required to have either a grease interceptor or grease trap installed at its
own expense and shall be required to comply with maintaining the device as
outlined in the St. George City Pretreatment Operating Plan.
   C.   All construction plans for interceptors shall be submitted to SGRWRF
for review and approval prior to installation. All interceptors shall be of a
type, construction, and capacity approved by SGRWRF.
   D.   All interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable
of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of
substantial construction, water tight, and equipped with easily removable
covers, which are gas and water tight.
   E.   All newly constructed commercial structures, strip malls, multi-tenant
planned-occupied buildings, or planned-un-occupied buildings, shall install
independent six-inch (6") wastewater discharge lines stubbed out within each
designated future food establishment unit. If a new source commercial
structure, strip mall, or multi-tenant building has planned occupancy by one or
more businesses that do not generate FOG, and therefore do not need a grease
interceptor, and the owner of the structure does not facilitate the
installation of independent six inch wastewater discharge line and install a
common interceptor, then no future food establishments shall be permitted,
unless facilities are retrofitted for independent lines.
   F.   All newly constructed “stand alone” commercial structures, strip malls,
multi-tenant planned-occupied buildings, where a three compartment sink will be
utilized, will be required to install a grease interceptor.
   G.   All existing commercial or industrial businesses shall have one (1)
year to install an interceptor upon notification by SGRWRF, where required by
SGRWRF standards.
   H.   Interceptors for businesses that have closed shall be dewatered and
cleaned by the owner of said establishment. A representative of SGRWRF may
inspect and verify this process has been completed to the satisfaction of
SGRWRF.
   I.   Grease Traps are only allowed in place of grease interceptors when in
the opinion of the Manager it is physically impossible to install a grease
interceptor outside of the building or business. As such, a variance request
from the owner or lessee of the property must be made to SGRWRF with a
certification letter from a duly licensed Utah plumber or engineer. (Ord. 2018-
27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-14-4: GENERAL FOGS WASTE DISCHARGE LIMITS AND REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to discharge within SGRWRF jurisdiction, any sanitary
wastewater, commercial and industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of the
Washington City Wastewater/Pretreatment Regulations Ordinance (this chapter).
The following are general requirements and prohibitions applicable to this
Section:
   A.   The discharge of any substance into the sewer system that exceeds or
violates general or specific prohibitions listed in Section
7-5-2-1 is prohibited.
   B.   The discharge into the sewer system of FOGs that may accumulate and/or
cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system, or at the sewer system
lateral, except as provided herein, is prohibited.
   C.   Installation and use of food grinders in new and/or remodeled FSEs is
not recommended.
   D.   Emulsifiers, enzymes, or degreasers shall not be added as sewer aids to
any plumbing that leads to any interceptor directly or indirectly.
   E.   The disposal of cooking oil (yellow grease) into the sewer system is
prohibited. All waste cooking oils shall be collected, stored, and labeled
properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other
acceptable methods of disposal.
   F.   The discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140°F to any
FOGS control device, including interceptors and traps, is prohibited.
   G.   The discharge of waste from toilets, urinals, washbasins, and other
fixtures containing fecal materials into sewer lines intended for interceptor
service, is prohibited.
   H.   The discharge to the sewer system of any waste including FOGS and solid
materials, that were otherwise removed from an interceptor or other FOGS
control device, is prohibited. Wastes removed from interceptors must be hauled
off and properly disposed of periodically in compliance with operation and
maintenance requirements.
   I.   Operation of an interceptor with FOGS and solids (floating + settled)
accumulation, exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the design hydraulic depth
of the interceptor, is prohibited.
   J.   Commercial Users, during regular business hours, shall provide to the
Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her designee immediate and safe access to
the Users premises, FOGS handling facilities, and BMP facilities.
   K.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require visual monitoring at the
expense of the Commercial User to observe conditions of the User’s sewer
lateral and lines downstream. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-14-5: KITCHEN BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) REQUIREMENTS:
All Food Service Establishments (FSEs) shall be required, at a minimum, to
implement and comply with the following Kitchen BMPs, whenever applicable:
   A.   Drain screens (strainers) shall be installed on all drainage pipes in
food preparation areas.
   B.   All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in
recycling receptacles such as barrels or drums. Such recycling receptacles
shall be maintained properly to ensure they do not leak.
   C.   All garbage and food waste shall be disposed of directly into trash
bins or containers, and not in sinks, drainage pipes, or the sewer system. Food
waste should be disposed of in lined trash bins.
   D.   Employee Training: Employees of FSEs shall be trained twice each
calendar year in the following areas:
      1.   How to “dry wipe/scrape” pots, pans, dishware, and work areas before
washing to remove FOG.
      2.   How to properly dispose of garbage, food waste, and solids in lined
plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers, to prevent leaking
and odors.
      3.   The location and use of absorbent products to clean under fryer
baskets and other locations where FOG may be spilled or accumulated.
      4.   How to properly dispose of cooking oil from fry equipment into a FOG
receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling.
      5.   Training shall be documented, and employee signatures recorded,
indicating each employee’s attendance and understanding of the practices
reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time
by the Pretreatment Coordinator, or designee.
   E.   Exhaust filters shall be maintained in good operating condition
utilizing frequent cleaning practices. Wastewater generated from cleaning
exhaust filters shall be disposed properly.
   F.   Kitchen BMP and “NO GREASE” signs, posters, or similar information,
inappropriate language(s), shall be prominently displayed in the food
preparation and dishwashing areas at all times.
   G.   Absorbent materials shall be placed under fryers and other areas where
FOG typically or frequently drips or spills.
   H.   Covered devices shall be used in transporting FOG to prevent spills.
   I.   FOG containers shall be emptied before they are full to avoid
accidental or incidental spills.
   J.   “Spill Kits” (e.g., absorbent materials) shall be provided and readily
available in the event of a spill. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-14-6: INTERCEPTOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All existing and newly constructed interceptors shall be operated in accordance
with the manufacturer’s specifications. The maintenance frequency for all
Commercial Users with interceptors shall be determined by the following:
   A.   Where installed, an interceptor shall be fully maintained by the User,
at its sole expense, in a continuous and efficient manner, and at all times
subject to SGRWRF inspection and approval.
   B.   Interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by
the periodic removal of the full contents of the interceptor. Interceptors
shall be fully emptied and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined
floating and settled FOGS accumulation does not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the design hydraulic depth of the Interceptor This is to ensure that
the minimum hydraulic retention time, and required available volume, is
maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOGS.
   C.   If an interceptor at any time is observed by the Pretreatment
Coordinator or his or her designee to contain floating and settled FOGS
accumulation in excess of twenty-five percent (25%), the User shall be required
to have the interceptor serviced as soon as possible, but no later than ten
(10) days from the date the notice of violation was given, such that all FOGS,
sludge, and other materials, are completely removed from the interceptor.
   D.   The owner of the property on which a Common Interceptor, and/or the
facilities discharging to a Common Interceptor, are located shall be primarily
responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and repair of the interceptor.
   E.   No Commercial User shall increase the use of water or in any other
manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a way of achieving compliance with the
Washington City Wastewater/Pretreatment Regulations Ordinance (this chapter).
(Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-14-7: GREASE TRAP OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Where installed, a grease trap shall be fully maintained by the User,
at its sole expense, in a continuous and efficient manner, and at all times
subject to SGRWRF inspection and approval.
   B.   A FSE may use, or be required to install, grease traps, in lieu of
installation of a grease interceptor, when, in the opinion of the Manager: 1)
installation of an interceptor cannot physically be accomplished; 2) there is
not adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and a
proposed grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the
private collection lines or the public sewer; or 3) no alternative pretreatment
can be installed. Sizing of grease traps shall be performed by a professional
engineer or plumber registered in the State of Utah, but shall conform to
SGRWRF Design Standards and Construction Specifications as a minimum.
   C.   Grease traps shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer’s
specifications.
   D.   Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by
removing accumulated grease on an as needed basis, or the frequency specified
by the manufacturer, but no less than weekly.
   E.   Grease traps shall be fully emptied of all food residues, and any FOG
waste, during the cleaning and scraping process.
   F.   Grease traps shall be inspected periodically, but in no event less than
once a month, to check for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective operation
of the baffles and flow-regulating device. Grease traps and their baffles shall
be maintained free of all caked-on FOG and waste. Removable baffles shall be
removed and cleaned during the maintenance process.
   G.   Automatic dishwashers and/or food grinder units shall not be connected
to, or discharged to, any grease trap.
   H.   No FSE shall increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt
to dilute a discharge as a way of achieving compliance with the St. George
Pretreatment Ordinance. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-14-8: NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A Commercial and Industrial User shall comply with the following notification
requirements:
   A.   Notification of Spills and/or Sanitary Sewer Overflows (SSO):
      1.   In the event a User is unable to comply with the FOGS Control
requirements due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error, or the
User has reasonable belief that its discharge will violate the St. George City
Ordinance, the User or its representative shall immediately notify the
Pretreatment Coordinator by telephone.
      2.   If the material discharged has the potential to cause, or results
in, sewer blockage or SSO, the User shall immediately notify the SGRWRF and the
Pretreatment Coordinator by telephone at: (435) 634-5849.
      3.   Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the
Pretreatment Coordinator no later than five (5) workings days from the date of
the incident, to the following address: Pretreatment Coordinator, SGRWRF - 3780
S. 1550 W., St. George, Utah 84790. The written notification shall state the
date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were
taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to
prevent a recurrence.
      4.   Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage or
otherwise arising out of a violation of the Washington City Wastewater/
Pretreatment Regulations Ordinance (this chapter), or other applicable law.
   B.   Commercial Users shall notify the Pretreatment Coordinator in writing
at least sixty (60) days prior to any facility expansion, and/or remodeling or
process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOGs
discharges, or a change in the nature of the discharge. The User shall submit
any information requested by the Pretreatment Coordinator for evaluation of the
effect of such expansion and/or remodeling or process modifications on the
User’s FOGs discharge to the sewer system. The written notification shall state
the FSE name, name the title of the User’s contact person or person most
knowledgeable concerning the facility expansion and/or remodeling or process
modifications, address and telephone number of the User, date of the proposed
facility expansion and/or remodeling or process modifications, and the reasons
for the same. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-14-9: RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
The following records shall be maintained for no less than three (3) years, and
the Commercial User shall make them available to Pretreatment Coordinator, or
designee:
   A.   A record or logbook of interceptor or trap cleaning and maintenance
practices and activities. The record or logbook shall include:
      1.   Dates cleaned;
      2.   Name of waste hauler;
      3.   Any observations concerning the effectiveness of the interceptor or
trap in controlling FOGs; and
      4.   Any other maintenance performed on the trap or interceptor.
   B.   A record or logbook of FSE Kitchen BMPs being implemented including
employee training;
   C.   Any other information deemed appropriate by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to ensure compliance with the Washington City Wastewater/
Pretreatment Regulations Ordinance (this chapter); and
   D.   Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral or sewer system.
(Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-14-10: INSPECTIONS AND SAMPLING:
Commercial Users are inspected on a regular basis by SGRWRF to determine if the
businesses are in compliance with the Washington City Wastewater/Pretreatment
Regulations Ordinance (this chapter). The purpose of inspections is as follows:
   A.   To verify if Users are complying with the Washington City Wastewater/
Pretreatment Regulations Ordinance (this chapter);
   B.   To collect and analyze samples and compare results to established
discharge limitations;
   C.   To provide evidence in support of enforcement actions;
   D.   To verify correction of problems; and
   E.   To maintain records of User discharge constituents. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-
14-2018)
7-5-15: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
7-5-15-1: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The SGRWRF may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up
and operating SGRWRF’s Pretreatment Program, which may include:
   A.   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of
processing such applications;
   B.   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including
the cost of collection and analyzing a User’s discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by Users;
   C.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   D.   Fees for filing appeals;
   E.   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs not included in Section
7-5-15-1.B. associated with any enforcement activity taken by the Manager to
address IU noncompliance; and
   F.   Other fees as SGRWRF may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable
by the SGRWRF. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
7-5-15-2: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue
in full force and effect. (Ord. 2018-27, 11-14-2018)
ARTICLE A. USER FEES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
7-5A-1: Normal Wastewater Strengths
7-5A-2: Schedule Of Special Charges
7-5A-3: Unusual Circumstances
7-5A-4: Permit Fees And Special Charges
7-5A-5: Residential Equivalent Formulas
7-5A-6: Oil And Grease Standard
7-5A-1: NORMAL WASTEWATER STRENGTHS:
Normal wastewater strengths are established as follows:
 
                    BOD (5 Day Biochemical  TSS (Total Suspended
                    Oxygen Demand) (mg/l)   Solids) (mg/l)
 
General commercial  250                     385
Food services       380                     385
 
Charges for users with wastewater strengths in excess of normal shall be based
upon the formula in section
7-5A-5 of this article. (Ord. 99-5, 3-10-1999)
7-5A-2: SCHEDULE OF SPECIAL CHARGES:
   A.   To provide for the recovery of the city's cost associated with the
discharge of industrial wastewater to the wastewater system and for the
enforcement of the provisions of this article, the city council shall establish
a schedule of special charges. The schedule of special charges may set forth
specific amounts for any fees, charges, liabilities or other cost recovery
provisions recommended by the public works director and approved by the city
council. Recovery of amounts based on actual costs or damages incurred by the
city may include late charges or service charges. The assessment of these late
charges and service charges may be waived at the sole discretion of the public
works director. The city council may adopt or amend a schedule of special
charges to include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Permit application fees;
      2.   Plan check fees;
      3.   Inspection fees;
      4.   Service contract charges;
      5.   Waste hauler fees;
      6.   Compliance monitoring fees;
      7.   Wastewater service charges;
      8.   Flow, conventional and nonconventional pollutant surcharges;
      9.   Administrative fees and penalties;
      10.   Reconsideration fees;
      11.   Disposal fees and special wastes;
      12.   Chemical analysis fees.
   B.   No statement in this article shall be construed as preventing the city
from establishing any lawful fees and charges. (Ord. 99-5, 3-10-1999)
7-5A-3: UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES:
Special rates and conditions for users of the wastewater service who discharge
wastes of unusual character or who make use of the wastewater system under
exceptional circumstances may be set from time to time upon such terms and
conditions as are deemed proper by the public works director, as provided in
section
7-5A-5 of this article. (Ord. 99-5, 3-10-1999)
7-5A-4: PERMIT FEES AND SPECIAL CHARGES:
In accordance with resolution 98-2, ordinance 99-2 and in compliance with the
federal water pollution act of 1972, all costs of industrial waste control are
mandated to be charged to the contributing industrial dischargers. Thus, the
fees are as follows:
   SCHEDULE OF SPECIAL CHARGES
Fee Class I Class II Waste Hauler And Class III
Fee                       Class I     Class II       Waste Hauler And Class III
Permit                       $ 100.      $ 5      $25.00
Plan check (if needed)       100.00      75.      50.00
Annual compliance            1,000.      250      50.00
monitoring (if needed)
Request formal               100.00      75.      50.00
consideration
Administrative penalties:             All Classes
Late reports                            $ 10.00/d 
Unsigned report                         5.00/day  
Failure to attend                       50.00/day 
compliance meeting
Failure to post notices                 10.00/day 
to employees
Failure to prenotify                    100.00    
before monitoring
Failure to allow
immediate inspection                    300.00    
entry
BOD5 or SS extra strength See formula in section
discharge                 7-5A-5 of this article
The penalty fee for
improperly maintain-ed
grease and sand traps,                   $ 50.00
which will be levied
against the owner of the
property
 
In addition to analysis and labor fees, along with civil and criminal charges,
the following administrative fees for noncompliance may be charged:
Parameter Dollars Per Pound Unless Otherwise Specified Or Fraction Thereof Per
          Day In Excess Of Permit Limit
                                        Dollars Per Pound Unless Otherwise
Parameter                               Specified Or Fraction Thereof Per Day
                                        In Excess Of Permit Limit
Ammonia (as N)                             $ 0.40
Arsenic                                    300.00
Barium                                     50.00
Beryllium                                  100.00
Biochemical oxygen demand               See section
                                        7-5A-5 of this article
Cadmium                                    300.00
Chemical oxygen demand                     0.40
Chloride                                   0.40
Chlorine residual                          100.00
Chromium (total)                           300.00
Copper                                     300.00
Cyanide (total)                            300.00
Endrin                                     300.00
Fluoride                                   100.00
Iron                                       300.00
Lead                                       300.00
Lindane                                    300.00
Mercury                                    300.00
Methoxychlor                               300.00
Nickel                                     300.00
Nitrogen (nitrate and nitrate as N)        0.40
Oil and grease                          See section
                                        7-5A-5 of this article
Organophosphorus or carbamate compounds    300.00
Phenolic compounds                         150.00
Selenium                                   100.00
Silver                                     300.00
Sulfate                                    0.40
Sulfide                                    150.00
Suspended solids                        See section
                                        7-5A-5 of this article
Total dissolved solids                     0.40
Total identifiable chlorinated             300.00
hydrocarbons
Total toxic organics                       300.00
Toxaphene                                  300.00
Zinc                                       300.00
Other pesticides and herbicides            300.00
 
 
pH Range                                Flat Fee Per Day Per Specified
                                        Quantity Or Fraction Thereof
Below 2.0 and above 13.0 (per 1 gallon)    $125.00
2.0–3.0 and 12.0–13.0 (per 2 gallons   100.00
3.1–4.0 and 11.0–11.9 (per 5 gallons   75.00
4.1–5.0 and 10.0–10.9 (per 10 gallon   50.00
5.1–5.9 and 9.1–9.9 (per 25 gallons)   25.00
 
 
Color (ADMI Units) Flat Fee Per Day Per 50
                   Gallons Or Fraction Thereof
   190 – 500        $100.00
   500 – 1,000      200.00
   Above 1,000        300.00
 
In accordance with this article, the administrative cost of a sampling and
evaluation program, including the costs for required laboratory analysis
performed by city personnel, the city authorized representative, or a
contracted laboratory, and costs incurred by city or its authorized
representative, to establish user's compliance with its discharge limits, shall
be billed to the discharge. The administrative costs shall include, but not be
limited to: a) a prorated portion of the salaries and overhead of all the city
employees who participated in the investigation, coordination, repair, cleanup,
and for any other activities related to enforcement of and compliance with any
sections of this article; b) the actual costs of materials, equipment and
services used, including laboratory costs; c) city vehicle expenses used to
transport such personnel and equipment; and d) costs for city legal counsel.
(Ord. 99-5, 3-10-1999)
7-5A-5: RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT FORMULAS:
For purposes of this article, the discharge characteristics of an equivalent
dwelling unit shall be composed of conventional strength wastewater flow of six
thousand (6,000) gallons per month and constituent levels of three hundred
eighty five (385) parts per million suspended solids and two hundred fifty
(250) parts per million biochemical oxygen demand. The number of residential
equivalent units shall be determined for flow, total suspended solids and
biochemical oxygen demand in establishing monthly user charges for industrial,
commercial and institutional users having constituent levels greater than those
specified for standard user classes established by the city council, such rates
shall be set under the following formula:
    C=S+(R Q)(Q)+[RB(B-250)+RT(T-385)].00834Q
 
Where:
 C  = Monthly charge for sewer service.
 S  = Monthly service charge, currently $0.50.
 RQ = Flow rate, currently $1.57 per thousand gallons.
 Q  = Average monthly sewer flow in thousand gallons, measured by average
       culinary water meter reading during the winter quarter.
 RB = BOD surcharge, currently $0.225 per pound of BOD.
 B  = Estimated or measured BOD concentration expressed in milligrams per
       liter.
 RT = TSS surcharge, currently $0.122 per pound of total suspended solids.
 T  = Estimated or measured TSS concentration expressed in milligrams per
       liter.
 
(Ord. 99-5, 3-10-1999)
7-5A-6: OIL AND GREASE STANDARD:
In addition to other standards, an oil and grease standard shall be in effect
for users. It is as follows:
   A.   No person shall discharge wastewater containing more than fifty
milligrams per liter (50 mg/l) of total oil and grease, unless a conditional
approval has been specified in the user's discharge permit issued by the
regional wastewater manager. Such conditional approval can only be authorized
if the regional wastewater manager determines that the user is not required to
comply with the federal categorical standard for oil and grease, or the user's
discharge does not injure or interfere with any wastewater collection/treatment
process, constitute a public hazard or nuisance, or cause the city to violate
its UPDES permit.
   B.   If conditional approval to exceed the fifty milligrams per liter (50
mg/l) oil and grease standard is authorized, the procedure and conditions shall
be as follows:
      1.   The wastewater shall be analyzed by the city to determine BOD5 and
the composition of polar and nonpolar oil and grease. The cost of the sampling
and analysis shall be paid for by the discharger.
      2.   The polar portion of the oil and grease concentration is assumed to
be biodegradable and, therefore, is included in the BOD5 measurement. And BOD5
in excess of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) shall be
surcharged at the rate set forth in the surcharge formula (nomenclature as set
forth above):
C=RB(B-250)0.00834Q
      3.   The nonpolar (mineral or petroleum origin) portion of the oil and
grease concentration is assumed to be nonbiodegradable. When gasoline, machine
oil and diesel fuel are the primary wastes of concern, the established limit of
one part per million of BTEX 1  or naphthalene shall be enforced.
      4.   The total toxic organic limit, which is derived from the categorical
standard for the metal finishing industry, shall be two (2) parts per million.
(Ord. 99-5, 3-10-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. BTEX = benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene, zylenes
CHAPTER 6
ELECTRICAL SERVICES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Electrical Power Department
7-6-2: Applicability
7-6-3: Definitions
7-6-4: Authority Of City Council
7-6-5: Service Agreements
7-6-6: Use Of Right Of Way
7-6-7: Advertising
7-6-8: Budget And Records
7-6-9: Joint Operations
7-6-10: Occupancy Permit Required
7-6-11: Rates, Fees And Deposits; Delinquency
7-6-12: Supplying And Taking Service
7-6-13: Temporary Service
7-6-14: Installations
7-6-15: Meters
7-6-16: Prohibited Acts And Activities
7-6-17: Line Extensions
7-6-18: Access To Premises
7-6-19: Changes And Additions; Conflicts
7-6-20: Nonliabilty
7-6-21: Penalty
7-6-1: ELECTRICAL POWER DEPARTMENT:
The electrical power department is hereby created and hereinafter referred to
in this chapter as "the department". It shall be comprised of all the property,
equipment and personnel necessary to maintain and operate the city electrical
power system. The department shall administer the operation and maintenance of
the municipal electrical power system under the general supervision of the city
manager. All hiring of employees shall be done in accordance with the city
personnel policies and procedures. This section does not, in any manner,
prohibit the city council from contracting the maintenance services to a
private vendor. (1989 Code § 14-511.1)
7-6-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   These electric service regulations are designed to govern the supplying
of and utilization of electric service consistent with prudent utility practice
and with safety to customers and to the department.
   B.   These electric service regulations and all rate schedules are on file
in the office of the department, and copies are obtainable by any customer
without charge upon request.
   C.   These electric service regulations, subject to revisions from time to
time, supersede and annul all regulations, by whatever term designated, which
may heretofore have governed the supplying and taking of the department's
electric service, except as these electric service regulations and any
revisions are consistent with prior regulations, in which case, these electric
service regulations and revisions shall be deemed to be a continuation of the
prior regulations. The city previously adopted ordinances 87-22 and 87-8, which
shall remain in full force and effect, except to the extent that any provisions
hereof are inconsistent with those electric service regulations, in which case
those provisions shall be deemed repealed.
   D.   The department may supplement these electric service regulations with
such other administrative rules, forms and specifications as may be necessary
to properly enforce and administer these electric service regulations and the
applicable rate schedules and to comply with the intent of the same. (1989 Code
§ 14-610)
7-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following expressions, when used in these electric service regulations, in
rate schedules and in service agreements, shall, unless otherwise indicated,
have the meanings given below:
CITY: Washington City, Utah or the Washington City electrical power department.
CONNECTED LOAD: The combined nominal rated capacity of all motors or other
energy consuming devices installed on the customer's premises, which may, at
the will of the customer, be operated with energy supplied by the department.
CUSTOMER: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, public or private
corporation, or governmental agency receiving the department's service at any
specified location.
CUSTOMER'S INSTALLATION: The department will furnish and install necessary
meter or meters, and the customer shall provide and maintain locations for
installation thereof free of expense and satisfactory to the department. No
meter shall be installed on an interior wall of a building nor shall any
construction be performed that will cause an installed meter to be enclosed
within a building or other similar structure.
DEPARTMENT: Washington City electric power department.
ELECTRICAL SERVICE: The availability of electric power and energy, irrespective
of whether any electric power and energy is actually used. Supplying of service
by the department consists of the maintenance by the department, at the point
of delivery, of approximately the established voltage and frequency by means of
facilities adequate for carrying the customer's proper load.
HORSEPOWER: Shall be construed to mean the equivalent to seven hundred fifty
(750) watts.
INDETERMINATE SERVICE: Service to residential, commercial or industrial
customers (except as defined herein as "temporary service") when the use of
service, both as to amount or permanency, cannot be reasonably assured.
Indeterminate service shall include, but is not limited to:
   A.   Service to mines, quarries, oil wells, industrial manufacturing and
large commercial enterprises of speculative character;
   B.   Real estate subdivisions;
   C.   Mobile homes and recreational vehicles;
   D.   Property being developed for sale;
   E.   Enterprises where the applicant will not be the user of service;
   F.   Locations where there is little or no immediate demand for service by
any other customer; and
   G.   Seasonal service.
METER: The meter or meters, together with auxiliary devices if any,
constituting the complete installation needed to measure the power and energy
supplied to any individual customer at a single point of delivery.
MONTH: An interval of approximately thirty (30) days between successive meter
reading dates, except when the calendar month is specified.
NOTICE: Unless otherwise specified, a written notification delivered personally
or mailed by one party to the other at such other party's last known address,
the period of notice being computed from the date of such personal delivery or
mailing.
PERMANENT SERVICE: Service to residential, commercial or industrial customers
when the use of service, both as to amount and permanency can be assured. To be
classified as "permanent service", the power using facilities must be in place
at the date of classification.
POINT OF DELIVERY: The customer's service terminal, or the point where the
department's wires are joined to the customer's wires or apparatus, unless
otherwise specified in the customer's service agreement.
RATE SCHEDULE: Electric rate tariffs, as adopted by the city.
SERVICE AGREEMENT: The agreement or contract between the department and the
customer pursuant to which service is supplied and taken.
SERVICE FACILITIES: A. Service Drop: The wires owned by the department
connecting the department's distribution system to the customer's service
entrance conductors.
   B.   Service Entrance Conductors: The portion of the customer's installation
to which the department's service drop is connected.
STANDARD SERVICE EXTENSION: An overhead or underground line extension with a
standard two hundred (200) amp secondary service, where the construction
required does not involve unreasonable cost, does not exceed a combined length
of one hundred feet (100') of secondary and service drop facilities and does
not require the installation of more than one distribution pole.
STANDBY SERVICE: Shall be construed to mean service to a load for which the
customer has available an alternative source of power other than that provided
by the department.
TEMPORARY SERVICE: Service to customers when the use of service is of a
temporary nature or the ventures are of such uncertain speculative character as
their permanency is questionable. Temporary service may include, but is not
limited to:
   A.   Construction work;
   B.   Circuses;
   C.   Bazaars;
   D.   Fairs;
   E.   Concessions and similar enterprises; and
   F.   Mining or oil and gas production operations during a preliminary
development period. (1989 Code § 14-611; amd. Ord. 94-17, 6-22-1994)
7-6-4: AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL:
The city council, for the efficient and economical operations of the
department, may enter into contract to: a) sell its products and services to
the public and private corporations and to other consumers; b) construct power
generating plants, transmission lines and other facilities; c) purchase real
estate and franchises; d) purchase power; and e) lease property which may be
necessary for the proper operation of the electrical system. (1989 Code § 14-
511.2)
7-6-5: SERVICE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Form And Execution: Each applicant for service shall make a written
application therefor on the department's standard form, or execute a formal
contract. The department's standard application form, when signed by the
department's authorized representative as well as the customer, becomes a
binding service agreement. Receipt of electric service shall constitute an
agreement to abide by all provisions of the standard application form and these
electric service regulations.
   B.   Implied Service Agreement: In the absence of a signed service
agreement, the delivery of electric service by the department and acceptance
thereof by customer shall be deemed to constitute an agreement by and between
the department and the customer for delivery and acceptance of electric service
under the terms and conditions in these electric service regulations and the
applicable rate schedule.
   C.   Term Of Service Agreement: Unless otherwise provided, service
agreements are to continue in effect for an initial period of one month where a
new service is provided.
   D.   Expiration Or Renewal: Unless otherwise provided, each service
agreement will automatically extend from its expiration date for additional
successive periods of one month each, unless and until either party has
notified the other in writing, not less than thirty (30) days prior to the end
of any such period, of its desire to terminate such agreement.
   E.   Department Right To Cancel Or Suspend Service: For any default or
breach of the service agreement by the customer, including failure to pay bills
within the specified period, the department, in addition to all other legal
remedies, may terminate the service agreement or suspend service at the
location where such default has occurred. No such termination or suspension,
however, will be made by the department without ten (10) days' notice to the
customer, stating in what particular manner the service agreement has been
violated, except that no notice need be given in cases of theft or unauthorized
use or disposition of service by the customer, or where in the department's
judgment, the customer is violating or threatening to violate the electric
service regulations or other ordinances, laws or codes, or the provisions of
these electric service regulations. Also, no notice need be given in case of
short circuit, or other dangerous condition on the customer's side of the point
of delivery, or in case of utilization by the customer of service in such
manner as to cause danger to persons or property, or to jeopardize service to
the customer or to others. Failure of the department at any time after any such
default or breach either to suspend supply of service, or terminate the service
agreement, or to resort to any other legal remedy, or its failure to exercise
on any one or more of such remedies, shall not affect the department's right to
resort thereafter to any one or more of such remedies for the same or any
future default or breach by the customer.
   F.   Cancellation: Unless otherwise provided in the service agreement, where
the customer entirely suspends operations with the intention to permanently
abandon them, the service agreement may be canceled by written notice to the
department not less than thirty (30) days before the date upon which service is
to be terminated. No such cancellation shall release the customer from his
prior obligation.
   G.   Change Of Customer Address:
      1.   When the customer changes his address, he shall give notice thereof
to the department at least three (3) days prior to the date of change. The
customer will be held responsible for all service supplied to the vacated
premises until such notice has been received and the department has had a
reasonable time, but not less than three (3) days, to discontinue service.
      2.   If the customer moves to an address at which he requires electric
service for any purposes specified in his service agreement, and at which
address the department has such service available under the same rate schedule,
the notice shall be considered as the customer's request that the department
transfer such service to the new address; but if the department does not have
such service available at the new address, the old service agreement shall, at
the option of the department, either be considered canceled or the customer
remain liable thereunder. If the department has service available at the new
address to which a different rate schedule applies, a new service agreement,
including the applicable rate schedule, will be offered to the customer. The
department will make transfers of service as promptly as reasonably possible
after receipt of notice.
   H.   Successor And Assigns: Service agreements shall inure to the benefit of
and be binding upon the respective heirs, legal representatives or successors
by operation of law, of the parties thereto. The customer may assign his
service agreement to a third party only with the written consent of the
department. The department may, without the customer's consent, assign any
service agreement to any person or corporation, in any lawful way acquiring or
operating all or any part of the department's property used in supplying
service under such agreement. (1989 Code § 14-612)
7-6-6: USE OF RIGHT OF WAY:
The department may use the property over, under or along any public street,
sidewalk or other right of way in the operations of the department; but said
department shall in all cases be subject to applicable general regulations of
the city and cause the surface of the public way to be restored to its usual
condition. (1989 Code § 14-511.4)
7-6-7: ADVERTISING:
The city council may authorize reasonable expenditures to advertise and promote
the use of services of the department and to acquaint the public with the
operations, programs and planned expansion of the department and city
electrical power system. (1989 Code § 14-511.6)
7-6-8: BUDGET AND RECORDS:
   A.   Budget Preparation: The department shall furnish a proposed budget for
the department to the city manager for each fiscal year so that it may be
incorporated in the general budget of the city. Said proposed budget shall be
subject to a review process as outlined in Utah Code Annotated section 10-6-
111.
   B.   Maintenance Of Accounts And Records: The accounts and records of the
department shall be maintained by city offices, but shall be kept separately
from the general accounts and funds of the city, except as may be otherwise
specifically provided by state law or other city ordinances.
   C.   Transfer Of Surplus Funds: The city council shall have the power to
transfer to the city treasury all surplus funds which in their best judgment
will not be needed for the proper operation, maintenance, bond payments and
care of the department. This transfer to be made at the close of each
operational year of the department. (1989 Code § 14-511.7)
7-6-9: JOINT OPERATIONS:
The city council may contract with any public agency or private corporation or
other municipality or individual for the joint use of poles and other property
belonging to the city or to the other party. The city council may also contract
with any other party for the joint acquisition of real property and franchises,
and the joint financing, construction, operation and maintenance of power
generating facilities, transmission lines and other property. (1989 Code § 14-
511.8)
7-6-10: OCCUPANCY PERMIT REQUIRED:
An occupancy permit shall be required on all new construction before regular
electric service is provided. The permit shall be signed by the chief building
inspector. (1989 Code § 14-511.23; amd. 2007 Code)
7-6-11: RATES, FEES AND DEPOSITS; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Service Rates:
      1.   The city council shall fix rates to be charged for electricity sold
and services rendered by the department. Rates shall be fair, reasonable and
compensatory and shall be uniform for all consumers within the same class; but
different rate schedules may be applied to different classes of consumers as
determined by the city council. Rates within the city limits may be less but
shall be no greater than for the same class of consumers outside the city
limits. Rates shall be sufficient to pay all operating and maintenance expenses
of the department and all bond interest and redemption costs of the electrical
power system. The city council may require reasonable deposits as security for
the payment of charges for services and may provide for the return of said
deposits when satisfactory consumer credit has been established.
      2.   The city offices shall administer the collection of any and all
funds generated by the department.
      3.   The rates charged for electric services shall be established by
resolution of the city council. (1989 Code § 14-511.5; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Selection And Application Of Rate Schedules:
      1.   Selection Of Rate Schedule:
         a.   When a prospective customer makes application for service, the
department will, upon request, assist in the selection of the rate schedule
appropriate to the customer for the service requested. The selection will be
based on the prospective customer's statement as to the class of service
desired, the amount and manner of use, and any other pertinent information.
This statement will be recorded and filed with the application. The department
shall not be liable for any errors in designating the applicable schedule.
         b.   If through error a service agreement is entered into specifying a
rate schedule which is not applicable to the class of service taken, on
discovery of the error, all bills rendered during the preceding twelve (12)
months shall be recalculated in accordance with the lowest properly applicable
rate schedule, and any excess paid shall be applied on any outstanding balance
owing by the customer or, if no balance is owing, shall be refunded by the
department, or any balance due shall be paid by the customer, as the case may
be. No adjustments may be made for service provided more than twelve (12)
months prior to the date on which adjustment is first requested in writing.
      2.   Distinction Between Residential And Commercial Service: Service
rendered through one meter to apartment houses and to recognized rooming and/or
boarding houses will be considered commercial service.
      3.   Lighting On Power Schedules: Lighting service will not be supplied
under any power rate schedules unless it is so specified in such power rate
schedule, and when so supplied, the customer will provide and maintain all
auxiliary apparatus (transformers, regulators, etc.) that may be necessary.
Service supplied to motor generators, any portion of the output of which is
used for lighting purposes, shall be considered lighting service.
      4.   Temporary And Standby Service:
         a.   Temporary and standby service shall not be rendered, except under
a special agreement between the department and the customer, unless the
temporary service is provided during construction where a permanent service
will be established.
         b.   In no event will the department supply power and energy for the
purpose of starting or furnishing excitation or other auxiliary service
necessary to the operation of any of the customer's generating plant or for
parallel operation of the customer's generating equipment with the department's
system, except under a special agreement between the department and the
customer. (1989 Code § 14-618)
   C.   Usage Charges: Effective as of June 2007 billing:
Residential:                            
 Base rate                               $ 8.50
 January – December year round rates 
  First 1,000 kWh                       0.061/kWh
  Second 1,000 kWh                      0.085/kWh
  Remaining                             0.093/kWh
Small commercial:                       
 Base rate                               17.50
  First 500                             0.0700
  Next 4,500                            0.0400
  Remaining                             0.0500
 First 5 kW demand                       0.00
 Remaining kW demand                     7.25
Large commercial:                       
 Base rate                               32.50
  First 10,000                          0.0475
  Next 15,000                           0.0500
  Remaining                             0.0525
All kW demand                             8.30
 
(Ord. 2007-17, 5-23-2007)
   D.   Connection Fees:
      1.   Residential: The city power department requires an application for
service from all new residential customers and prior to the commencement of
construction on new residences. Application for service shall be made a
reasonable amount of time in advance of the time that service is required. For
temporary service and new construction, refer to section
7-6-13 of this chapter, the temporary service policy. Each time a customer is
connected to the electrical system for electric service at a point of delivery,
or each time a customer changes his point of delivery, the customer shall be
charged a connection fee. If service to a customer is disconnected for
nonpayment of service charges, the customer shall pay all delinquent service
charges, and in addition shall pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) reconnection fee
before service will be continued. The connection fees shall be established by
resolution by the city council. (1989 Code § 14-511.20; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Commercial:
         a.   General: This service connection fee is for alternating current
electric service, single phase or 3-phase, supplied at the city's available
voltage at a single point of delivery for all service required on the premises
for nonresidential services. Service will be provided at any point on the city
electric system where there are existing facilities with adequate capacity.
Refer to section
7-6-17 of this chapter, the line extension policy, for areas where no
electrical facilities exist.
         b.   Application: The city power department requires an application
for service from all new commercial customers and prior to the commencement of
construction of new commercial buildings. Application shall be made a
reasonable time in advance of the time that service is required. For temporary
service and new construction, refer to section
7-6-13 of this chapter, the temporary service policy. Connection fees are due
and payable at the time of application. Each time a customer is connected to
the electrical system for electric service at a point of delivery not
previously used, or each time a customer changes his point of delivery, or each
time a customer is reconnected after an involuntary disconnection to his same
point of delivery, the customer shall be charged a connection fee. The
connection fees shall be established by resolution by the city council. (1989
Code § 14.511.21; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Reconnection Fee: Any person desiring reconnection of service to the
city electrical power system after said service has been turned off, shall be
required to pay, in advance, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). (1989 Code §
14-511.9; amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Deposits And Refunds:
      1.   Renter Deposit:
         a.   All renters or tenants of commercial, residential or other
property shall pay a deposit, in advance, of commencement of electrical
service. Said deposit shall be in addition to the regular monthly or other
periodic payments for electricity.
         b.   Such deposits shall be received by the city treasurer and
deposited in the general account of the city and shall be retained by the city
so long as any services have not been paid for in full. The city shall use such
amount of said deposit as is needed to pay any delinquent charges for such
services not paid for by the tenant or renter.
         c.   The city council may by resolution require the landlord or owner
of rental property to be responsible for the payment of electrical power
services furnished to the property, whether or not the landlord or owner
resides upon the property. In addition, the landlord or owner may be required
to post such deposits with the city as the governing body may deem appropriate
to ensure the payment for electrical services. (1989 Code § 14-511.10; amd.
2007 Code)
      2.   Generally:
         a.   When Required: The department, at the time application for
electric service is made or at any time thereafter, may require a cash deposit
or guarantee satisfactory to the department to secure the payment of bills as
they become due. Such deposit or guarantee may be held in its entirety by the
department until final settlement of the customer's account. The amount of such
deposit may be equivalent of the estimated cost of service for ninety (90)
days, as estimated by the department.
         b.   Refunds: Deposits shall be refunded upon the customer's request
after a satisfactory payment history of twenty four (24) months. Deposits shall
be credited to the customer's bills for electric service. If the customer is
terminating service and that customer's deposit balance remains greater than
the customer's last bill, the remaining balance, after crediting the bill, may
be refunded directly to the customer. (1989 Code § 14-619)
   G.   Delinquency: All charges for electrical service shall be paid for
monthly by the customer. Any customer failing, neglecting or refusing to pay
such charges by the twentieth day of the month shall be assessed a five percent
(5%) penalty on the unpaid balance. Customers whose accounts are delinquent in
excess of thirty (30) days shall also be subject to having their electric
current shut off by the department. (1989 Code § 14-511.11)
7-6-12: SUPPLYING AND TAKING SERVICE:
   A.   Power Supply: The department supplies alternating current at
approximately sixty (60) cycles. Secondary distribution voltages are available
at 120/240 volts, 120/208 volts and 277/480 volts. The department may, at its
option, provide other voltages. All voltages are nominal and subject to
standard variation. The standard amperage shall be two hundred (200) amps.
   B.   Supply Of Service: Service will be supplied only under and pursuant to
these electric service regulations, and any modifications or additions thereto,
and such applicable rate or rates as may from time to time be adopted. Service
will be supplied under a given rate schedule only at such points of delivery as
are adjacent to facilities of the department and are adequate and suitable as
to capacity and voltage for the service desired. Otherwise, special agreements
between the customer and the department may be required.
   C.   Continuity Of Service: The department will use reasonable diligence to
supply steady and continuous service, but does not guarantee the service
against irregularities or interruptions. The department shall not be liable to
the customer for any injury, loss or damages occasioned by or related to
irregularities or interruptions from whatever cause, nor shall such
interruption or irregularity constitute a default in the service agreement or
on the part of the department.
   D.   Compliance With Regulations:
      1.   If compliance with orders or formal requests of any governmental
agency, curtailing or diverting the department's available electric power
resources, makes it impossible for the department to supply the full electric
power requirements of all its customers, the department shall not be liable for
any injury or loss caused by the resultant curtailment, in whole or in part, of
its supply to any customer. If any such curtailment reduces the amount of power
available to a customer below the minimum amount contracted for, such a
customer shall be relieved of the obligation to pay more than the amount of
power from time to time made available by the department. Such other
adjustments in amounts payable by the customer will be made as may be
equitable, taking into consideration the time and extent of curtailment.
      2.   Inability on the part of the department to meets its contractual
obligations to any customer, when such inability is due to the department's
compliance with an order or formal request of a governmental agency, shall not
constitute default on the part of the department as to any contract or
agreement, and any contract or agreement affected by such compliance shall
remain in full force and effect except as necessarily modified during the
effective period of such order or formal request.
   E.   Suspension Of Service For Repairs And Changes: When necessary to make
repairs or changes in the department electric facilities or other property, the
department may, without incurring any liability therefor, suspend service for
such periods as may be reasonably necessary and in such manner as not to
inconvenience the customer unnecessarily.
   F.   Use Of Service: Service shall be supplied directly to the customer
through the department's own meter, and shall be used by the customer only for
the purposes specified in and in accordance with the provisions of the service
agreement. Service shall be for the customer's use only, and under no
circumstances may the customer or the customer's agent, or any other individual
association or corporation install meters or other apparatus or facilities for
the purpose of remetering or reselling or otherwise disposing of service
supplied the customer to lessees, tenants or others, except in accordance with
a service agreement of the department which specifically authorizes such use of
the service. In no case shall the customer, except with the consent of the
department, extend or connect his installation to lines across or under a
street, alley, lane, court or avenue or other public or private space in order
to obtain service for an adjacent property through one meter, even though such
adjacent property be owned by the customer. In case such unauthorized
remetering, sale, extension or other disposition of service, the department may
immediately discontinue the supplying of service to the customer until such
unauthorized remetering, sale or act is discontinued and full payment is made
for all service supplied or used, billed on proper classification rate
schedules and reimbursement in full is made to the department for all extra
expenses incurred, including attorney fees, expenses for clerical work, testing
and inspections.
   G.   Right Of Way: Without reimbursement, the customer shall make or procure
conveyance to the department of right of way satisfactory to the department
across the property owned by or controlled by the customer for the department's
lines or extensions thereof necessary or incidental to the supplying of service
to the customer.
   H.   Access To Premises: The duly authorized agents of the department shall
have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the customer for the
purpose of inspecting wiring and apparatus, removing or replacing the
department's property, reading of meter, and all other purposes incident to the
supplying of electric service. It shall be the responsibility of the customer
to provide access that is safe and free of obstruction at all times. In the
event the department determines, in its discretion, that the access provided is
not safe or is not free of obstruction, it shall give the customer notice that
the customer must remove the unsafe condition and/or obstruction within ten
(10) days of the notice. In the event the customer fails to comply with the
terms of the notice, the city may do either of the following: 1) the city may
estimate for each month, the electrical consumption at the premises and use
that estimate for purposes of charging the customer for electrical consumption;
2) the city may without further notice, discontinue electric service at the
premises. If the city elects to estimate the electrical consumption, that
estimate shall equal the highest monthly level of metered consumption at the
premises during the preceding twelve (12) months, plus an additional twenty
five percent (25%). The estimate of consumption determined by the city shall be
binding upon the customer. The fact that the city estimates consumption for one
or more months shall not preclude it from subsequently electing to terminate
electric service if the customer has not removed the unsafe condition and/or
obstruction.
   I.   Location Of Customer's Service Entrance Conductors: The customer's
service entrance conductors shall be located at a point readily accessible to
the department's service drop, such point to be determined by the department.
(1989 Code § 14-613)
7-6-13: TEMPORARY SERVICE:
   A.   Applicability: The temporary service policy is applicable for all new
construction requiring temporary electric service. Service will be provided at
points where existing electrical facilities exist. Temporary service shall be
used only for the purpose of construction, other uses which are temporary and
which are approved by the electrical power department director. Temporary
service shall not be used to service uses which are normally served by regular
connections. Fees for temporary service shall be established by resolution by
the city council.
   B.   Application: Application for temporary service shall be made at time of
application for building permits. Fees for temporary service are due and
payable at the time of application.
   C.   Fees: Fees shall be charged for the following:
      1.   Service for first six (6) months.
      2.   Service for second six (6) months.
   D.   Maximum Use Period; Extension: Temporary service shall have a maximum
use period of one year. Extension may be granted if applicant can show
reasonable cause. Extensions shall be approved by the electrical power
department director.
   E.   Box And Pedestal: Applicant shall provide at the job site a service box
and meter pedestal for temporary service. Said box and pedestal shall meet
national electrical code standards as adopted by the city and shall be
inspected and approved by the building inspector. (1989 Code § 14-511.22; amd.
2007 Code)
7-6-14: INSTALLATIONS:
   A.   Customer Installation:
      1.   Customer Facilities For Receiving Service: The customer's facilities
for receiving shall be installed in accordance with the department standards
and national electrical code. The department specifications mentioned above are
on file at the department office and are hereby made part of these electric
service regulations.
      2.   Equipment: The customer shall not employ or utilize any equipment,
appliance or device so as to affect adversely the department's service to the
customer or to others. When polyphase service is supplied by the department,
the customer shall control the use thereof so that the load at the point of
delivery will be maintained in reasonable electric balance between the phases.
      3.   Power Factor Correction And Voltage Control:
         a.   The department reserves the right to require the customer to
install, at his expense, such power factor corrective and/or load limiting
equipment as is necessary for the department.
         b.   When fluorescent, neon, or other hot or cold cathode types of
gaseous tube lighting having similar power factor characteristics are installed
and used, the customer may be required to furnish, install and maintain, at his
own expense, corrective apparatus designed to maintain at not less than
approximately ninety percent (90%) lagging the power factor or each unit of
such equipment or group of such equipment controlled as a unit by a single
switch or its equivalent which controls only such unit. Similarly, all air
conditioning equipment installed after the effective date hereof shall be
equipped so that when in operation, the power factor is not less than ninety
percent (90%) lagging.
         c.   Where the customer installs power factor corrective equipment,
the department reserves the right to require the customer to install such
controls as are necessary, in the department's opinion, to prevent voltage or
other disturbances on the department's system that are detrimental to the
service furnished other customers.
         d.   The department shall have the right to refuse or discontinue
service to any such installation until the customer has complied with the
foregoing provisions. (1989 Code § 14-614)
      4.   Phase Of Motors:
         a.   Individual motor installations requiring less than five (5)
horsepower shall be single phase. Motors not exceeding one- half (1/2)
horsepower shall be for one hundred twenty (120) volts; and motors of one-half
(1/2) horsepower to five (5) horsepower shall be for two hundred forty (240)
volts. Exceptions may be served at the option of the department. (1989 Code §
14-614; amd. 2007 Code)
         b.   For installations of motors of five (5) horsepower and over, 3-
phase alternating current will be furnished at the voltage stated in the
service agreement; but single phase service, at the option of the department,
may be furnished for installations of motors of five (5) horsepower and over,
where the department has only single phase service available at the point where
the customer desires service.
      5.   Current Limiting Devices:
         a.   Auto starters or other suitable devices shall be provided by the
customer for all motors having above five (5) horsepower.
         b.   All motors starting on other than light load shall be provided
with a suitable device or be of suitable type to limit the starting current.
      6.   Changes In Installation: Since the department's service drop,
transformers, meters and other facilities used in supplying service to a
customer have a definite limited capacity, before making any material changes
or increases in the customer's installation or use, the customer shall give
notice thereof to the department, and obtain the department's consent thereto.
The department, as promptly as possible after receipt of such notice, will
either give its approval to the proposed change or increase, or will advise the
customer upon what conditions service can be supplied for such change or
increase.
      7.   Inspection By Department: The department shall have the right, but
does not assume the duty, to inspect the customer's installation at any time
and, from time to time, the department shall also have the right to refuse to
commence or to continue service whenever it does not consider such installation
to be in good operating condition, but the department does not in any event
assume any responsibility whatever in connection with the customer's
installation.
      8.   Customer's Responsibility: The customer assumes all responsibility
on the customer's side of the point of delivery for service supplied or taken
as well as for the electrical installation, appliances and apparatus used in
connection therewith, and shall indemnify the department from and against all
loss, cost, damage or claims for injury or damages to persons or property
occasioned by or in any way resulting from such service or the use thereof on
the customer's side of the point of delivery. Such indemnity shall extend to
cover all expenses, including all attorney fees and court costs, incurred by
the department, with or without suit. (1989 Code § 14-614)
   B.   Department Installation:
      1.   Installation And Maintenance: Except as otherwise provided in these
electric service regulations, in service agreements or rate schedules, the
department will install and maintain its lines and equipment on its side of the
point of delivery, but shall not be required to install or maintain any lines
or equipment, except meters on the customer's side of the point of delivery.
Only the department's agents are authorized to connect the department's service
drop to the customer's service entrance conductors.
      2.   Connections To Customer Service: The service drop will ordinarily be
installed overhead. If the customer desires to have the service drop installed
in any other manner, special arrangement will be made between the customer and
the department whereby such service drop will be installed and maintained at
the customer's expense.
      3.   Relocation Of Department Facilities At Customer Request: When,
solely for the customer's convenience, the department is requested to relocate
its facilities, the customer shall pay to the department the total cost of
making the requested change, as that cost is determined by the department.
      4.   Protection By Customer: The customer shall protect the department's
wiring and apparatus on the customer's premises and shall permit no one but the
department's agents or persons authorized by law to inspect or handle same. In
the event of any loss or damage to such property of the department caused by or
arising out of carelessness, neglect or misuse by the customer or other
unauthorized persons, the cost of making good such damages, including attorney
fees and court costs, shall be paid by the customer. (1989 Code § 14-615)
7-6-15: METERS:
   A.   Installation: The department will furnish and install necessary meter
or meters, and the customer shall provide and maintain locations for
installation thereof free of expense and satisfactory to the department.
   B.   Evidence Of Service Use: The registration of the department's meter
shall be accepted and received at all times and places as prima facie evidence
of the amount of power and energy taken by the customer.
   C.   Voltage Of Installation: Metering will be at secondary voltage unless
otherwise specified in the service agreement.
   D.   Meter Tests And Bill Adjustments:
      1.   When the accuracy of a meter is questioned, upon written request
from the customer, the department will test the meter by comparing with a
standard test meter. If the meter is found to be accurate within plus or minus
two percent (±2%), the customer will reimburse the department for the cost of
said test. Prior to any test, the department reserves the right to require a
deposit to cover said costs.
      2.   If the meter being tested is found to be more than two percent (2%)
slow or fast, no charge shall be made for testing and the department will
adjust the bill in proportion to the error (either fast or slow) for the period
covered by the billing question and until the date of installation of a new
meter, but said adjustment period, in any event, shall not exceed ninety (90)
days. (1989 Code § 14-616)
7-6-16: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Theft Of Electricity:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use electric current ahead of
the meter or to use, employ or follow any other procedure or device for
obtaining electricity without paying therefor, or to aid, abet, encourage or
assist any other person in so doing. (1989 Code § 14-511.12)
      2.   In any case of tampering with a meter installation or interfering
with the proper working thereof, or theft of service by any person, the
customer shall be liable to immediate discontinuance of service as provided
herein, and the department shall be entitled to collect from the customer at
the appropriate rate for all power and energy not recorded on the meter by
reason of such tampering, interfering, or theft or service diversion, as such
amount may be estimated by the department from the best available date. The
customer shall also pay all expenses, including attorney fees and court costs,
incurred by the department in the collection of amounts due or in the remedying
of any tampering, interfering or theft. (1989 Code § 14-617H)
   B.   Damage To System: It shall be unlawful for any person to take down,
remove, damage, obstruct, displace, destroy or otherwise interfere with any
power line or equipment, or any part thereof, or to sever or damage any wire or
cable thereof, or in any manner to interrupt the transmission of electricity
along such line, or damage in any manner whatsoever any building or structure
or machinery connected therewith. (1989 Code § 14-511.14)
   C.   Turning On Current: It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on the
electric current to his or any other premises or to use any electric current
from the city system without written permission from the department. (1989 Code
§ 14-511.15)
7-6-17: LINE EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Regulations May Be Adopted: The city council may adopt regulations
governing extensions of services of the department both inside and outside the
city limits. The regulations shall provide the conditions under which the
extensions shall be made to render compensatory and shall provide that each
extension project shall, when completed, become the property of the city,
whether on public or private property. The city council may provide for the
form of refunds where advances by the persons benefited are necessary to make
extensions compensatory. (1989 Code § 14-511.3)
   B.   Application: This line extension policy is applicable for all service
requirements located in the city at points where existing electrical facilities
do not exist, or exist but lack adequate capacity to properly serve a proposed
load. (1989 Code § 14-511.24)
   C.   Extension Of Distribution Lines:
      1.   Any person or persons, including a subdivider or developer, desiring
to have electrical distribution lines extended or modified shall, at the city's
option, advance the whole estimated cost of the proposed system or hire a
licensed electrical contractor to design the proposed extension or modification
of the system and shall also make application to the city by providing:
         a.   A description of the proposed extension or modification,
accompanied by a map designed by a licensed professional electrical engineer,
showing the location thereof. (Ord. 91-1, 2-14-1991, eff. 2-15-1991)
         b.   An agreement to pay the whole estimated cost of installing the
proposed extension or modification. Said estimated cost shall be agreed upon in
writing by the applicant and the city. Agreement shall state that applicant
agrees to pay cost overruns caused by unforeseen difficulties or errors in the
estimate. Agreement shall also state that the city will inform and review with
applicant all cost overruns at the time such overruns are made known unto the
city, and that the city will not incur these additional expenses until the
applicant has reviewed said expenses.
      2.   The city shall not cause the applicant to pay for extensions or
modifications of the electrical system when said extensions or modifications
are not necessary for the applicant's project unless there is a reimbursement
schedule provided as stated in this section.
      3.   The applicant may file written protest of estimated costs for
extensions and modifications of the electrical system with the electrical power
department director within fifteen (15) days of receipt of estimated costs.
Applicant shall present reasons for protest at the request of the electrical
power department director. The electrical power department director shall
determine adjustments, if any, of estimated costs within fifteen (15) days of
receipt of protest.
      4.   Upon receipt of application for service, and before the application
is granted, the city shall:
         a.   Obtain from the appointed city official a certified statement
showing the estimated cost and expense of making extension or modification.
         b.   Obtain from the engineer and the appointed city official a
certified statement showing that the electrical facilities have adequate
capacity to serve the proposed loads.
         c.   Obtain from the engineer, planner and appointed city official a
description of the area and number and type of users that may be served in the
future by the extension or modification and the estimated prorated share of the
cost that should be borne by said future users.
         d.   Determine the amount to be charged for future uses of the
extension or modification and what portion thereof shall be reimbursed to the
applicant upon payment by future users, and the time limit thereof.
         e.   Prepare an agreement specifying the manner and circumstances
under which said reimbursement shall be made.
      5.   The city may grant or deny said application as in its discretion
deems best for the welfare of existing users in the city. (1989 Code § 14-
511.24)
   D.   Deposit With City Treasurer:
      1.   If the city grants an application for line extension or
modification, the applicant and the city shall execute the agreement for said
extension or modification and the applicant shall deposit with the city
treasurer the amount of the estimated cost and expense of making such extension
or modification as certified by the appointed city official before any work is
initiated and within thirty (30) days after the granting of the agreement.
      2.   In the event that the estimated cost exceeds the actual costs, the
city shall refund to the applicant the difference between the two (2) costs.
The city shall provide to the applicant, upon his request, an accounting of the
expenditures on the extension or modification of the electrical system. (1989
Code § 14-511.25; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Rights Of Way Or Easements: Before any work is initiated on any
extension or modification of the electrical system, the applicant shall secure,
at his expense, all easements and rights of way necessary for said extension or
modification. All rights of way and easements shall be in the name of the city
and shall be for the construction and perpetual maintenance and replacement of
said extension or modification. (1989 Code § 14-511.26)
   F.   Applicant Responsibilities: The applicant shall be responsible to
facilitate the extension or modification of the electrical distribution lines
by:
      1.   Planning the installation of utilities to each lot or site to be
served to preclude conflict between other utilities and the electrical
distribution lines.
      2.   Schedule and coordinate the actual installation of improvements to
allow adequate time for the construction of the extensions or modifications.
      3.   Notify the power department director upon the completion of adequate
site preparation to allow the installation of the extensions or modifications.
(1989 Code § 14-511.27; amd. 2007 Code)
   G.   Site Preparation: The applicant shall prepare the site in the following
manner:
      1.   Installation of curb and gutter indicating permanent grade.
      2.   Markers installed on curb indicating property lines.
      3.   Level to final grade the first ten feet (10') of the front setback
area.
      4.   Utilities installed less than four feet (4') below final grade shall
not extend beyond the property line for more than twelve inches (12"). (1989
Code § 14-511.28)
   H.   Backfill Of Underground Facilities: The applicant shall backfill,
compact, test and guarantee for one year the backfill of all excavations for
underground facilities installed in response to his application. (1989 Code §
14-511.29)
   I.   Ownership Of Extensions Or Modifications: All extensions or
modifications shall be deemed the property of the city. (1989 Code § 14-511.30)
   J.   Estimated Costs: The figures used to estimate the costs of extensions
or modifications shall be established by resolution by the city council upon
recommendation by the power department director. (1989 Code § 14-511.24; amd.
2007 Code)
   K.   General Provisions:
      1.   Any person or persons, including any subdivider or developer
(hereinafter referred to as "applicant"), desiring to have electrical
distribution lines extended or modified, and being willing to advance the whole
expense of such extension or modification, may make application to the city by
providing:
         a.   A description of the proposed extension or modification,
accompanied by a map showing the location thereof. Applicant must also provide
electrical load information in sufficient detail to provide the city with full
knowledge of the electrical load requirements.
         b.   An offer to pay the whole expense incurred by the city in
providing such extension or modification and to advance such payment as said
expense shall be determined by the city.
      2.   The city will grant said application if, in its discretion, granting
the application is not detrimental to existing users in the city, and if the
applicant, in the determination of the city, is classified as permanent
service, indeterminate service or temporary service, and applicant complies
with all other provisions of this section. If the application is granted and
all other provisions of this section are complied with by the applicant, the
city will provide electric service within the boundaries of its service area.
   L.   Extensions For Permanent Service:
      1.   Upon payment of the required and applicable connection fee and
subject to all provisions of this section, the city shall make an extension for
permanent service at its own expense where, in the determination of the city,
the extension is classified as a standard service extension.
      2.   If the extension varies from the standard service extension, the
customer must pay a contribution in aid of construction for the entire cost of
the extension.
   M.   Extensions For Indeterminate Service: The applicant shall make a
contribution in aid of construction for the entire cost of the extension, in an
extension for indeterminate service.
   N.   Extensions For Temporary Service:
      1.   For temporary service extensions, the city shall require the
applicant to pay the city, in advance of construction, an amount equivalent to
the city's estimate of the total cost of constructing and removing the
extension, less estimated salvage value of material used.
      2.   Service provided to a temporary extension shall be billed in
accordance with the rate schedule applicable.
      3.   The city may refuse to connect additional customers to temporary
service extensions.
      4.   Service over temporary service extensions will not be continued for
a period longer than eighteen (18) months. If the customer desires service
thereafter, said continued service shall be furnished under the terms of either
the permanent service or indeterminate service, but only if the city's estimate
of the future use of service then justifies the continued operation and
maintenance of the line.
   O.   Contributions In Aid Of Construction:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days after the granting of an application under
this section, or such other time as the city shall indicate, and before any
work begins or is undertaken by the city for any extensions or modifications
for which contributions in aid are required under this section, the applicant
shall deposit with the city one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
estimated cost and expense of making such extension or modification as
determined by the city, plus an additional ten percent (10%) of the total
estimated cost and expense for such work to pay for administrative costs.
Deposits or contributions in aid of construction will be calculated to reflect
the estimated construction costs by the city.
      2.   Since the deposit is based on an estimate of the cost of the work to
be completed, at the completion of the proposed work, the applicant shall pay
the city any additional money required, or the city shall reimburse the
applicant any excess money received, so that the applicant will pay the city
for the actual cost associated with the proposed work, plus the ten percent
(10%) administrative cost. Such additional payments to the city shall be made
within thirty (30) days of receipt by the applicant of notice of such
additional payments.
      3.   Contributions in aid shall not affect the applicant's or customer's
applicable rate schedule. In other words, the customer will be served under the
applicable rate schedule, independent of any contribution in aid of
construction.
      4.   Facilities constructed with funds from a contribution in aid of
construction become the property of the city.
   P.   Extensions For Underground Power Lines: The city will install, own and
maintain all underground facilities to the point of delivery. At the option of
the city, the applicant shall backfill, compact, test and guarantee the
backfill of excavation for underground facilities installed in response to his
or her application.
   Q.   Large Industrial Loads: Large industrial loads involving special
construction or circumstances will be individually analyzed and the provisions
of the extension policy agreed upon in writing. In the absence of such a
written agreement, the applicant will bear the entire cost of such special
construction and shall provide funds to the city in accordance with this
section.
   R.   Rights Of Way Or Easements: Before any work shall be done on any
extension or modification, the applicant shall furnish, at no cost to the city,
adequate rights of way or easements, in the name of the city, for construction
and perpetual maintenance and replacement of said extension or modification.
   S.   Applicant Responsibilities: At the option of the city, the applicant
shall be responsible to facilitate the extension or modification of electrical
distribution lines by:
      1.   Planning the installation of utilities to each lot or site to be
served to preclude conflict between other utilities and the electrical
distribution lines.
      2.   Scheduling and coordinating the actual installation of improvements
to allow adequate time for construction of electrical distribution lines.
      3.   Notifying the city upon completion of adequate site preparation to
allow installation of electrical distribution lines.
   T.   Site Preparation: At the option of the city, the applicant shall
prepare the site for electrical distribution line installation before notifying
the city to install said lines.
   U.   Estimated Minor Line Extension Costs:
      1.   For minor line extension or modifications, as determined by the
city, the costs given in the following tables 1 and 2 shall be used for
estimation purposes. For other line extensions or modifications, cost estimates
will be prepared on a project specific basis.
      2.   These costs given in tables 1 and 2 are based on normal construction
conditions or requirements which may exist at the proposed construction site
and are intended as estimates only. The city is not bound by the costs listed
in the following tables 1 and 2 in establishing project or construction
estimates or in determining final costs of line extensions.
   TABLE 1
   OVERHEAD CONSTRUCTION ESTIMATED COSTS
Item Cost  
Item                                                     Cost  
Secondary (#2 triplex 0–150 feet)                      $ 300.00
Secondary (#1/0 triplex 0–150 feet)                    325.00
Secondary (#1/0 quadraplex)                              460.00
35 foot service pole                                     525.00
40 foot service pole                                     625.00
Down guy and anchor                                      325.00
10 kVA transformer                                       880.00
25 kVA transformer                                       1,000.00
50 kVA transformer                                       1,300.00
75 kVA transformer                                       1,710.00
Single phase poles:                                       
   40 foot tangent1                                   750.00
   40 foot tap1                                       835.00
   40 foot single dead end1                           845.00
   40 foot heavy angle1                               1,085.00
3-phase poles:                                            
   40 foot tangent1                                   820.00
   40 foot tap1                                       975.00
   40 foot single dead end1                           930.00
   40 foot heavy angle1                               1,225.00
Single phase primary conductor (#2 ACSR) (per 100 feet)2 71.00
3-phase primary conductor (#4/0 ACSR) (per 100 feet)2    191.00
 
   Notes:
       1.   Add $55.00 for 45 foot poles.
    2.   Due to market fluctuations, conductor prices should be verified at the
time of the estimate preparation.
   TABLE 2
   UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION ESTIMATED COSTS
Item Cost  
Item                                            Cost  
Secondary (#2 triplex cable 0–150 feet)       $ 470.00
Secondary (#1/0 triplex cable 0–150 feet)     500.00
Secondary (#1/0 quadraplex cable 0–150 feet)  610.00
Padmount transformer 25 kVA (10)                1,480.00
Padmount transformer 37.5 kVA (10)              1,605.00
Padmount transformer 50 kVA (10)                1,785.00
Padmount transformer 75 kVA (10)                2,035.00
Padmount transformer 100 kVA (10)               2,110.00
Padmount transformer 75 kVA (30)                5,200.00
Padmount transformer 112.5 kVA (30)             5,650.00
Padmount transformer 225 kVA (30)               6,775.00
Padmount transformer 300 kVA (30)               7,550.00
Padmount transformer 500 kVA (30)               9,255.00
Single phase, 40 foot terminal pole             1,350.00
Single phase, 45 foot terminal pole             1,405.00
3-phase, 40 foot terminal pole                  2,535.00
3-phase, 45 foot terminal pole                  2,535.00
Single phase primary cable - #2 AL. (per foot)1 12.00
3-phase primary cable - #1/0 AL. (per foot)1    18.75
3-phase primary cable - #4/0 AL. (per foot)1    19.90
 
   Note:
      1.   Due to market fluctuations, conductor prices should be verified at
the time of the estimate preparation.
(Ord. 94-17, 6-22-1994)
7-6-18: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
Free access at all reasonable hours shall be allowed employees of the
department to all premises supplied with electrical service. All meters shall
be outside of the building which they serve and readily accessible, and
mounting of the meter must be approved in advance by the department. It shall
be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the employees of the
department in the performance of their duties. (1989 Code § 14-511.13)
7-6-19: CHANGES AND ADDITIONS; CONFLICTS:
   A.   Application Of Electric Service Regulations And Rate Schedules: Service
agreements that are presently in effect or that may be entered into in the
future are made expressly subject to these electric service regulations and to
the applicable rate schedules and any modifications or additions thereto. When
practicable, thirty (30) days' notice, by publication in a local newspaper or
by mail, at the department's option, will be given to any of the customers
affected by any such change, addition or substitution.
   B.   Conflicts: In case of a conflict between any provision of these
electric service regulations, a customer's service agreement or a rate
schedule, the provision of the service agreement takes precedence, followed by
the provision of the rate schedule. (1989 Code § 14-620)
7-6-20: NONLIABILITY:
The city and its power system shall not be held liable for damages to any
electric user by reason of a stoppage, fluctuation of voltage, or interruption
of electrical service caused by accident to power plant, service or
transmission lines, alterations, additions, repairs or other unavoidable
causes. (1989 Code § 14-511.16)
7-6-21: PENALTY:
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any person violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 14-511.17; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE A. UNDERGROUND POWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION:
7-6A-1: Approved And Adopted
7-6A-1: APPROVED AND ADOPTED:
The "Washington City Underground Power Construction Standards And
Specifications", dated October 2003, as prepared by ICPE, and revised by the
city power director, three (3) copies of which have previously been filed with
the city recorder for use and examination by the public, is hereby approved and
adopted by the city. (Ord. 2003-25, 11-12-2003; amd. Ord. 2014-09, 2-12-2014)
ARTICLE B. ELECTRICAL STREET LIGHTING USAGE CHARGES
SECTION:
7-6B-1: Applicability; Charges; Specifications; Service
7-6B-1: APPLICABILITY; CHARGES; SPECIFICATIONS; SERVICE:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   This section applies to all city street lighting within the
corporate limits of the city, including mercury vapor lamps, sodium vapor high
intensity discharge lamps, and metal halide lamps anywhere on the city's
interconnected system.
      2.   This section provides for street lighting service required for the
lighting of public streets, alleys, thoroughfares and public grounds by sodium
vapor, metal halide or mercury vapor lamps.
   B.   Charges: Street lighting monthly bill is eight dollars fifty cents
($8.50) plus per lamp charge.
   NOMINAL LAMP RATING
Initial Lumens Watts Per Lamp
Initial Lumens                          Watts       Per Lamp
Mercury vapor lamps:                                
      4,000                                $ 4.41
      7,000                                6.65
      10,000                               8.64
      20,000                               12.67
      37,000                               20.56
      54,000                               26.90
Sodium vapor lamps:                                 
      5,600   high intensity di         3.87
      8,500   high intensity di         5.10
      16,000   high intensity d         6.19
      22,000   high intensity d         7.82
      27,500   high intensity d         9.11
      50,000   high intensity d         13.27
Metal halide lamps:                                 
      12,000                               12.90
      19,500                               13.03
      32,000                               13.85
      107,000                              27.36
 
   C.   Specifications And Service: Each street lighting lamp will be operated
from a multiple circuit (alternating current only) from dusk to dawn. The
entire installation, including initial lamp requirements and wiring with a
suitable connection to the city system, will be furnished and installed by the
customer, except that installations on city owned poles will be made by the
city and the cost thereof will be billed to the customer. Installations must
meet city construction standards and codes at the time of installation. If the
city is unable to obtain materials to perform maintenance, the streetlight
facilities will be deemed obsolete and must be upgraded at the customer's
expense in order to be accepted by the city. The street lighting service
provided includes energy, lamp and glassware replacements and cleaning of
glassware, and replacement of damaged or inoperative photocells, ballasts,
starting aids, poles, mastarms and luminaries. However, any costs for materials
that are over and above costs for the city's standard materials, as determined
by the city, are not included in this service. The customer shall pay any such
extra cost. The city will control the burning hours of lamps. (Ord. 2006-01, 1-
11-2006)
ARTICLE C. RENEWABLE RESOURCE POLICY
SECTION:
7-6C-1: Availability
7-6C-1A: Solar Installation Company Agreements
7-6C-2: Application Provisions
7-6C-3: Inspection
7-6C-4: Energy Rates And Payments
7-6C-5: Liability
7-6C-6: Forms
7-6C-1: AVAILABILITY:
Washington City (“City”) desires to encourage the use of Renewable Resources
with Washington City Electric Customers (“Customer”) by making available a
meter capable of measuring the electrical energy delivered from the City to the
Customer and the electrical energy received from the Customer to the City
(“Bidirectional Meter”). The Bidirectional Meter will be available to any
electric Customer connected to Washington City’s electric distribution system
provided that the Customer installs a solar, wind, or other City-approved
renewable generation resource (“Renewable Resource”) on the Customer’s side of
the meter, subject to the Application Provisions.
Washington City also desires to set a capacity cap of 4,000 installed kilowatts
(kW) of Renewable Resources allowed to connect to the City distribution system
after which applications for connection will no longer be accepted. The
capacity cap will be reviewed from time to time by the City and may be
increased or decreased if it is in the best interest of the City. (Ord. 2017-
39, 9-27-2017; amd. Ord. 2023-23, 6-14-2023)
7-6C-1A: SOLAR INSTALLATION COMPANY AGREEMENTS:
All solar companies wanting to do business in Washington City boundaries shall
meet with the Washington City Power department to discuss a solar installation
agreement. This agreement will go over solar standards, policies and procedures
for Washington City Power and Dixie Power in the Washington City boundaries.
All companies shall be represented by a solar company installation manager,
company representative, and emergency contact. Upon completion of the class,
the solar company will be approved to apply for building permits and to do
business in the Washington City Boundaries. (Ord. 2023-23, 6-14-2023)
7-6C-2: APPLICATION PROVISIONS:
The Customer must make an application to Washington City and receive approval
from the City before installing an interconnected Renewable Resource on their
property. Washington City may withhold approval if for any reason the requested
interconnection would result in a negative monetary or physical impact on the
City’s electrical system.
The City may approve the agreement if there are no physical or monetary
negative impacts.
   A.   By accepting this Renewable Resource Policy, the Customer hereby agrees
to the following provisions:
      1.   System Maximum Size & Output Limits
         a.   The maximum total system AC output is limited to 16 kW for
residential installations. Commercial and residential systems over 16 kW will
be reviewed on a case by case basis and may require an additional study &
review process.
         b.   The monthly electrical energy output of the Renewable Resource
shall not be greater than 120% of the historical maximum monthly energy
consumption (kWh) of the location of the Renewable Resource.
      2.   A Renewable Resource installed by the Customer shall include, at the
Customer’s expense, all equipment necessary to meet applicable safety, power
quality and interconnection requirements established by the City, State,
National Electric Code (NEC), National Electric Safety Code (NESC) and shall be
manufactured and installed to interconnection standards that meet or exceed the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (“IEEE”) standard 1547
for Interconnecting Distributed Resources with Electric Power Systems and
Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (“UL’) standard 1741, Inverters, Converters and
Controllers for use in Independent Power Systems. Energy storage systems must
comply with UL 9540, Energy Storage System (ESS) Requirements, listed and
comply with all state and code requirements. Additional UL, IEEE and other
industry standards may apply.
      3.   The Customer shall be required to install or upgrade the following:
         a.   A manual disconnect for the renewal resource system that is
within 5 feet of the meter location, readily accessible by City personnel and
outside of any fenced area. The disconnect switch shall be lockable and shall
be labeled as “Generation Disconnect”.
         b.   Equipment required to meet rapid shutdown requirements.
         c.   A single production meter base located adjacent to the manual
disconnect wired to measure the total output of the Renewable Resource. The
City will provide the production meter.
         d.   For ESS systems smoke detection equipment shall be installed and
must comply with all code requirements.
         e.   If the existing main service location and equipment does not
comply with current Code or City requirements the service equipment must be
upgraded to comply with all current Code and City requirements.
      4.   The City shall install and maintain a new revenue meter for the
Customer, at the Customer’s expense. In addition, any subsequent revenue meter
change necessitated by the Customer, whether because of a decision to stop the
Renewable Resource Policy or for any other reason, shall be an expense billed
to the Customer at the applicable service rates.
      5.   By accepting this agreement, the Customer releases to the City all
renewable energy credits (RECs), solar renewable-energy credits (S-RECs) or
other renewable attributes as appropriate based on actual on-site electric
generation from the Renewable Resource.
      6.   The Customer will comply with all City service and utility billing
requirements, including payments for applicable monthly electrical base rates
and other utility billings, fees and taxes.
      7.   The Customer will comply with all installation requirements,
building and electric codes of the City.
      8.   The Customer’s facility used for Renewable Resource generation shall
be equipped with metering equipment, which can measure the flow of electricity
delivered to the Customer from the City and received from the Customer to the
City. For customer facilities less than 25 kilowatts (kW) in rated capacity,
this shall be accomplished through the use of a single, bi-directional electric
revenue meter.
      9.   The City shall make Renewable Resource available to eligible
customers on a first-come, first-served basis. Single or multiple Renewable
Resource connections to a City owned transformer, which create an imbalance
that exceeds 20% of the nameplate rating may be denied at the City’s discretion
or, if approved, may require system upgrades including additional transformers
or other system upgrades at the Customer’s expense.
      10.   System Design Review & Approval Requirements
         a.   All renewable resource system designs shall be reviewed and
approved by a third-Party reviewer prior to submitting plans to the City for
review. The third-party reviewer must be a City approved third party reviewer.
The Customer will be responsible for costs associated with the third-party
review and shall pay the reviewer directly.
         b.   The renewable system design must also be reviewed and approved by
the City through the standard building permit process.
         c.   Renewable Resource connections to City facilities above the
standard single phase 120/240 volt system shall be reviewed by the City under a
separate review and approval process, which may include a system impact study.
         d.   Large single phase, three phase or complex systems installations
over 16 kW AC output may also require a separate review, study and approval
process. (See paragraph 11 below).
         e.   Renewable Resource connections to transmission (69 kV) or
distribution (12.47 kV) lines within the City are prohibited.
         f.   Systems that include battery or generation backup capabilities
may require additional review and study costs.
      11.   Special System Engineering And Study Requirements.
         a.   If the Renewable Resource project requires special engineering
studies, the Customer shall be responsible for all costs. The need for
additional system engineering studies will be solely determined by the City.
         b.   An estimate of the Study costs shall be provided by a licensed
engineering firm as determined by the City and payment will be made by the
Customer, to the City, before the engineering study is approved. Final billing
for the study will be trued up upon completion and the Customer shall be billed
for any amount above, or their electric account credited, for any amount below
the initial estimate.
      12.   The Customer shall be solely responsible for all work, and costs
incurred, for installation and maintenance of the Renewable Resource. All
modifications or improvements required to the City’s electric system, due to
the Customer’s installation of facilities, shall be paid for by the Customer.
(Ord. 2017-39, 9-27-2017; amd. Ord. 2023-23, 6-14-2023)
7-6C-3: INSPECTION:
Upon approval and installation of a Renewable Resource, but before installation
of the Bidirectional Meter, the City shall inspect the Renewable Resource
installation and interconnection and approve or disapprove the interconnection.
The City may disapprove any final interconnection for any reason.
   A.   The City shall have the right to inspect the Customer’s Renewable
Resource during reasonable hours and with reasonable prior notice to the
Customer. If the City finds that the Customer’s Renewable Resource is not in
compliance with the requirements of the City’s interconnection rules and the
standards set forth in this Policy, and noncompliance adversely affects the
safety or reliability of the City’s facilities or other customers’ facilities,
the City may require the Customer to disconnect the facility until compliance
is achieved.
   B.   If the City disconnects the Renewable Resource, the Customer shall
receive in a timely manner, a written explanation of the disconnection. The
Customer shall have the right to correct the situation and petition the City to
re-establish an interconnection. (Ord. 2017-39, 9-27-2017; amd. Ord. 2023-23,
6-14-2023)
7-6C-4: ENERGY RATES AND PAYMENTS:
The Customer shall be subject to the following provisions for service under
this Policy:
   A.   For all kWh delivered by the City to the Customer, the Customer shall
pay the applicable retail rate, as if the Customer had not installed a
Renewable Resource.
   B.   For all kWh received from the Customer to the City, the City shall
credit the Customer’s current electric bill during the current billing period
at the current rate per kilowatt-hour as approved by the City Council. Note
this rate may be adjusted +/- in conjunction with the overall City power rates.
   C.   Each account is charged and/or credited ($) on a monthly basis for the
energy delivered and received. Carryover of kWh’s produced to the City’s system
from month to month is not allowed.
   D.   Energy produced and consumed onsite by the customer is considered the
avoided cost or return on investment and will not be included in the
determination of the wholesale credit to the customer account.
   E.   If the credit amount ($) exceeds the electrical charges due, a credit
will be applied on the next month’s billing. At the discretion of the City, a
check may be issued to the Customer in lieu of a credit amount.
   F.   If a home with a Renewable Resource is sold, any remaining credit
amounts will be applied to the outstanding electrical billing for kWh
consumption and base fee or a check will be issued if a credit amount is due to
the Customer.
   G.   Renewable Resource credit shall only be applied to offset part of or
all of a Customer’s own electrical requirements at a single metering point.
Renewable Resource credit shall not be applied to multiple meters owned by a
single customer at separate locations.
   H.   This agreement is between the electric Customer and the City. Nothing
in this policy allows for the purchase or sale of energy produced by the
Customer to or from a third party. Renewable Resources on rental units are not
eligible for Renewable Resource installation under this policy.
   I.   The City reserves the right to modify or amend this Policy, the City’s
avoided cost rate, the displacement ratio, or the monthly service charge, upon
reasonable advance notice to the Customer. (30 days.) (Ord. 2017-39, 9-27-2017;
amd. Ord. 2023-23, 6-14-2023)
7-6C-5: LIABILITY:
The Customer shall be responsible for any damage caused by the Customer’s
Renewable Resource to the City’s distribution system and other customer
facilities. The Customer shall be responsible for the installation and
maintenance of applicable protection equipment, and for any damage caused by
improper application, maintenance or faulty equipment. The City will not be
liable directly or indirectly for permitting or continuing to allow an
attachment of a Renewable Resource, or the acts or omissions of the Customer’s
Renewable Resource that cause loss or injury, including death, to any third
party.
Application for the Customer’s Renewable Resource, within a Home Owners
Association (HOA), must be accompanied by a letter of approval of the Renewable
Resource installation, signed by the Chairman of the board at the time of
application. The letter must include a copy of the minutes showing a majority
vote of approval. The City is not liable for any violation of existing CCR’s
within an HOA, related to the Customer’s installation of a Renewable Resource.
For multi-family unit locations, if the installation requires feeders and/or
equipment to be installed on or across another owner’s unit the Customer must
obtain proper written easement/permission for such an installation. The
Customer is solely responsible to obtain any needed easements or permissions.
Neither the City nor the Customer, shall be subject to any liability or damages
due to the inability of the City to serve the Customer’s load, due to lack of
energy from either the City or the Renewable Resource.
Neither the City nor the Customer, shall be subject to any liability or claims
for damages due to the inability of equipment manufacturers or vendors to
provide equipment or repairs essential for the safe operation of the system in
a timely manner. (Ord. 2017-39, 9-27-2017; amd. Ord. 2023-23, 6-14-2023)
7-6C-6: FORMS:
Forms for the Renewable Resource program are on file at the city offices or
available online. (Ord. 2017-39, 9-27-2017; amd. Ord. 2023-23, 6-14-2023)
ARTICLE D. POWER BOARD
SECTION:
7-6D-1: Establishment Of Power Board; Members; Appointment
7-6D-2: Power Board Duties
7-6D-3: Term
7-6D-4: Vacancies; Resignations; Removals
7-6D-5: Compensation Of Board Members
7-6D-6: Board Meetings
7-6D-7: Rules And Procedures
7-6D-8: Quorum And Vote
7-6D-9: Employees And Expenditures
7-6D-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF POWER BOARD; MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT:
   A.   The Power Board is hereby established by the City to serve as an
advisory board to the City Council.
   B.   The Power Board shall consist of five (5) voting members, each of whom
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with advice and consent of the City Council,
and one current member of the City Council as a non-voting member appointed by
the Mayor. No person shall be appointed or serve as a voting member of the
Power Board, unless he/she shall be a resident of the City and receive
electrical services from Washington City Power.
   C.   The City Council shall appoint from the voting members of the Power
Board, a Chairperson, whose term shall be for one year and continuing until a
successor Chair is appointed. The Power Board and/or the City Council may
create and appoint other Power Board officers from the current members of the
Power Board as deemed necessary.
   D.   The Power Board functions as an advisory board to the City Council and,
as such, is only a recommending body. (Ord. 2016-03, 1-13-2016)
7-6D-2: POWER BOARD DUTIES:
The duties and responsibilities of the Power Board are as follows:
   A.   Provide the City Council with recommendations regarding Power
Department operations and policies.
   B.   Make recommendations to the City Council for rates as it deems
necessary so that the Power Department operates on a self- sustaining economic
basis.
   C.   The Power Board may proactively initiate its own research and submit
its recommendations and findings to the Power Director, City Manager and/or
City Council for consideration.
   D.   Report to the Mayor and City Council regularly and upon request.
   E.   Undertake additional duties and responsibilities, which the Mayor and/
or City Council may request from time to time.
   F.   The Power Director shall assist the Power Board in carrying out its
duties and responsibilities and shall work with the Power Board in matters
pertaining to the Power Department. (Ord. 2016-03, 1-13-2016)
7-6D-3: TERM:
The term of office of a voting member of the Power Board shall be three (3)
years and continuing until his/her respective successor has been appointed.
Voting member terms shall be filled in staggered terms so that the terms of at
least two (2) voting members expire each year. The Mayor (with advice and
consent of City Council) may reappoint any Power Board member to any number of
subsequent terms. (Ord. 2016-03, 1-13-2016)
7-6D-4: VACANCIES; RESIGNATIONS; REMOVALS:
Vacancies of voting members of the Power Board created by other than the
designated expiration of term shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term by appointment by the Mayor, with consent and advice of the City
Council. The City Council may remove any member of the Power Board by a
majority vote of the City Council. Any member of the Power Board resigning is
requested to provide at least thirty (30) days' written notice to the Mayor and
City Council, however a successor to such resigning member may be appointed at
any time following receipt of such notice. (Ord. 2016-03, 1-13-2016)
7-6D-5: COMPENSATION OF BOARD MEMBERS:
The Power Board may receive compensation for services as determined by the City
Council. Furthermore, the City Council may provide for the reimbursement of the
Power Board for actual expenses reasonably incurred by members in the exercise
of Power Board assignments or duties. Such reimbursements shall be subject to
all City policies and procedures regarding "requests for reimbursement". (Ord.
2016-03, 1-13-2016)
7-6D-6: BOARD MEETINGS:
The Power Board shall conduct regularly scheduled meetings and special meetings
as established by the City Council, which meetings shall comply with applicable
noticing and/or advertising provisions of Utah Public Meeting Laws. (Ord. 2016-
03, 1-13-2016)
7-6D-7: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
The Power Board may adopt such rules and procedures it deems necessary for the
proper conduct of its business or as established or directed by the City
Council. The Power Board shall keep a record of its proceedings compliant with
Utah Public Meetings Laws, which shall be open to inspection by the public
consistent with applicable Utah Public Document Access Laws. (Ord. 2016-03, 1-
13-2016)
7-6D-8: QUORUM AND VOTE:
A "quorum" of the Power Board is required to conduct a Power Board meeting. A
quorum is defined as attendance by three (3) voting Power Board members. The
concurring vote of a majority of the voting members of a quorum of the Power
Board is required to carry any motion or take any Power Board action. (Ord.
2016-03, 1-13-2016)
7-6D-9: EMPLOYEES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Power Board may, upon approval of the City Council, employ such staff as it
may deem necessary for its work, and may contract consultants for services it
may require to fulfill its duties and assignments from the City Council;
provided, that the expenditures of the Power Board shall not be in excess of
such sums as may be appropriated by the City Council. (Ord. 2016-03, 1-13-2016)
CHAPTER 7
STORM WATER UTILITY FEE
SECTION:
7-7-1: Purpose
7-7-2: Definitions
7-7-3: Establishment Of Fee
7-7-4: Billing
7-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
city and its inhabitants by improving the city storm water system, managing and
controlling storm water runoff, protecting property, preventing polluted waters
from entering the city water supply and other receiving waters, and
establishing a viable and fair method of financing the construction, operation
and maintenance of the storm water system. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-9-2004)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
DEVELOPMENT PARCEL: Any parcel that has been altered from its natural condition
by grading, filling or the construction of improvements or other impervious
surfaces.
EQUIVALENT SERVICE UNIT (ESU): The average amount of impervious surfaces
expressed in square feet on developed single-family residential parcels.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities or at greater rates of flow than
the natural surface. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-9-2004)
7-7-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE:
Each developed parcel of real property in the city shall be charged a storm
water utility fee.
   A.   ESU: The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent service units
(ESUs) contained in the parcel. The city council finds that the ESU is the most
accurate measurement for determining the amount that each parcel contributes
to, benefits from and otherwise uses the storm sewer utility.
   B.   Calculation: The city council finds that each single-family residential
parcel contributes approximately the same amount of storm water runoff;
therefore, each developed single-family residential parcel shall pay a base
rate of one ESU. All nonsingle-family residential parcels shall pay a multiple
of this base rate, expressed in ESUs, calculated by dividing total square feet
of impervious surface by three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet,
rounded to the nearest whole number.
   C.   Charge Per ESU: The amount charged for each ESU may be established by
resolution of the city council.
   D.   Exemptions And Credits: The city council may establish exemptions and
credits to the storm water utility fee by resolution.
   E.   Policies: The public works department may adopt policies, consistent
with this chapter and any resolution passed by the city council, to assist in
the application, administration and interpretation of this chapter and any
resolutions related to the storm water utility.
   F.   Appeals: Any person or entity that believes that this chapter, or any
storm water utility rate resolution, was interpreted or applied erroneously to
their property, may appeal to the public works director ("director") designee.
The appeals shall be in writing, shall state any facts supporting the appeal,
and shall be made within ten (10) days of when the appeal was filed. (Ord.
2004-14, 6-9-2004)
7-7-4: BILLING:
The city council finds that the city storm water and sewer system, sanitary
sewer water, culinary sewer water and solid waste collection systems are
interrelated services that are a part of a unified city plan for the health,
safety and welfare of the city and its residents in an environmentally
responsible manner. Therefore, the storm water utility fee shall be included on
the city's regular monthly utility bill for any given property. Failure to pay
any portion of the utility bill may result in termination of water/electrical
services. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-9-2004)
CHAPTER 8
UTILITY BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
7-8-1: Title
7-8-2: Monthly Billing
7-8-3: Due Date
7-8-4: Late Charge
7-8-5: Involuntary Disconnect Procedures
7-8-6: Voluntary Disconnect Procedures
7-8-7: Customer Change
7-8-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM UTILITY BILLING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 91-
2, 2-28-1991, eff. 2-28-1991)
7-8-2: MONTHLY BILLING:
All charges for water, sewer and electrical services provided by the city shall
be billed monthly on a combined statement (the "statement"), together with
charges for solid waste collection services. (Ord. 91-2, 2-28-1991, eff. 2-28-
1991)
7-8-3: DUE DATE:
All charges billed on the statement shall be due and payable on the due date
provided on the statement. The due date shall be generally between fifteen (15)
and twenty five (25) days after the statement is mailed. All payments received
by the city shall be allocated among the charges billed on the statement
according to procedures determined by the city's independent auditor. Those
procedures shall be based on requirements of the city's debt obligations and
limitations in the city's computer facilities. (Ord. 91-2, 2-28-1991, eff. 2-
28-1991)
7-8-4: LATE CHARGE:
A late charge equal to five percent (5%) of all charges not paid on the due
date thereof is hereby assessed. The late charge shall be due and payable with
all other unpaid charges. (Ord. 91-2, 2-28-1991, eff. 2-28-1991)
7-8-5: INVOLUNTARY DISCONNECT PROCEDURES:
In the event any customer fails to pay all charges billed for electrical, water
and sewer services, and any late charges assessed, on or before the twenty
fifth day of the calendar month in which the charges are due, the customer
shall be subject to the following disconnect procedures:
   A.   The customer shall be mailed at the customer's last known address a
notice providing: 1) that the customer's electrical service shall be
disconnected if all delinquent charges for electrical services and all related
late charges are not paid within ten (10) days of the date of the notice; and
2) that the customer's water service shall be disconnected if all delinquent
charges for water and sewer services and all related late charges are not paid
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice. The customer shall be
informed in that notice that the customer may request a hearing to be held
within that ten (10) day period to challenge the correctness of charges.
   B.   The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed as utility hearing
officer for the city. If a customer requests in writing that a hearing be held
during normal business hours within that ten (10) day period and that writing
is received by the city no later than twenty four (24) hours prior to the time
for the hearing, the utility hearing officer shall hold an informal hearing
with the customer to determine if the charges are correct. The hearing may be
continued by the utility hearing officer from time to time in order for the
officer to assemble evidence. The determination of the utility hearing officer
shall be announced to the customer at the hearing and that determination shall
be final. The utility hearing officer shall not have any authority to consider
questions of hardship or inability to pay.
   C.   If all delinquent charges for electrical services and all related late
charges are not paid within the ten (10) day period and the utility hearing
officer has not determined that the charges are incorrect, the electrical
services for the customer shall be disconnected. The electrical meter shall be
removed from the premises as part of the disconnection process. If all
delinquent charges for water and sewer services and all related late charges
are not paid within the fifteen (15) day period and the utility hearing officer
has not determined that the charges are incorrect, the water services for the
customer shall be disconnected. The water meter may be removed from the
premises as part of the disconnection process, if such removal is deemed
necessary by city utility personnel to prevent unauthorized reconnection to the
city water system.
   D.   The electrical services may only be reconnected for the customer if the
following are paid:
      1.   An electrical reconnect charge of fifty dollars ($50.00);
      2.   All outstanding late charges for electrical services; and
      3.   All delinquent charges for electrical services.
   E.   The water services may only be reconnected for the customer if the
following are paid:
      1.   A water reconnect charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) ($125.00 if the
water meter has been previously removed by the city);
      2.   All outstanding late charges for water and sewer services; and
      3.   All delinquent charges for water and sewer services. (Ord. 91-2, 2-
28-1991, eff. 2-28-1991)
7-8-6: VOLUNTARY DISCONNECT PROCEDURES:
In the event a customer desires to disconnect the water and/or electrical
services, the service shall be disconnected by the city. The city may, for
security purposes, remove the electrical and/or water meters as part of the
disconnection process. Then, if service is again requested by that customer, a
single reconnect charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be paid to reconnect
the service disconnected. (Ord. 91-2, 2-28-1991, eff. 2-28-1991)
7-8-7: CUSTOMER CHANGE:
   A.   Electrical And/Or Water Service: In the event a new customer applies
for electrical or water services at a location which is, at the time, connected
to the city electrical or water system, the customer shall make proper
application and shall pay a five dollar ($5.00) name change fee. If the
location has been disconnected under the involuntary or voluntary disconnect
procedures of sections
7-8-5 and
7-8-6 of this chapter, the customer shall make proper application to the city
and shall pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) reconnect fee.
   B.   Security Deposit: A three hundred dollar ($300.00) security deposit is
required on all residential accounts and a five hundred dollar ($500.00)
security deposit is required on all commercial accounts. The deposit shall be
waived if the customer is, at that time, a customer of the city's utility
service and has an account that has been in good standing for a period of
twelve (12) consecutive months. (Ord. 2008-15, 4-23-2008)
ARTICLE A. MEDICAL ALERT PROGRAM FOR
UTILITY BILLING COLLECTIONS
SECTION:
7-8A-1: Customer Responsibility
7-8A-1: CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The customer has the responsibility of notifying the city if there is
someone in his or her household who is either:
      1.   Chronically or seriously ill, and
      2.   On a life support system, and
      3.   Medically requires uninterrupted electric service.
   B.   The customer must provide a letter or certification from a doctor or
hospital advising of the above condition.
These letters will be reviewed and brought up to date in January and July of
each year.
   C.   The customer has the responsibility to carefully handle their account
so that service will not be interrupted for failure to pay.
With the medical alert designation, the city will make every effort to make
personal contact with the customer before service is terminated.
Customers in the medical alert program will be given a thirty (30) day notice
prior to termination of service.
The notice will be sent by first class mail to the mailing address that is on
the account.
The notice period shall start with the date that is on the notice.
If the customer has provided a valid telephone number, the city will also
attempt to contact the customer by telephone prior to the disconnection of
service. All attempts to contact the customer will be documented and kept on
file. (Ord. 2009-01, 2-11-2009)
TITLE 8
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 1
UNIFORM CODES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Uniform And International Codes
8-1-2: Building Code
8-1-3: Plumbing Code
8-1-4: Mechanical Code
8-1-5: Electrical Code
8-1-6: Fire Code
8-1-7: Code For The Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
8-1-8: Energy Code
8-1-9: Administrative Code
8-1-10: Revisions And Amendments To Codes
8-1-11: Penalty
8-1-1: UNIFORM AND INTERNATIONAL CODES:
The uniform and/or international codes as adopted by the state are hereby
adopted by the city to regulate and control the design, erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance and use of all
buildings, structures or systems in the city, and further, to provide for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees, and provide for penalties for
violations thereof. (Ord. 2007-02, 1-24-2007)
8-1-2: BUILDING CODE:
   A.   Building Code Adopted: The current uniform/international building
standard/code, which has been adopted by the state for use in the state, is
hereby adopted by the city. Three (3) copies of the current code shall be filed
for use and examination by the public, in the office of the city recorder.
(Ord. 2007-02, 1-24-2007)
   B.   Permit And Approval Requirements:
      1.   Application For Permit: A building permit shall be secured from the
building department on written application accompanied by plans and
specifications in duplicate, which must state the specific nature of the
construction or alteration to be made. The plan must be verified by the person
who will perform or be in charge of the construction or alterations. (1989 Code
§ 12-212; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Approval Of Plan: The application and plans shall be forwarded from
the building department to the building official, who shall review the plan to
determine whether the proposed construction or alteration conforms to the
building codes and ordinances of the city. The building official shall return
the plans with the statement "approved" if the plans do conform or
"disapproved" if the plans do not conform. If the plans are disapproved, the
reasons therefor shall be annexed to the plans. Upon receipt of an approved
plan, the building department shall issue a permit to the applicant, together
with one set of the approved plan. One set of the plans shall be retained by
the building department. The building official may revoke at any time a permit
which has been issued for any building constructed, or being constructed, or
which would be or result, if constructed, in a violation of any ordinance of
the city. (1989 Code § 12-213; amd. 2007 Code)
      3.   Variations Of Plan Prohibited: No material variation from the
approved plan shall be allowed unless such variation shall first have been
approved in writing by the building official. (1989 Code § 12-214)
      4.   Penalty; Exception:
         a.   It shall be a class C misdemeanor for any homeowner, and a class
B misdemeanor for any person who receives payment or anything of value, to
construct or alter any building or structure, except as exempted by the
building codes, without first securing the permit required by this chapter.
         b.   This section shall not apply where the retail cost of the
materials used in the construction or alteration is less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), except that it shall apply in all cases where the
construction or alteration results in an enlarged structure or affects the
walls of the building or structure. (1989 Code § 12-210; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Building Permit Fee Schedule: The city recorder shall collect a
building permit fee, which shall be in such amount as adopted by resolution of
the city council. The determination of value or valuation shall be made by the
building official using the building valuation data in said resolution, which
is on file in the city office. (Ord. 98-14, 5-13-1998; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Fencing Along Desert Tortoise Habitat Conservation Plan Reserve: No
building permit on any structure on any property which borders the Washington
County desert tortoise habitat conservation plan (HCP) reserve shall be issued
unless the HCP has first issued a written approval for a fencing plan along the
border of the reserve. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a structure
in violation of this subsection or to fail to comply with an approved fencing
plan. (Ord. 97-4, 1-8-1997)
8-1-3: PLUMBING CODE:
   A.   Plumbing Code Adopted: The current uniform/international plumbing code,
which has been adopted by the state for use in the state is hereby adopted by
the city. Three (3) copies of the current code shall be filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the city recorder. (Ord. 2007-02, 1-
24-2007)
   B.   Application And Scope: The provisions of this section shall apply to,
but not be limited to, all new construction, relocated buildings and to any
installation, alteration, repair or reconstruction of a plumbing system within
the city, except as otherwise provided in this section. (1989 Code § 12-411)
   C.   Plumbing Inspector:
      1.   Created: There is hereby created the position of plumbing inspector.
      2.   Powers And Duties, Generally: The plumbing inspector shall issue
permits to properly licensed, bonded and registered persons. Licensing should
be for work to be done within the scope of this section. The plumbing
inspector:
         a.   Shall order changes in workmanship and/or materials essential to
enforce compliance with all provisions of the plumbing code.
         b.   Shall investigate any construction or work regulated by this
section and issue such notices and orders as are necessary to prevent or
correct dangerous or unsanitary conditions.
         c.   May recommend the revocation of any license to the state
department of business regulation for cause, and report to the department of
business regulation all violations of this section by journeymen, apprentices
or contractors. (1989 Code § 12-412)
   D.   Allowance For Exception: Where structural conditions impose extreme
difficulty in fully complying with the plumbing regulations of this section,
any aggrieved party may apply in writing to the plumbing inspector for special
permission to deviate from the regulations. If, in the judgment of the plumbing
inspector, such deviation is reasonable and does not create an unsanitary or
unsafe condition, he shall recommend to the governing body that the request for
deviation be approved or disapproved, or that approval is subject to such
conditions as the governing body may require. The governing body, on review,
may approve or disapprove the application or vary the conditions on which
approval is granted. (1989 Code § 12-413)
   E.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: No plumbing shall be installed, nor additions or
alterations made in existing plumbing, except as provided in subsection E2 of
this section, without first obtaining a permit. Application for such permits
shall be in writing to the city recorder and shall describe the nature of the
work to be done and affirm that the plumbing will conform to the plumbing code.
No permit shall be issued to any applicant during the time that he shall fail
to correct any defective plumbing installed by him after he has been notified
in writing by the plumbing inspector of the defective work. (1989 Code § 12-
418)
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   Repairs which involve only the working parts of a faucet or
valve, the clearance of stoppages, the repairing of leaks or the replacement of
defective faucets or valves may be made without a permit; provided, that the
permits shall be procured to replace fixtures, traps, soil, waste and vent
pipes, unless waived by the plumbing inspector.
         b.   Any person regularly employed by an owner or lessee of property,
or his agent, for the sole purpose of operating and maintaining such property
and to make minor repairs thereof, and any owner or lessee of property shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section when doing work for which permits
are not required. (1989 Code § 12-422)
      3.   Homeowner Permit: Any permit required by this section may be issued
to any person to do any plumbing or drainage work regulated by this section in
a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the
usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings in the
event that any such person is the bona fide owner of any such dwelling and
accessory buildings and quarters, and that the same are occupied by or designed
to be occupied by the owner; and further provided, that the owner shall furnish
the plumbing inspector with a complete layout drawing of the proposed work,
satisfies the plumbing inspector that he has a working knowledge of the
requirements contained in this section, pays the necessary fees and calls for
all inspections required by this section. (1989 Code § 12-423)
      4.   Expiration Of Permit: Every permit issued by the plumbing inspector
shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is
not commenced within one hundred (100) days from the date such permit is
issued, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at
any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred twenty (120)
days or more. (1989 Code § 12-420; amd. 2007 Code)
      5.   Denial Of Permit: The plumbing inspector may refuse to issue permits
for any plumbing work to any person who has had a permit revoked in accordance
with this chapter during such time as such person fails to perform plumbing
work in conformance with this section. (1989 Code § 12-421)
      6.   Revocation Of Permit: The plumbing inspector may revoke any permit
when the person to whom the permit is issued fails, neglects or refuses to do
the work thereunder in conformance with this section, or when the permit is
issued in error. (1989 Code § 12-419)
   F.   Fees And Charges:
      1.   Permit Fees: The fee for each permit shall be in such amount as
established by resolution of the city council. (1989 Code § 12-424; amd. 2007
Code)
      2.   Reinspection Charge: After notice that any plumbing work is ready
for inspection, if the plumbing inspector calls at the place designated to make
such inspection and finds the work not ready for inspection, he may charge an
additional fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for each additional inspection
required, except that the governing body may from time to time change the
inspection fee required in this subsection by resolution. (1989 Code § 12-425;
amd. 2007 Code)
   G.   Right Of Entry: The plumbing inspector shall have the right of entry
within reasonable hours to any building or premises for the purpose of
inspection, or to investigate any work or conditions governed by this section.
(1989 Code § 12-414)
   H.   Power To Condemn: The plumbing inspector is hereby empowered to condemn
and order repaired, removed, replaced or changed any plumbing found in any
unsanitary condition or not in accordance with this section. Failure to comply
with the order within a reasonable time is an infraction, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 12-416; amd. 2007 Code)
   I.   Interest In Sale Or Installation Of Equipment Prohibited: The plumbing
inspector and his assistants shall not in any way engage in the sale or
installation of plumbing equipment upon which they are required to make
inspection hereunder. (1989 Code § 12-417)
   J.   Refusal To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or
occupant of any building or premises to fail, neglect or refuse to repair,
remove, replace or change within ten (10) days after written notice to do so
from the plumbing inspector, any plumbing condemned by such inspector;
provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any occupant not responsible
for the installation or repair of the condemned plumbing. (1989 Code § 12-426)
   K.   Penalty:
      1.   The violation of any provision of this section by any homeowner,
building owner or manager of any building, apartment, hotel, motel or other
structure shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   The violation of any provision of this section by any person who
receives payment or anything of value for performing such work shall be a class
B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 12-427; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-4: MECHANICAL CODE:
The current uniform/international mechanical code, which has been adopted by
the state for the use in the state is hereby adopted by the city. Three (3)
copies of the current code shall be filed for use and examination by the public
in the office of the city recorder. (Ord. 2007-02, 1-24-2007)
8-1-5: ELECTRICAL CODE:
   A.   Electrical Code Adopted: The current national electrical code, which
has been adopted by the state for use in the state, is hereby adopted by the
city. Three (3) copies of the current code shall be filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the city recorder. (Ord. 2007-02, 1-
24-2007)
   B.   Inspections: The building official shall perform all functions of
electrical inspection and shall, among other things, inspect and supervise the
construction, installation and repair of all electric light and power wiring,
fixtures, appliances or apparatus installed within the limits of the city,
except those of the public utility companies, and shall require compliance with
the provisions of the electrical code. Wiring, fixtures and apparatus
heretofore installed need not necessarily be made to conform strictly to all
the provisions of the electrical code. The building official shall require the
correction of such defects as he deems actually dangerous to life or property.
Those same enforcement standards established in the building code shall be
followed by the building official for all electrical work. (1989 Code § 12-301;
amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Fees: Permit fees for electrical permits and inspections shall be in
such amounts as established by resolution of the city council. (1989 Code § 12-
303; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Disturbances:
      1.   Nuisance Declared: Electrical installations for signs, equipment or
other facilities which create electrical disturbances that cause interference
with normal radio or television reception beyond the immediate vicinity of such
electrical installations are hereby declared to be a nuisance. The owners or
operators thereof shall so install and maintain such installations as to avoid
or eliminate such interference, using all known means and devices for such
purpose, such as proper grounding, connections, condensers, resistors and live
chokes.
      2.   Enforcement: The building official shall withhold or withdraw
approval of any electrical installation causing the above disturbance, and is
hereby authorized to take all steps necessary for the abatement of such
conditions. (1989 Code § 12-304)
   E.   Installations:
      1.   Business License Required: No person shall engage in the
installation, alteration, repair or construction of any electrical work,
wiring, fixtures, appliances or equipment inside or outside of any building,
except work done for or on the property of the city, and excluding owner/
builder, without first securing a business license and paying the fee therefor
as provided in title 3, chapter 1 of this code. (1989 Code § 12-311; amd. 2007
Code)
      2.   Unlawful Installation; Disconnection:
         a.   If the building official shall find any part of any electrical
light or power wiring appliances, apparatus or fixtures in or upon any building
in the city to have been installed without a permit, or installed not in
accordance with the provisions of the electrical code, or to be dangerous to
life or property, the building official shall have the right and power to
disconnect, or cause to be disconnected, such defective work, fixtures,
appliances or apparatus and place a seal upon the same, and shall at the same
time give written notice of such disconnection to the owner or occupant of the
building.
         b.   After such disconnected wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus
have been put in the condition required by this subsection, the seal so placed
shall be removed by order of the building official. (1989 Code § 12-314; amd.
2007 Code)
      3.   Notification To Inspect:
         a.   Upon completion of the installation of any electrical wiring,
fixtures, appliances or apparatus in or on any building, it shall be the duty
of the person doing the work to notify the building official, who shall cause
the same to be inspected and, if approved, to issue a certificate of
inspection, which shall contain the date of such inspection and a statement
that the installation is approved.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on or connect the
current with such installation until such certificate shall be issued and it
shall also be unlawful to make any change, alteration or extension in or to the
installation of any electrical wiring, fixture, appliances or apparatus in or
on any building after inspection without notifying the building official and
securing a permit to do so. (1989 Code § 12-315)
         c.   The requirement of permits, inspection and supervision shall not
apply to those items exempted by the National Electrical Code, and to minor
repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses,
changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints, repairing drop cords
and wiring for appliances and devices operating at less than twenty five (25)
volts. (1989 Code § 12-315; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-6: FIRE CODE:
   A.   Fire Code Adopted:
      1.   The current International Fire Code, which has been adopted by the
State of Utah, is hereby adopted by the City to encompass the Washington City
Fire Code including, appendices B: Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings, C:
Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, D: Fire Apparatus Access Roads.
      2.   A copy of the current code shall be maintained for use and
examination by the public in the Office of the City Recorder.
   B.   Appeals:
      1.   Board Of Appeals Created; Jurisdiction; Composition: There is hereby
created a Board of Appeals to be known as the Washington City Council, to hear
and decide appeals of orders, decisions and determinations made by City
officials and Enforcement Officers relative to the application and
interpretation of the International Fire Code.
      2.   Filing Of Appeal: Any individual or entity desiring to appeal a
decision of a City official or Enforcement Officer, as provided for herein,
shall file a notice of appeal, in writing, with the City Recorder within twenty
(20) days after being provided notice of the decision or determination from
which an appeal is sought. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the Secretary
shall refer the matter to the Board for a hearing.
      3.   Hearing: The hearing shall be scheduled within a reasonable time
after the filing of the notice of appeal and shall be a public hearing. The
appellant may present such evidence and argument as is pertinent to the
question of whether or not the decision of the City official or Enforcement
Officer was correct. The Board shall also permit the presentation of evidence
and argument by the City official or Enforcement Officer and other interested
parties.
      4.   Standard Of Review And Burden Of Proof: The Board shall presume the
action of the City official or Enforcement Officer which is the subject of the
appeal is valid and uphold such action unless it is shown that such action was
an abuse of discretion or was otherwise contrary to law. The burden of proof
shall at all times remain with the appellant. It shall take an affirmative vote
of three (3) members to reverse or modify the action which is the subject of
the appeal.
      5.   Time Frame For Decision: Within ten (10) days of the hearing, the
Board shall, over the signature of its Chairperson (Mayor) or such other member
of the Board as it may designate, render its written decision, a copy of which
shall be mailed to or served upon the appellant by the City Recorder.
      6.   Decision; Limits On Authority: In rendering its decision, the Board
may uphold, reverse or modify the decision of the City official or Enforcement
Officer which is the subject of the appeal. Appeals shall be based on a claim
that the intent of the applicable Fire Code provision or rules adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, do not apply, or an equivalent
method of protection or safety is proposed. The Board shall have no authority
to waive the requirements of the Fire Code.
         a.   Determination Upheld: In the event the Board upholds the
determination of the City official or Enforcement Officer, the notice
originally given by the City official or Enforcement Officer which is the
subject of the appeal shall be deemed to be sufficient to require the appellant
to comply therewith and the appellant shall have up to ten (10) days from the
date of notice of the Board's decision within which to conform thereto.
         b.   Determination Overruled Or Modified: In the event the Board
either overrules or modifies the determination of the City official or
Enforcement Officer, the written decision of the Board shall apprise the
appellant of that fact and set forth the details and the action that appellant
may be required to take, if any, to conform to the decision of the Board.
Unless a longer time frame is provided in the Board's decision, the appellant
shall be required to conform to the decision of the Board within ten (10) days
after service or mailing of a copy of the decision, and the decision shall be
deemed to be the modified decision of the City official or Enforcement Officer.
      7.   Miscellaneous Administrative Provisions:
         a.   Rules And Procedures: The Board is authorized to establish
policies and procedures necessary to carry out its duties and any hearing.
         b.   Disqualification Of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in
which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest.
         c.   Postponed Hearing: When five (5) members are not present to hear
an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representatives shall have
the right to request a postponement of the hearing. Failure to request a
postponement at the beginning of any hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the
right to have any appeal heard by a full five (5) member Board.
         d.   Stay Of Decision: Except in those circumstances where the City
official or Enforcement Officer deems, in his or her sole discretion, that
there is an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the filing of an
appeal as provided for in this subsection shall operate as an automatic stay of
the decision being appealed from.
         e.   Time Computed: In computing any period of time prescribed or
allowed by this subsection, the day of the act or event from which the
designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of
the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, or
a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day
that is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday.
   C.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Washington
City Fire Code or fail to comply therewith, or who shall build in violation of
any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the Governing Body or by a court of competent
jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, shall, severally for each and every
such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation nor permit it to continue. All persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and
when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
      2.   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of the prohibited condition. (Ord. 2018-16, 6-13-2018)
8-1-7: CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
   A.   This chapter shall implement the current edition of the international
property maintenance code.
   B.    Purpose And Scope: It is the purpose of this chapter to provide just,
equitable, and practicable methods to require the repair (including temporary
boarding) and vacation of buildings or structures that endanger the life, limb,
health, property, safety, or welfare of the general public or their occupants.
   C.   Definitions:
   BUILDING CODE: The international building code, or its successor,
promulgated by the international code council, as adopted by the State of Utah.
   BOARDED BUILDING: A building in which accessible openings, such as windows
and doors, are secured by a secondary means against entry. Examples of securing
a building by a secondary means includes, but is not limited to, boarding and
fencing.
   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS: Any building or structure that has any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described may be deemed to be a dangerous
building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the
life, health, property, or safety of the public or its occupants are
endangered.
      A.   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of
exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide
safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
      B.   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of exit is warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not
provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
      C.   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due
to all dead and live loads, is more than one and half (1.5) times the working
stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose or location.
      D.   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such
catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for
new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.
      E.   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
      F.   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the
building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location
without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such
buildings.
      G.   Whenever any portion of a building or structure has wracked, warped,
buckled, or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions
have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the
case of similar new construction.
      H.   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because
of (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii)
the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for
the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay or
inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or
completely collapse.
      I.   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
      J.   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base.
      K.   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows thirty-three percent (33%) or more damage or deterioration of its
supporting member or members, or fifty percent (50%) damage or deterioration of
its non-supporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
      L.   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire,
wind, earthquake, or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
become an attractive nuisance to children or as to enable persons to resort
thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful acts.
M.   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this
jurisdiction, as specified in the building code, or of any law or ordinance of
this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location, or structure of
buildings.
      N.   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting
part, member or portion less than fifty percent (50%), or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than sixty-six percent (66%) of the (i) strength,
(ii) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (iii) weather-resisting
qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed
building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
      O.   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be unsanitary,
unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause
sickness or disease.
      P.   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a
fire hazard.
      Q.   Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to
constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity
jurisprudence.
      R.   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever
any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months
so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or
hazard to the public.
   VACANT/SECURE BUILDING: An unoccupied building having all openings, such as
windows and doors, secured against entry, where windows are fully glazed and
the doors are secured by means of a lock.
   D.   Authority To Enforce:
      1.   Authority To Enforce: The building official or designee is hereby
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Authority To Inspect: The building official or their designee is
hereby authorized to make inspections and take such actions as may be required
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Buildings Or Structures Subject To Inspection: Any building or
structure, where there is reasonable cause to believe a condition exists that
renders the building or structure endangering the life, limb, health, morals,
property, safety, or welfare of the general public or the structure's
occupants, is subject to inspection by the building official or their designee.
   E.   Procedures Upon Determination Of A Violation: When the building
official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and
determined that such building is a dangerous building, the building official
shall follow the enforcement procedures set forth herein.
   F.   Appeals: Appeals of a notice and order issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be taken in accordance with chapter
5-4-4 of the Washington City code.
   G.   City's Abatement Of Property: If the property owner does not comply
with the notice and order issued pursuant to this chapter within the time
specified in the notice and order, the building official or designees may cause
the building to be repaired, vacated, or temporarily boarded to the extent
necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set
forth in the notice and order. Any such repair, vacation, or boarding shall be
completed and the cost thereof paid and recovered as set forth in this chapter.
   H.   Recovery Of Costs:
      1.   Permitted Recovery Of Costs: If the building official or designee
causes the repair, vacation, or boarding of a building pursuant to a notice
issued under this chapter, and after the property owner received at least ten
(10) days' notice in which to complete the repair, vacation or boarding and
failed to do so, Washington City may collect the cost of that abatement, by
filing a property tax lien, as set forth in this section.
      2.   Itemized Statement Of Costs: Upon completion of the repair,
vacation, or boarding work, the building official or designee shall prepare an
itemized statement of costs and mail it to the property owner by certified mail
or reputable mail tracking service that is capable of confirming delivery,
demanding payment within thirty (30) days of the date the statement is post
marked. The itemized statement of costs may include an administrative fee to
cover the city's administrative expenses in contracting for the repair,
boarding, or to cover other abatement costs that are not otherwise included in
the statement of costs.
      3.   Form Of Itemized Statement Of Costs: The itemized statement of costs
shall include:
         a.   The address of the property at issue;
         b.   An itemized list of all expenses incurred by Washington City,
including administrative and other abatement costs;
         c.   A demand for payment;
         d.   The address where payment is to be made;
         e.   Notification that failure to timely pay the expenses described in
the itemized statement may result in a lien on the property in accordance with
this chapter and Utah code section 10-11-4(4) or its successor;
         f.   Notification that the property owner may file a written objection
to all or part of the statement within twenty (20) days of the date the
statement is postmarked; and
         g.   Where the property owner may file the objection, including the
name of the office and the mailing address.
      4.   Delivery of Statement of Costs: The itemized statement of costs
described in subsection 3 shall be deemed delivered when delivered via email to
an previously used email address that has been used by city employees to
correspond with the owner, or when mailed by certified mail or reputable mail
tracking service that is capable of confirming delivery addressed to the last
known address of the property owner, according to the records of the county
recorder.
      5.   Objection To Statement Of Costs: A property owner may appeal the
statement of costs to a hearing official, only as to the issue of whether the
costs were actually incurred, pursuant to the process set forth in chapter
5-4-4 of the Washington City code.
      6.   Failure To Object Or Pay: If the property owner fails to make
payment of the amount set forth in the itemized statement within thirty (30)
days of the date of the mailing of that statement, or to file a timely
objection, then the city may certify the past due costs and expenses to the
Washington County treasurer.
      7.   Failure To Pay After Objection Hearing: If the property owner files
a timely objection but fails to make payment of any amount ordered by the fines
hearing officer within thirty (30) days of the date of the hearing, the
inspector may certify the past due costs and expense to the Washington County
treasurer.
      8.   Lien on Property: After entry by the Washington County treasurer, as
set forth in subsections 6 and 7, the amount entered shall have the force and
effect of a valid judgment of the district court, is a lien on the property,
and shall be collected by the Washington County treasurer at the time of the
payment of general taxes.
      9.   Release of Lien: Upon payment of the amount set forth in the
itemized statement of costs or otherwise determined due and owing by the fines
hearing officer, the judgment is satisfied, the lien is released from the
property, and receipt shall be acknowledged upon the general tax receipt issued
by the treasurer.
   I.   Applicability Of Building Code: All buildings or structures which are
required to be repaired under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the provisions of the applicable building and construction codes adopted
pursuant to chapter 1 of this title 8.
   J.   Public Nuisances:
      1.   Declaration And Abatement Of Public Nuisances: All buildings or
structures or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the
building official to be dangerous are hereby declared to be public nuisances
and shall be abated by repair, vacation, or boarding in accordance with the
procedures specified herein.
      2.   Boarded Or Vacant Building As Public Nuisance: Any structure that is
vacant or which has been boarded may be declared a public nuisance upon a
determination that the structure is detrimental to the safety or public welfare
of the residents and property values of this city.
   K.   Boarding Or Temporarily Securing Buildings: The provisions of this
chapter apply to any person or entity who is ordered to board a building under
this chapter
8-1-7 and any person or entity who voluntarily boards a building.
   L.   Registration:
      1.   Registration Required: Registration is required to board a building.
In the case where the city causes the boarding work to be done, the city will
register the property on which the building is located and will bill the record
owner the yearly registration fee. In the case where the building official
causes temporary boarding work to be done and the building is boarded for more
than forty-five (45) days, the provisions of Washington City code
8-1-7 shall apply.
      2.   Registration Process: Registration of a property on which a boarded
structure shall be located must be done on a form provided by the building
official or designee. The form shall specify the following:
         a.   The address of the structure to be boarded or temporarily
secured;
         b.   The type of building;
         c.   For residential structures, the number of dwelling units;
         d.   For nonresidential buildings, the number of square feet of all
building faces at ground level;
         e.    The name, address, and telephone number of a person authorized
to act as an agent for the owner for performing the owner's obligations under
this article, who lives within forty (40) miles of Washington City; and
         f.   Whether the property has the required external water source for
landscaping, if landscaping is required.
   M.   Notice Of Registration: Upon registration the city may record with the
Washington County recorder's office a notice of registration. The recordation
of a notice of registration shall not be deemed an encumbrance on the property
but shall merely place interested parties on notice that the cost of Washington
City abatement activities may be outstanding and recoverable as a lien on the
property. Once the building official determines that the property is no longer
subject to registration then a notice of deregistration shall be recorded.
Recordation of the notice of deregistration shall have the effect of canceling
the recorded notice of registration.
   N.   Yearly Registration Fees:
      1.   Annual Fee: Upon registration and on each yearly anniversary of the
date the property was registered pursuant to this article, a property owner
desiring to maintain a boarded building shall pay the annual boarding
registration fee shown on the Washington City consolidated fee schedule. A
change in ownership shall not restart the yearly amount of registration fees,
but such fees shall increase as set forth in the Washington City consolidated
fee schedule in accordance with the amount of time that the property has been
registered.
      2.   Late Penalty And Interest: If annual registration fees are not
timely paid, an accounts receivable fee and interest shall accrue.
      3.   Failure to Register: Boarding a building before registering pursuant
to this article shall result in a fine of up to twenty-five percent (25%) of
the boarding registration fee specified in the Washington City consolidated fee
schedule.
      4.   Collection Of Fees: If the property owner fails to pay the boarding
registration fees, the city may take legal action to collect any amounts owed.
   O.   Posting Of Boarded Or Closed To Occupancy Buildings: Whenever a
building is boarded or closed to occupancy, the city shall be authorized to
install a sign to be mounted on the exterior of the building. The sign shall
state that the building is closed to occupancy and that it is unlawful for any
unauthorized person to enter the building. The sign shall also provide phone
numbers to call if people are seen on the property or if doors or windows are
unsecured.
   P.   Method Of Securing Buildings: All buildings shall be boarded in the
following manner:
      1.   Securing Opening: All openings in the structure on the first floor,
other openings easily accessible from the ground, and openings with broken
glass, shall be secured either by erecting a single one-half (½) inch thick
layer of plywood sheathing or similar material, not to include chipboard/OSB,
covering over all exterior openings, overlapping the opening on every edge by
three (3) inches, affixed along the edges by nails or screws spaced every six
(6) inches.
      2.   Alternatives to Securing Openings: Alternately, the openings may be
secured by conventional wood frame construction. The frames shall use wood
studs of a size not less than two (2) inches by four (4) inches (nominal
dimension) placed not more than twenty-four (24) inches apart on center. The
frame stud shall have the four (4) inch sides or the wide dimension
perpendicular to the face of the wall. Each side of the frame shall be covered
with plywood sheathing or similar material of at least one-half (½) inch
thickness or equivalent lumber nailed over the opening by using nails or screws
spaced every six (6) inches on the outside edges and every twelve (12) inches
along intermediate stud supports; and
      3.   Exterior Doors: Exterior doors shall be secured by a strong non-
glass door adequately locked to preclude entry of unauthorized persons, or
shall be covered as an opening described in subsection 1 or 2 of this section
or successor sections.
   Q.   Landscape Maintenance: Existing landscaping and lawn on the property
shall be maintained in the manner otherwise required by Washington City code
9-14-18, as it may be amended.
   R.   Exterior Maintenance:
      1.   Exterior of Building: The exterior of a boarded building shall be
maintained by the owner. In particular, exterior walls and surfaces shall be
properly maintained and severely weathered, peeling, or unpainted wood and
damaged siding and roofing shall be replaced or repaired with similar materials
and colors.
      2.   Salvage Permit Required: Doors, windows, special glass, fixtures,
fittings, pipes, railings, posts, panels, boards, lumber, stones, bricks,
marble, or similar materials within the interior of a boarded building shall
not be salvaged except upon the issuance of a permit and approval of plans.
   S.   City Maintenance Of Property:
      1.   Notice: If the building official or the building official's designee
determines that a boarded building and/or property is not being maintained, the
building official or the building official's designee shall issue a notice
requiring compliance with the building maintenance standards as required in
city code.
      2.   Failure to Comply with Notice: If the building official or designee
determines that the property owner has failed to comply with the notice and
order, the city may cause the work to be done by a contractor hired by the city
and the city may recover its abatement costs.
   T.   City Maintenance Of Landscaping: If the building official or the
building official's designee determines that the landscaping on the property
surrounding a boarded building is not being maintained as required by city
code, the building official or the building official's designee shall follow
the notice of violation and corrective measures procedures as detailed herein.
   U.   Violations:
      1.   It is unlawful for the building owner to fail to maintain the
boarded building or ensure the building remains vacated after the property has
been abated by either the city or the building owner. Each day a violation
occurs shall be a separate offense.
      2.   Violations of the provisions of this chapter are punishable in
accordance with chapter
5-1-16 of the Washington City code.
   V.   Building Inspections Required: Whenever a property owner, manager, or
tenant intends to clean, repair, renovate, reopen or reoccupy a building that
has been boarded, the building is to be inspected by the building official or
designee and a permit must be issued by building services or its successor
prior to the building owner, manager, or tenant initiating any of the above
actions. Any person conducting any work on a building that has been boarded or
closed to occupancy must have a valid building permit at all times. (Ord. 2025-
22, 6-25-2025)
8-1-8: ENERGY CODE:
   A.   Energy Code Adopted: The current Uniform/International Energy Code,
which has been adopted by the State of Utah, for use in the State of Utah, is
hereby adopted by the City. Three (3) copies of the current code shall be filed
for use and examination by the public in the Office of the City Recorder. (Ord.
2007-02, 1-24-2007)
   B.   Penalty: It is unlawful for any person to perform any act prohibited by
this section, or to fail or refuse to perform any act commanded in this
section, or to aid or abet therein, or to fail or refuse to comply with any
valid order issued by the building official pursuant to the provisions of this
section. Permits shall not be issued to any applicant during the time the
person fails to correct any defective work or noncomplying installation of
equipment after written notice by the building official. Any person violating
any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor
and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1989 Code § 12-572; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-9: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE:
The current Uniform/International Administrative Code, which has been adopted
by the State for the use in the State, is hereby adopted by the City. Three (3)
copies of the current code shall be filed for use and examination by the public
in the Office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 2007-02, 1-24-2007)
8-1-10: REVISIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODES:
Any code as adopted by this chapter shall also include the adoption of any and
all revisions, supplements and amendments as and when such revisions,
supplements and amendments are adopted by the State, without action by the City
Council, provided at least three (3) copies of said revisions, supplements and
amendments are kept on file in the Office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 2007-02,
1-24-2007)
8-1-11: PENALTY:
Any violation of any provisions of the codes herein adopted shall be deemed a
Class B misdemeanor. Also, any structure or equipment built or installed in
violation of any provision of the codes herein adopted shall be deemed a public
nuisance and may be abated by appropriate proceedings. (Ord. 2007-02, 1-24-
2007)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING OFFICIAL
SECTION:
8-2-1: Created
8-2-2: Powers And Duties
8-2-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of building official. (1989 Code § 12-111;
amd. 2007 Code)
8-2-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Stop Order: The building official shall have the power to order all
work stopped on construction, alteration or repair of buildings in the city
when such work is being done in violation of any provisions of any ordinance
relating thereto, or in violation of the subdivision or zoning ordinances. Work
shall not be resumed after the issuance of such order except on the written
permission of the building official. Such written stop order may be served by
any peace officer or other authorized person. (1989 Code § 12-112; amd. 2007
Code)
   B.   Entry Powers: The building official or approved representative shall
have the power to enter into any building or the premises where the work of
altering, repairing or constructing of any building or structure is going on,
for the purpose of making inspections at any reasonable hour, pursuant to any
of the provisions of this title. (1989 Code § 12-113; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Additional Duties; Generally: The building official shall, in addition
to all other duties imposed on him by the city:
      1.   Enforce the provisions of the adopted building code.
      2.   Inspect all buildings, structures, signs and fences to determine
their safety and effect on the persons who are within the city.
      3.   Until such time as a plumbing inspector is appointed or designated,
the building official shall be responsible for enforcing the adopted plumbing
code regulations.
      4.   Review all building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements to determine whether the proposed building site will
be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location
that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial
improvement (including prefabricated and mobile homes) must: a) be designed (or
modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of
the structure; b) use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage; and c) use construction methods and practices that
will minimize flood damage. (1989 Code § 12-114; amd. 2007 Code)
      5.   Review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to
assure that: a) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage; b) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage; and c) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
      6.   Require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary
sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters,
and require on site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid
impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. (1989 Code § 12-
114)
CHAPTER 3
WASTEWATER DISPOSAL CODES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Individual Wastewater (Sewage) Disposal Code Adopted
8-3-2: Small Underground Wastewater Disposal System Code Adopted
8-3-1: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER (SEWAGE) DISPOSAL CODE ADOPTED:
Part IV, individual wastewater disposal systems, of the code of waste disposal
regulations, adopted by the state division of health and state committee on
water pollution in May 1965, as revised by action of the board in June 1967,
and issued and published as a code in book form, three (3) copies of which have
been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city
recorder, and which established rules and regulations relating to the disposal
of domestic wastewater discharge from single homes, multiple dwellings
containing not more than four (4) individual units, and commercial
installations serving not more than fifty (50) persons per day, is hereby
adopted by the city as the ordinance relating to individual wastewater disposal
systems within the city, except as such code may be altered or modified by the
provisions of this section. (1989 Code § 12-510)
8-3-2: SMALL UNDERGROUND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM CODE ADOPTED:
Part V, small underground wastewater disposal systems, of the code of waste
disposal regulations, adopted by the state division of health and state
committee on water pollution in May 1965, as revised by action of the board on
June 2, 1967, and June 21, 1967, and issued and published as a code in book
form, three (3) copies of which have been filed for use and examination by the
public in the office of the city, is hereby adopted by the city as the small
underground wastewater disposal systems code within the city, except as it may
be altered or modified by the provisions of this section or section
8-3-1 of this chapter. Occupancies in existing buildings may be continued as
provided in section 104(g) of the uniform building code, except as to those
structures which are found to be substandard as defined in the housing code.
(1989 Code § 12-520)
CHAPTER 4
FALLOUT SHELTERS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Defined
8-4-2: Exemption From Building Code Requirements
8-4-3: Administrative Application Of Building Code
8-4-4: Design
8-4-5: Construction
8-4-1: DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, a "family fallout shelter" is a structure
designed and constructed for emergency use only, to afford minimum protection
from nuclear radiation, commonly known as fallout, resulting from a nuclear
incident which recently has been or is likely to be of catastrophic
proportions. (1989 Code § 12-562)
8-4-2: EXEMPTION FROM BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS:
Due to the specialized purpose of emergency nature for which family fallout
shelters are designed, any such shelter which complies with the provisions of
this chapter are hereby exempt from the provisions of the building code, except
as otherwise provided herein. (1989 Code § 12-561)
8-4-3: ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATION OF BUILDING CODE:
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this chapter, the provisions
contained in the building code relating to administration, permits and
inspections shall be applicable to family fallout shelters. (1989 Code § 12-
565)
8-4-4: DESIGN:
A family fallout shelter shall be of a design conforming to that recommended or
accepted by the federal department of defense, office of civil defense. (1989
Code § 12-563)
8-4-5: CONSTRUCTION:
A family fallout shelter shall, in all matters relating to construction and
structural stability, comply with not less than the equivalent of the
provisions relating to design loads and general building requirements specified
in the building code. (1989 Code §12-564)
CHAPTER 5
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Disposal Of Construction Debris
8-5-2: Plan And Information Required
8-5-1: DISPOSAL OF CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS:
All construction debris and other solid waste resulting from the construction
of any residential, commercial or other building or structure shall be
transported to and disposed of at the county sanitary landfill site, located
approximately four (4) miles east of the city, in an area known as Purgatory
Flats, or some other disposal site approved by the state department of health
and the city council. (1989 Code § 12-581)
8-5-2: PLAN AND INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction of any
residential, commercial or other building or structure, the applicant for said
building permit shall be required to:
   A.   Submit a written plan, specifying the manner in which all construction
debris and other solid waste resulting from construction shall be transported
to and disposed of at the sanitary landfill site; and
   B.   Specify the name and address of the individual or entity responsible
for transportation and disposal of construction debris and other solid waste to
the sanitary landfill site. (1989 Code § 12-582)
CHAPTER 6
IMPACT FEES
ARTICLE A. ELECTRICAL IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
8-6A-1: Adopted; Fee Schedule
8-6A-1: ADOPTED; FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   Plan Adopted: Washington City hereby approves and adopts, and
incorporates by reference, the following capital facilities plan for the
electrical system of the city: "Washington City Power - Capital Facility Plan,
Impact Fee Facility Plan And Impact Fee", dated August, 2013, prepared by
Intermountain Consumer Professional Engineers, Inc.
   B.   Service Area: The city hereby establishes one service area consisting
of the entire geographical area of Washington City that is served by the city's
electrical system, including future annexed areas.
   C.   Fee Schedule: The city hereby amends, supersedes and replaces the
existing electrical impact fee schedule and hereby establishes the following
impact fees to be charged to all new connections to the city's electrical
system, which impact fees shall be paid to the city:
      WASHINGTON CITY IMPACT FEE 2013
      Summary Of Impact Fees For Residential And Commercial Customers
Description/Panel Rating Impact Fee
Description/Panel Rating                     Impact Fee
Base impact fee ($ per kW)                   $566.81
Assumed panel utilization factor:             
 Residential                                10%
 Commercial                                 20%
Assumed power factor:                         
 Residential                                90%
 Commercial                                 85%
Impact fee charge for applicable panel size:  
 Residential (120/240 V, 1 phase):           
  100 amp                                  $ 1,224.00
  200 amp                                  2,449.00
  400 amp                                  4,897.00
  600 amp                                  7,346.00
  800 amp                                  9,794.00
 Commercial (120/240 V, 1 phase):            
  100 amp                                  2,313.00
  200 amp                                  4,625.00
  400 amp                                  9,250.00
  600 amp                                  13,876.00
 Commercial (208/120 V, 3 phase):            
  100 amp                                  3,471.00
  200 amp                                  6,943.00
  400 amp                                  13,885.00
  600 amp                                  20,828.00
 Commercial (480/277 V, 3 phase):            
  200 amp                                  16,022.00
  400 amp                                  32,043.00
  800 amp                                  64,086.00
  1200 amp                                 96,130.00
 Special services (120/240 V, 1 phase)1:     
  60 amp                                   735.00
 
   Note:
      1.    By special approval.
   For single phase customers:
 
Impact fee charge = IFb x PUF x (PS x ( V     ) x PF)
                                        1,000
 
 
Where:   
 IFb  = Base impact fee
 PUF  = Average panel utilization factor
 PS   = Panel size (amperage)
 V    = Line to line voltage
 PF   = Estimated power factor
 
   For 3-phase customers:
 
Impact fee charge = IFb x PUF x ( 3 x PS x ( V     ) x PF)
                                             1,000
 
 
Where:   
 IFb  = Base impact fee
 PUF  = Average panel utilization factor
 PS   = Panel size (amperage)
 V    = Line to line voltage
 3    = 1.732
 PF   = Estimated power factor
 
The listed fees are based upon standard panel ratings and are based on five
hundred sixty six dollars eighty one cents ($566.81) per kW usage. All users
may not fit within one of the standard panel ratings shown in this subsection
and, if not, shall be based upon, and set by, the five hundred sixty six
dollars eighty one cents ($566.81) per kW and the formulas outlined above to
set the impact fee. Fees are rounded to the nearest dollar.
   D.   Adjustments:
      1.   The city council may adjust the impact fees at the time the same is
charged to: a) respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases and b) ensure
that the impact fees are imposed fairly.
      2.   The city may adjust the amount of electrical impact fees to be made
or paid on any specific development based upon studies and data submitted by
the developer.
   E.   Use Of Fees: All impact fees received by the city pursuant to this
section shall be used for, and, as appropriate, refunded in compliance with
Utah Code Annotated sections 11-36a-601, 602, and 603, as amended.
   F.   Challenges:
      1.   Any fee payer that has paid an impact fee pursuant to this section
may challenge the impact fee by filing:
         a.   An appeal to the city pursuant to subsection F2 of this section;
or
         b.   A request for arbitration as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 11-36a-705, as amended; or
         c.   An action in state district court as provided in Utah Code
Annotated section 11-36a-703(2)(c), as amended.
      2.   Any person or entity who has paid or made an impact fee required by
this section may challenge or appeal the impact fee by filing a written notice
of appeal with the city manager within thirty (30) days of the date that the
fee was paid or made. Upon receiving the written challenge or appeal, the city
shall set a hearing date to consider the merits of the challenge or appeal. The
hearing panel, which shall consist of the city council or such other body as
the city shall designate, shall hold a hearing and make a decision within
thirty (30) days after the date that the challenge or appeal is filed. The
person or entity challenging or appealing the fee may appear at the hearing and
present any written or oral evidence deemed relevant to the challenge or
appeal. Representatives of the city may also appear and present evidence to
support the imposition of the fee. The decision of the hearing panel shall be
in writing and shall be supported by written findings and a written or taped
record of the hearing sufficient for a judicial review of the findings. No
appeal shall be permitted unless and until the impact fees at issue have been
paid. (Ord. 2013-23, 10-23-2013)
ARTICLE B. HABITAT CONSERVATION IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
8-6B-1: Findings
8-6B-2: Impact Fee Imposed
8-6B-3: Expiration; Exceptions
8-6B-1: FINDINGS:
The city makes the following findings:
   A.   An impact fee is required to finance the habitat conservation plan
(HCP).
   B.   The fees imposed in this article bear a reasonable relationship to the
environmental mitigation required by the HCP. (Ord. 95-17, 6-28-1995)
8-6B-2: IMPACT FEE IMPOSED:
An impact fee for environmental mitigation as set forth in more detail in the
HCP dated November 10, 1994, is hereby imposed and assessed as follows:
 
  For each final subdivision plat
 (including all forms of subdivisions,  $250.00/acre
  condominium and planned unit
  developments) issued within the city
  With the issuance of each building      0.002% of the estimated construction
 permit of new residential, commercial  cost of the work to be performed
  or industrial structure                 under the permit
 
(Ord. 95-17, 6-28-1995)
8-6B-3: EXPIRATION; EXCEPTIONS:
In accordance with the terms of the HCP and in order to ensure that the
benefits of the HCP are received by the people and the economy of the city, the
impact fee requirement set forth in this article shall expire twenty (20) years
after the date hereof unless:
   A.   It is determined by the city council, after review, that the impact fee
is still required to finance the HCP and must remain in effect; and
   B.   The city council affirmatively reauthorizes the impact fee. (Ord. 95-
17, 6-28-1995)
ARTICLE C. WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
8-6C-1: Schedule Adopted
8-6C-1: SCHEDULE ADOPTED:
The regional wastewater treatment facility impact fee schedule is hereby
adopted as shown:
   REGIONAL WASTEWATER TREATMENT
   FACILITY IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
Culinary Water Meter Size Impact Fee
Culinary Water Meter Size Impact Fee
   3/4 inch            $ 984.00
   1 inch              1,948.00
   11/2 inches         3,895.00
   2 inches            6,231.00
   3 inches            13,631.00
   4 inches            22,366.00
   6 inches            48,679.00
 
(Ord. 2008-30, 8-13-2008)
ARTICLE D. WASTEWATER IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
8-6D-1: Imposed; Adjustments
8-6D-2: Areas South Of Virgin River
8-6D-1: IMPOSED; ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Imposed; Payable: A wastewater impact fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for each "residential equivalent" (as defined by the environmental
protection agency user charge system) is hereby imposed. The impact fee is
payable when a building permit is obtained and is only payable if the property
is, or can be, served by the city wastewater system.
   B.   Adjustments:
      1.   After approval by the city council in a specific case and upon
consultation with the city engineer, the city is authorized to adjust the
impact fee at the time the fee is charged: a) to respond to unusual
circumstances in that specific case; and b) to ensure that the impact fee is
imposed fairly.
      2.   After approval by the city council in the case of a specific
development and upon consultation with the city engineer, the city is
authorized to adjust the amount of fee based on studies and data submitted by
the developer. (Ord. 97-12, 3-12-1997)
8-6D-2: AREAS SOUTH OF VIRGIN RIVER:
   A.   Imposed: A wastewater impact fee for areas south of the Virgin River
for each "residential equivalent" (as defined by the environmental protection
agency user charge system) is hereby imposed. The impact fee is payable when a
building permit is obtained and is only payable if the property is, or can be,
served by the city wastewater system. The amount of the impact fee shall be two
thousand one hundred fifty dollars ($2,150.00).
   B.   Other Ordinance Applicability: The wastewater impact fees imposed under
section
8-6D-1 of this article for all other areas of the city shall remain in full
force and effect.
   C.   Adjustments: The city may adjust the amount of the wastewater impact
fees to be made or paid on any specific development based upon certified and
reliable data and studies submitted by the developer evidencing that the
wastewater impact fees imposed are unfair or not reasonably related to the
impacts caused by such new development. The application to adjust fees,
together with any supporting data studies, shall be submitted to the planning
commission for study and recommendation to the city council. If the planning
commission finds that the studies and data submitted by the developer justify a
reduction in the fee, the planning commission shall so recommend to the city
council, which may then consider all relevant information and make any
adjustments deemed appropriate at a regular or special meeting of the city
council.
   D.   Use: All fees received by the city pursuant to this section shall be
used, accounted for and, as appropriate, refunded, in compliance with Utah Code
Annotated sections 11-36-301 through 11-36-303, as amended.
   E.   Challenges: Any person or entity who has paid a wastewater impact fee
required by this section may challenge or appeal the wastewater impact fees in
accordance with the following administrative procedure: Any challenge or appeal
must be in writing and filed with the city manager within thirty (30) days of
the date that the fee was paid or made. Upon receiving the written challenge or
appeal, the city shall set a hearing date to consider the merits of the
challenge or appeal. The hearing panel, which shall consist of the city council
or such other body as the city shall designate shall hold a hearing and make a
decision within thirty (30) days after the date that the challenge or appeal is
filed. The person or entity challenging or appealing the fee may appear at the
hearing and present any written or oral evidence deemed relevant to the
challenge or appeal. Representatives of the city may also appear and present
evidence to support the imposition of the fee. The decision of the hearing
panel shall be in writing and shall be supported by written findings and a
written or taped record of the hearing sufficient for a district court to
review the findings. Any party to the administrative action who is adversely
affected by the decision of the hearing panel may petition the district court
for a review of the decision in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 11-
36-401. (Ord. 99-1, 1-13-1999)
ARTICLE E. STREETS AND ROADWAYS IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
8-6E-1: Plan Adopted
8-6E-2: Service Area
8-6E-3: Established
8-6E-4: Adjustments
8-6E-5: Use
8-6E-6: Challenges
8-6E-1: PLAN ADOPTED:
The city hereby approves and adopts the following transportation impact fee
study (the "capital facilities plan") for the street and roadways system of
city: "Washington City Transportation Impact Fee Study", dated November 2003,
prepared by Carter-Burgess. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-14-2004, eff. 1-15-2004)
8-6E-2: SERVICE AREA:
The city hereby establishes one service area consisting of the entire
geographical area of the city, including future annexed areas. (Ord. 2004-01,
1-14-2004, eff. 1-15-2004)
8-6E-3: ESTABLISHED:
The city hereby amends, supersedes and replaces the existing street and
roadways impact fee (ordinance 97-33) and hereby establishes the following
impact fees to be charged for all new development, which impact fees shall be
paid to the city:
   A.   Single-family detached residential unit: one thousand six hundred
thirty nine dollars ($1,639.00) per residential dwelling unit; or
   B.   Commercial, office, industrial, single-family dwelling (other than
"single-family detached residential unit" in subsection A of this section) and
other housing, or other applicable development, shall be the greater of the
following B1 or B2 of this section:
      1.   TPH x cost per peak hour trip x trip reduction factor = impact fee
Definitions:
TPH = Trips per peak hour from the ITE trip generation manual, latest edition.
Cost per peak hour trip = Total road improvement costs/total number of trips by
development (over 15 year period) = two hundred eighty six dollars ($286.00).
Trip reduction factor = 0.60 for single-family residential and other housing;
0.29 for general commercial; and 0.50 for office, industrial and other uses.
   or:
      2.   One thousand six hundred thirty nine dollars ($1,639.00). (Ord.
2004-01, 1-14-2004, eff. 1-15-2004)
8-6E-4: ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   The city council may adjust the impact fee at the time the same is
charged to: 1) respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases; and 2)
ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly.
   B.   The city may adjust the amount of street and roadways impact fees to be
made or paid on any specific development based upon studies and data submitted
by the developer. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-14-2004, eff. 1-15-2004)
8-6E-5: USE:
All impact fees received by the city pursuant to this article shall be used for
and, as appropriate, refunded in compliance with Utah Code Annotated sections
11-36-301 through 11-36-303, as amended. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-14-2004, eff. 1-15-
2004)
8-6E-6: CHALLENGES:
   A.   Any fee payer that has paid an impact fee pursuant to this article may
challenge the impact fee by filing:
      1.   An appeal to the city pursuant to subsection B of this section; or
      2.   A request for arbitration as provided in Utah Code Annotated section
11-36-402, as amended; or
      3.   An action in state district court as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 11-36-401, as amended.
   B.   Any person or entity who has paid or made an impact fee required by
this article may challenge or appeal the impact fee by filing a written notice
of appeal with the city manager within thirty (30) days of the date that the
fee was paid or made. Upon receiving the written challenge or appeal, the city
shall set a hearing date to consider the merits of the challenge or appeal. The
hearing panel, which shall consist of the city council or such other body as
the city shall designate, shall hold a hearing and make a decision within
thirty (30) days after the date that the challenge or appeal is filed. The
person or entity challenging or appealing the fee may appear at the hearing and
present any written or oral evidence deemed relevant to the challenge or
appeal. Representatives of the city may also appear and present evidence to
support the imposition of the fee. The decision of the hearing panel shall be
in writing and shall be supported by written findings and a written or taped
record of the hearing sufficient for a judicial review of the findings. No
appeal shall be permitted unless and until the impact fees at issue have been
paid. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-14-2004, eff. 1-15-2004)
ARTICLE F. PARKS AND RECREATION IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
8-6F-1: Plan Adopted
8-6F-2: Service Area
8-6F-3: Established
8-6F-4: Adjustments
8-6F-5: Use
8-6F-6: Challenges
8-6F-1: PLAN ADOPTED:
Washington City hereby approves and adopts the parks and recreation impact fee
facilities plan and analysis: Washington City Parks and Recreation Master Plan
- Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Analysis, dated October 2014, prepared by
Sunrise Engineering, Inc. (Ord. 2015-05, 2-25-2015)
8-6F-2: SERVICE AREA:
The City hereby establishes one service area consisting of the entire
geographical area of Washington City, including future annexed area. (Ord.
2015-05, 2-25-2015)
8-6F-3: ESTABLISHED:
   A.   The City hereby establishes a parks and recreation impact fee in the
sum of three thousand seven hundred dollars ($3,700.00) per household or
residential unit to be charged to all new residential development in the City.
   B.   The impact fee shall be calculated and charged to all new development
as follows:
The "per household" or "per residential unit" impact fee should be charged to
each residential dwelling unit. A "residential dwelling unit" is defined as a
house, apartment unit, condominium unit, etc. The impact fees shall be paid to
the City prior to final plat recordation, or paid prior to issuance of a
building permit if for an existing platted lot where fees were not collected at
the time of final plat recordation. (Ord. 2015-05, 2-25-2015)
8-6F-4: ADJUSTMENTS:
The City Council may adjust the impact fee at the time the same is charged to:
a) respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases and b) ensure that impact
fees are imposed fairly. (Ord. 2015-05, 2-25-2015)
8-6F-5: USE:
All impact fees received by the City pursuant to this article shall be used
for, and as appropriate, refunded in compliance with Utah Code Annotated
section 11-36a - part 3, as amended. (Ord. 2015-05, 2-25-2015)
8-6F-6: CHALLENGES:
   A.   Subject to the time limitations as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 11-36a-702, any person or entity that has paid the impact fee pursuant
to this article may challenge the impact fee as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 11-36a-701, et seq., as amended by filing:
      1.   A written administrative appeal to the City pursuant to subsection B
of this section; or
      2.   A request for arbitration as provided in Utah Code Annotated section
11-36a-705, as amended; or
      3.   An action in State District Court.
   B.   A written administrative appeal challenging the impact fee or fees may
be made to the City by any person or entity that has paid or made an impact fee
required by this article by filing a written notice of appeal with the City
Recorder setting forth the name of the person or entity challenging the impact
fee or fees, the specific impact fee or fees challenged, evidence that the
impact fee or fees challenged have been paid by the person or entity, and
alleged grounds for such challenge. A written administrative appeal, subject to
the time limitations as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 11-36a-702,
containing the information set forth herein and filed with the City the
necessary document for filing an administrative appeal as provided in Utah Code
Annotated section 11-36a-703(2)(a), as amended. An administrative appeal shall
be considered and decided by the "Appeal Authority", which is currently
designated as the City Council, or such other body as the City shall designate,
within thirty (30) days after the day on which the appeal is filed. The person
or entity challenging or appealing the impact fee may appear at the hearing and
present any written or oral evidence deemed relevant to the imposition of the
impact fee. The decision of the Appeal Authority shall be in writing and shall
be supported by written findings. No appeal shall be permitted unless and until
the impact fees at issue have been paid. (Ord. 2015-05, 2-25-2015)
ARTICLE G. FIRE STATION IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
8-6G-1: Definitions
8-6G-2: Analysis Adopted
8-6G-3: Service Area
8-6G-4: Impact Fee
8-6G-5: Use
8-6G-6: Challenges
8-6G-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following are defined terms for purposes of this article:
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): Any new residential connection, including
any single-family residence, apartment unit, recreational vehicle or any other
dwelling structure, temporary or permanent, designed as a residence for an
individual or family. The "equivalent residential unit" is equivalent to a fire
flow requirement of one thousand two hundred (1,200) gallons per minute as
determined by the insurance services office formula.
INSURANCE SERVICES OFFICE (ISO) FORMULA: Required fire flow (GPM) = A0.5(18)
(fire coefficient).
 
A                = Total square footage of the 3
                   largest consecutive floors
Fire coefficient = 1.5 for weed frame construction
                = 1.0 for masonry walls and combustible roof
                = 0.8 for noncombustible construction
                = 0.6 for fire resistant construction
 
(Ord. 99-22, 8-11-1999)
8-6G-2: ANALYSIS ADOPTED:
The city hereby approves and adopts the fire station impact fee analysis, a
copy of which is attached to ordinance 99-22 and on file in the city office.
(Ord. 99-22, 8-11-1999)
8-6G-3: SERVICE AREA:
The city hereby establishes one service area consisting of the entire
geographical area of the city. (Ord. 99-22, 8-11-1999)
8-6G-4: IMPACT FEE:
In addition to other impact and connection fees required by any city ordinance
or resolution, and as a condition precedent to the issuance of a building
permit, and based upon the analysis of the fire station impact fee analysis,
the type of development activity and the improvements involved, the city hereby
adopts the fire station impact fee for any person or entity desiring to obtain
a building permit for the construction of one or more residential, commercial
or industrial buildings within the city:
 
Residential                  $200.00 per ERU
Commercial and industrial    200.00 per ERU
One ERU shall be equivalent to a fire flow formula flow requirement of 1,200
gpm as determined by the ISO formula.
 
(Ord. 99-22, 8-11-1999)
8-6G-5: USE:
All fees received by the city pursuant to this article shall be used, accounted
for and, as appropriate, refunded, in compliance with Utah Code Annotated
sections 11-36-301 through 11-36-303. (Ord. 99-22, 8-11-1999)
8-6G-6: CHALLENGES:
Any person or entity who has paid a fire station impact fee required by this
article may challenge or appeal the fire station impact fees in accordance with
the following administrative procedure: Any challenge or appeal must be in
writing and filed with the city manager within thirty (30) days of the date
that the fee was paid for made. Upon receiving the written challenge or appeal,
the city shall set a hearing date to consider the merits of the challenge or
appeal. The hearing panel, which shall consist of the city council or such
other body as the city shall designate, shall hold a hearing and make a
decision within thirty (30) days after the date that the challenge or appeal is
filed. The person or entity challenging or appealing the fee may appear at the
hearing and present any written or oral evidence deemed relevant to the
challenge or appeal. Representatives of the city may also appear and present
evidence to support the imposition of the fee. The decision of the hearing
panel shall be in writing and shall be supported by written findings and a
written or taped record of the hearing sufficient for a district court to
review the findings. Any party to the administrative action who is adversely
affected by the decision of the hearing panel may petition the district court
for a review of the decision in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 11-
36-401. (Ord. 99-22, 8-11-1999)
ARTICLE H. WATER IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
8-6H-1: Plan Adopted
8-6H-2: Service Area
8-6H-3: Established
8-6H-4: Adjustments
8-6H-5: Use
8-6H-6: Challenges
8-6H-1: PLAN ADOPTED:
The city hereby approves and adopts the following capital facilities plan for
the culinary water system of the city: "Washington City, Culinary Water Master
Plan", dated August 2006, prepared by Sunrise Engineering, Inc. (Ord. 2006-25,
9-27-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
8-6H-2: SERVICE AREA:
The city hereby establishes one service area consisting of the geographical
area of the city, including future annexed areas. (Ord. 2006-25, 9-27-2006,
eff. 10-1-2006)
8-6H-3: ESTABLISHED:
The city hereby amends, supersedes and replaces the existing water acquisition
impact fee and water impact fee and hereby establishes the following impact
fees to be charged to all new connections to the city culinary water system,
which impact fees shall be paid to the city:
   A.   Residential: Two thousand one hundred twenty one dollars ($2,121.00)
per unit for three-fourths inch (3/4") meter size. All other meter sizes shall
be charged according to the size of the meter in accordance with the impact fee
shown on exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated
by reference.
   B.   Commercial And Industrial: Two thousand one hundred twenty one dollars
($2,121.00) per equivalent residential unit or ERU. All other meter sizes shall
be charged according to the size of the meter in accordance with the impact fee
shown on exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated
by reference.
   C.   ERU Defined: For purposes of this article, "ERU" shall be defined in
accordance with the definition contained in the capital facilities plan for the
culinary water system of the city: "Washington City, Culinary Water Master
Plan", dated August 2006, prepared by Sunrise Engineering, Inc., and adopted
pursuant to this article. (Ord. 2006-25, 9-27-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
8-6H-4: ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   The city council may adjust the impact fee at the time the same is
charged to: 1) respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases; and 2)
ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly.
   B.   The city may adjust the amount of water impact fees to be made or paid
on any specific development based upon studies and data submitted by the
developer. (Ord. 2006-25, 9-27-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
8-6H-5: USE:
All impact fees received by the city pursuant to this article shall be used for
and, as appropriate, refunded in compliance with Utah Code Annotated sections
11-36-301 through 11-36-303, as amended. (Ord. 2006-25, 9-27-2006, eff. 10-1-
2006)
8-6H-6: CHALLENGES:
   A.   Any fee payer that has paid an impact fee pursuant to this article may
challenge the impact fee by filing:
      1.   An appeal to the city pursuant to subsection B of this section; or
      2.   A request for arbitration as provided in Utah Code Annotated section
11-36-402(1), as amended; or
      3.   An action in state district court as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 11-36-401(4)(c)(iii), as amended.
   B.   Any person or entity who has paid or made an impact fee required by
this article may challenge or appeal the impact fee by filing a written notice
of appeal with the city manager within thirty (30) days of the date that the
fee was paid or made. Upon receiving the written challenge or appeal, the city
shall set a hearing date to consider the merits of the challenge or appeal. The
hearing panel, which shall consist of the city council or such other body as
the city shall designate, shall hold a hearing and make a decision within
thirty (30) days after the date that the challenge or appeal is filed. The
person or entity challenging or appealing the fee may appear at the hearing and
present any written or oral evidence deemed relevant to the challenge or
appeal. Representatives of the city may also appear and present evidence to
support the imposition of the fee. The decision of the hearing panel shall be
in writing and shall be supported by written findings and a written or taped
record of the hearing sufficient for a judicial review of the findings. No
appeal shall be permitted unless and until the impact fees at issue have been
paid. (Ord. 2006-25, 9-27-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
ARTICLE I. WASHINGTON PARKWAY ZONAL IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
8-6I-1: Plan Adopted
8-6I-2: Service Area
8-6I-3: Established
8-6I-4: Adjustments
8-6I-5: Use
8-6I-6: Challenges
8-6I-1: PLAN ADOPTED:
The city hereby approves and adopts the following transportation infrastructure
impact fee study (the "capital facilities plan") for the transportation
infrastructure system in the Washington Parkway area of the city: "Washington
City Parkway Impact Fee Study", dated March 2005, prepared by Carter-Burgess.
(Ord. 2005-10, 3-9-2005, eff. 3-9-2005)
8-6I-2: SERVICE AREA:
The city hereby establishes one service area, or zone, consisting of the
Washington Parkway area of the city, consisting of approximately eight hundred
eighty six (886) acres of land, as more accurately described in appendix 3 to
the capital facilities plan incorporated herein. (Ord. 2005-10, 3-9-2005, eff.
3-9-2005)
8-6I-3: ESTABLISHED:
   A.   The city hereby establishes the following Washington Parkway
transportation infrastructure impact fee to be charged for all new development
in the Washington Parkway area of the city, which impact fee shall be paid to
the city:
      1.   Single-family residential unit: Forty six dollars ($46.00) per
residential dwelling unit; or
      2.   Commercial and other applicable development: Commercial, office,
industrial and other housing, or other applicable development, shall be
calculated as follows:
TPD x cost per trip = impact fee (e.g., TPD x $4.77).
Definitions:
TPD = Trips per day on a typical weekday from the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) trip generation manual.
Cost per trip = Total road improvement costs/total number of daily trips by
proposed development = $4.77.
   B.   This Washington Parkway transportation infrastructure impact fee is a
separate impact fee for the area/zone designated and is in addition to any
other impact fees applicable in the city and shall not replace, amend or act as
an offset for any other impact fees in the city. (Ord. 2005-10, 3-9-2005, eff.
3-9-2005)
8-6I-4: ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   The city council may adjust the impact fee at the time the same is
charged to: 1) respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases; and 2)
ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly.
   B.   The city may adjust the amount of transportation infrastructure impact
fees to be made or paid on any specific development based upon studies and data
submitted by the developer. (Ord. 2005-10, 3-9-2005, eff. 3-9-2005)
8-6I-5: USE:
All impact fees received by the city pursuant to this article shall be used for
and, as appropriate, refunded in compliance with Utah Code Annotated sections
11-36-301 through 11-36-303, as amended. (Ord. 2005-10, 3-9-2005, eff. 3-9-
2005)
8-6I-6: CHALLENGES:
   A.   Any fee payer that has paid an impact fee pursuant to this article may
challenge the impact fee by filing:
      1.   An appeal to the city pursuant to subsection B of this section; or
      2.   A request for arbitration as provided in Utah Code Annotated section
11-36-402(1), as amended; or
      3.   An action in state district court as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 11-36-401(4)(c)(iii), as amended.
   B.   Any person or entity who has paid or made an impact fee required by
this article may challenge or appeal the impact fee by filing a written notice
of appeal with the city manager within thirty (30) days of the date that the
fee was paid or made. Upon receiving the written challenge or appeal, the city
shall set a hearing date to consider the merits of the challenge or appeal. The
hearing panel, which shall consist of the city council or such other body as
the city shall designate, shall hold a hearing and make a decision within
thirty (30) days after the date that the challenge or appeal is filed. The
person or entity challenging or appealing the fee may appear at the hearing and
present any written or oral evidence deemed relevant to the challenge or
appeal. Representatives of the city may also appear and present evidence to
support the imposition of the fee. The decision of the hearing panel shall be
in writing and shall be supported by written findings and a written or taped
record of the hearing sufficient for a judicial review of the findings. No
appeal shall be permitted unless and until the impact fees at issue have been
paid. (Ord. 2005-10, 3-9-2005, eff. 3-9-2005)
ARTICLE J. STORM WATER IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
8-6J-1: Plan Adopted
8-6J-2: Service Area
8-6J-3: Established
8-6J-4: Adjustments
8-6J-5: Use
8-6J-6: Challenges
8-6J-1: PLAN ADOPTED:
The city hereby approves and adopts the following master and capital facilities
plan for the storm water system of the city: "Washington City, Utah, Storm
Water Master And Capital Facilities Plan", dated July 2005, prepared by
Alliance Consulting. (Ord. 2005-32, 9-28-2005, eff. 9-29-2005)
8-6J-2: SERVICE AREA:
The city hereby establishes one service area consisting of the entire
geographical area of the city, including future annexed areas. (Ord. 2005-32,
9-28-2005, eff. 9-29-2005)
8-6J-3: ESTABLISHED:
   A.   The city hereby establishes a four thousand six hundred thirty dollar
($4,630.00) per acre impact fee, to be charged to all new connections to the
city storm water system, which impact fees shall be paid to the city prior to
final plat recordation.
   B.   The city hereby establishes a per lot impact fee to be charged to all
connections to the city storm water system recorded previous to the adoption of
this article. Impact fees will be calculated by multiplying the lot acreage by
four thousand six hundred thirty dollars ($4,630.00), which impact fee shall be
paid to the city prior to issuance of the building permit. (Ord. 2005-32, 9-28-
2005, eff. 9-29-2005)
8-6J-4: ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   The city, through the public works administrator or his designee, may
adjust the amount of storm water impact fees to be made or paid on any specific
development based upon studies and data submitted by the developer, for example
those developments in which storm water infrastructure has already been
installed to the satisfaction of the public works administrator.
   B.   The city council may adjust the impact fee at the time the same is
charged to: 1) respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases; and 2)
ensure that impact fees are imposed fairly. (Ord. 2005-32, 9-28-2005, eff. 9-
29-2005)
8-6J-5: USE:
All impact fees received by the city pursuant to this article shall be used
for, and, as appropriate, refunded in compliance with Utah Code Annotated
sections 11-36-301 through 11-36-303, as amended. (Ord. 2005-32, 9-28-2005,
eff. 9-29-2005)
8-6J-6: CHALLENGES:
   A.   Any fee payer that has paid an impact fee pursuant to this article may
challenge the impact fee by filing:
      1.   An appeal to city pursuant to subsection B of this section; or
      2.   A request for arbitration as provided in Utah Code Annotated section
11-36-402(1), as amended; or
      3.   An action in state district court as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 11-36-401(4)(c)(iii), as amended.
   B.   Any person or entity who has paid or made an impact fee required by
this article may challenge or appeal the impact fee by filing a written notice
of appeal with the city recorder within thirty (30) days of the date that the
fee was paid or made. Upon receiving the challenge or appeal, the city shall
set a hearing date to consider the merits of the challenge or appeal. The
hearing panel, which shall consist of the city council or such other body as
the city shall designate, shall hold a hearing and make a decision within
thirty (30) days after the date that the challenge or appeal is filed. The
person or entity challenging or appealing the fee may appear at the hearing and
present any written or oral evidence deemed relevant to the imposition of the
fee. The decision of the hearing panel shall be in writing and shall be
supported by written findings. No appeal shall be permitted unless and until
the impact fees at issue have been paid. (Ord. 2005-32, 9-28-2005, eff. 9-29-
2005)
CHAPTER 7
POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
8-7-1: General Provisions
8-7-2: Definitions
8-7-3: Grading Permits
8-7-4: Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) And Notice Of Intent (NOI)
8-7-5: Stormwater Facilities Design And Management Standards
8-7-6: Post-Construction
8-7-7: Illicit Discharges
8-7-8: Enforcement
8-7-9: Penalties
8-7-10: Recovery Of Damages And Costs
8-7-11: Appeals
8-7-12:    Severability
8-7-13:    Effective Date
8-7-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to:
      1.   Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of Washington City.
      2.   Establish responsibilities for controlling and managing stormwater
runoff.
      3.   Protect the public health, safety and the general welfare of the
city and its inhabitants by controlling discharges of pollutants to the city's
stormwater facilities and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving
waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, but not limited to,
lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the city.
      4.   Enable the city to comply with the most current National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES) and applicable regulations, 40 CFR
section 122.26 for stormwater discharges and the state of Utah, Department of
Environmental Quality, Utah Pollution Discharge Elimination System (UPDES)
stormwater general permits which include: general stormwater permit for
construction activity connected with single-lot housing projects; general
permit for stormwater discharges from construction activities; and general
permit for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s).
      5.   Allow the city to exercise the powers granted by Utah code, which
provides that, among other powers municipalities have with respect to
stormwater facilities, the power by ordinance or resolution to:
         a.   Exercise general regulation over the planning, location,
construction, operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities in Washington
City, whether or not owned and operated by Washington City;
         b.   Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to accomplish
the purposes of this chapter, including the adoption of a system of fees for
services and permits;
         c.   Establish standards to regulate the quantity of stormwater
discharged and to regulate stormwater contaminants as may be necessary to
protect water quality;
         d.   Review and approve plans and plats for stormwater management in
proposed subdivisions or commercial developments;
         e.   Issue permits for stormwater discharges, or for the construction,
alteration, extension, or repair of stormwater facilities;
         f.   Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that the
permittee has violated any applicable ordinance, resolution, or condition of
the permit;
         g.   Regulate and prohibit discharges into stormwater facilities of
sanitary, industrial, or commercial sewage or waters that have otherwise been
contaminated;
         h.   Expend funds to remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of
contaminated land or other sources of stormwater contamination, whether public
or private; and
         i.   Establish a viable and fair method of financing the construction,
operation and maintenance of the stormwater facilities.
   B.   Administering Entity: Washington City shall administer the provisions
of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any person from
responsibility for damage to other persons or property, nor impose upon
Washington City, its officers, agents or employees, any liability for damage to
other persons or property.
(Ord. 2020-16, 9-9-2020; amd. Ord. 2025-25, 8-13-2025)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions in section 8-6-2 shall apply
in this chapter as well as the following definitions:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Physical, structural, and/or managerial
practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution
of water, that have been approved by Washington City and that have been
incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully set out therein. For
purposes of this title, the relevant BMPs are more particularly defined in the
Washington City stormwater management program and city of Washington "Standard
Specifications For Design And Construction."
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that
conducts flowing water continuously or periodically.
CITY STORM WATER FACILITIES: Storm systems that receive runoff from public
rights-of-way, natural waterways, and drainage systems identified in a city
easement.
COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE: A plan to subdivide a parcel of land into
separate parts for separate sale. This can be for residential, commercial, or
industrial development. The plan originates as a single parcel that is
separated into parts. This usually goes through an approval process by a local
governmental unit, but in some cases, it may not require that process. The
original plan is considered the "common plan of development or sale" whether
phased or completed in steps.
CONTAMINANT: Any unnatural, physical, chemical, biological, or radiological
substance or matter in water.
DISCHARGE: Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by
any means including any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter
into the municipal separate stormwater facilities.
EASEMENT: An acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person,
party, firm, corporation, municipality or other legal entity has in the land of
another.
EROSION: The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or
other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction
with or promoted by anthropogenic activities or effects (human cause).
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A written plan (including drawings or other
graphic representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion
and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities.
GRADING PERMIT: A permit issued by Washington City to allow grading of a
property.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Illegal or unauthorized connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system whether or not such connections result in
discharges into that system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is
not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a UPDES
Permit (other than the UPDES Permit for discharges from the municipal separate
storm sewer) to waters of the state.
IMMEDIATELY: Requires owner/operator to, on the same day a condition requiring
corrective action is found (or as soon afterward as possible considering normal
work schedule and task size), take all reasonable steps to minimize or prevent
the discharge of pollutants until a permanent solution is installed and made
operational.
LAND DISTURBING/GRADING ACTIVITY: Any activity on property that results in a
change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or
the existing soil topography. Land disturbing/grading activities include, but
are not limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition, construction,
reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation.
LONG-TERM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: A site-specific written document that
identifies potential sources of stormwater pollution. It describes stormwater
control measures and best management practices (BMPs) that will be used to
reduce or eliminate pollutants in stormwater discharges into the city's MS4. It
contains the procedures the owner will implement to comply with the terms and
conditions of the stormwater maintenance agreement. The long-term stormwater
management plan is required as a condition of the development plan approval and
is required as part of the city's small MS4 UPDES general permit from the State
of Utah.
MAINTENANCE: Any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in
good working order so as to function as designed. Maintenance shall include
complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed in
order to restore the facility to its original operational design parameters.
Maintenance shall also include the correction of any problem on the site
property that may directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) pursuant
to paragraphs R317-8-1.6(4), (8), & (15), or designated under UAC R317-8-11.3
(6)(a) and UAC R317-8-11.3(6)(b):
   A.   That is owned or operated by a state, city, town, county, district,
association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to State Law) having
jurisdiction over disposal of wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including
special districts under State Law such as a sewer district, flood control
district or drainage district, or similar entity, or a designated and approved
management/agency under section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the
state;
   B.   That is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
   C.   Which is not a combined sewer; and
   D.   Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined
in 40 CFR 122.2.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT OR NPDES PERMIT: The
provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act for the control of stormwater
discharges, also a permit issued pursuant to 33 USC section 1342.
NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT): Whenever a contractor completes a project on one
(1) acre or more of property, or less than one (1) acre if part of a common
plan of development, it is the contractor's responsibility to maintain the
stormwater and drainage controls until such time as the NOT is filed and
accepted by the State of Utah and City of Washington.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): Whenever a contractor disturbs one (1) acre or more of
property, or less than one (1) acre if part of a common plan of development, an
NOI through the state of Utah must be filed. This is a binding contract between
the State of Utah and the contractor stating that the contractor will address
stormwater and drainage issues on site and downstream throughout the duration
of the project until the NOT is filed.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV): Whenever Washington City finds that a person is in
noncompliance with this chapter, Washington City may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. Requirements in this
notice are at the discretion of Washington City, and may include monitoring,
payment to cover costs relating to the noncompliance, and the implementation of
best management practices.
PERSON: Any and all persons including any individual, firm or association and
any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of
this or any other state or country.
PROPERTY OWNER: Landowner of property within the boundary of Washington City.
REDEVELOPMENT: The replacement or improvement of impervious surfaces on a
developed site.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or
below sea level.
SEDIMENTATION: Soil particles suspended in stormwater that can settle in
streambeds and disrupt the natural flow of the stream.
STABILIZATION: Providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that
will prevent erosion from occurring.
STORM WATER FACILITIES: The drainage structures, conduits, ditches, storm
sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of which stormwater is collected,
transported, pumped, treated or disposed of.
STORM WATER MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A document recorded in the Washington County
recorder's office that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides
for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices and will reference
a long-term stormwater management plan. The stormwater maintenance agreement is
required as a condition of the development plan approval and is required as
part of the city's small MS4 UPDES general permit from the state of Utah.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT: The programs to manage quality and quantity of
stormwater runoff.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SWMP): Washington City stormwater master
program as adopted by the city.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A site-specific, written
document that, among other things:
   A.   Identifies potential sources of storm water pollution at the
construction site;
   B.   Describes storm water control measures to reduce or eliminate
pollutants in storm water discharges from the construction site; and
   C.   Identifies procedures the operator will implement to comply with the
terms and conditions of this Permit.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: Stormwater runoff from precipitation, snowmelt, and surface
runoff and drainage.
STRUCTURAL BMPs: Devices that are constructed or installed to provide control
of stormwater runoff.
SURFACE WATER: Includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created
naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other
watercourses, lakes and reservoirs.
UPDES: Utah Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
WASHINGTON CITY: Washington City or authorized designee.
WATERCOURSE: A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either
natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERS OF THE STATE: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water-courses,
waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other
bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or
artificial, public or private which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon this state or any portion thereof, except bodies of water confined
to and retained within the limits of private property, and which do not develop
into or constitute a nuisance, or a public health hazard, or a menace to fish
and wildlife which shall not be considered to be "waters of the state" under
this definition ("UAC" R317-1-1).
(Ord. 2020-16, 9-9-2020; amd. Ord. 2025-25, 8-13-2025)
8-7-3: GRADING PERMITS:
   Engineers, Contractors, etc. shall follow all requirements of the most
recently approved and adopted Washington City Grading, Erosion, and Sediment
Control (GESC) Manual.
(Ord. 2025-25, 8-13-2025)
8-7-4: STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) AND NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI):
   Contractors, applicants, etc. shall adhere to the requirements for
construction site stormwater as laid out in state law 19-5-108.3 Construction
site stormwater runoff control.
   All persons grading or disturbing one (1) acre or more, or less than an acre
if part of a common plan of development, shall obtain a notice of intent (NOI)
through the State of Utah. This form requires that a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) is submitted for review and approval from Washington
City. The NOI and SWPPP shall be signed by both the owner and the operator.
   The SWPPP must be developed and be consistent with the most current UPDES
stormwater general permit for construction activities.
(Ord. 2025-25, 8-13-2025)
8-7-5: STORMWATER FACILITIES DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT STANDARDS:
   Engineers, architects, contractors, etc. shall follow all requirements of
the most recently approved and adopted Washington City Construction Design
Standards and Details and the Washington City Grading, Erosion, and Sediment
Control (GESC) Manual.
(Ord. 2025-25, 8-13-2025)
8-7-6: POST-CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   In General. This chapter shall apply to any application for a
building permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or other zoning,
planning or land use approval that is filed on or after the date of adoption
for any New Development or Redevelopment within tWashington City that
Discharges Stormwater to the Washington City's MS4 and to associated Stormwater
Management Facilities.
      2.   Exception. This chapter does not apply to New Development or
Redevelopment on a lot, tract or parcel where that lot, tract or parcel is part
of a subdivision that is approved under this chapter; said lot, tract or parcel
shall not require separate review under this chapter, but shall comply with the
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan requirements for that approved
subdivision.
   B.   Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan Approval: General
Requirement. Except as provided in Section 5.B. above, no Applicant for a
building permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or other land use
approval for New Development or Redevelopment to which this chapter is
applicable shall receive such permit or approval for that New Development or
Redevelopment unless the Municipal Permitting Authority for that New
Development or Redevelopment also determines that the Applicant's Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan for that New Development or
Redevelopment meets the requirements of this chapter and the Maintenance
Agreement has been recorded in the office of the Washington County Recorder.
   C.   Standards:
      1.   Stormwater Management Plan Required. The Applicant shall make
adequate provision for the management of the quantity and quality of all
stormwater generated by the New Development or Redevelopment through a Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan. This Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan shall be designed by a Professional Engineer to meet the
standards contained in the Grading Manual and must include evaluation of Low
Impact Development as well as fully comply with all practices described in the
Storm Water General Permit.
      2.   Stormwater Maintenance Agreement Required. Where the Applicant
proposes to retain ownership of the Stormwater Management Facilities shown in
its Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Applicant shall submit to
Washington City documentation, approved as to legal sufficiency by the City's
attorney that the Applicant, its successors, heirs and assigns shall have the
legal obligation and the resources available to operate, repair, maintain and
replace the stormwater management facilities. Applications for New Development
or Redevelopment requiring Stormwater Management Facilities shall enter into a
Maintenance Agreement with Washington City.
      3.   Location of Facilities. The Applicant may meet the quantity and
quality standards above either on-site or off-site, but where off-site
facilities are used, the Applicant must submit to the Washington City
documentation, approved as to legal sufficiency by the City's attorney, that
the Applicant has a sufficient property interest in the property where the off-
site facilities are located -- by easement, covenant or other appropriate legal
instrument – to ensure that the facilities will be able to provide post-
construction stormwater management for the New Development or Redevelopment and
that the property will not be altered in a way that interferes with the off-
site facilities.
      4.   Easements and Dedications. Whenever elements of the Stormwater
Management Facilities are not within the right-of-way of a public street and
the facilities will not be offered to Washington City for acceptance as public
facilities, the Municipal Permitting Authority may require that perpetual
easements conforming substantially with the lines of existing natural drainage,
and in a form acceptable to the City's attorney, shall be provided to
Washington City allowing access for maintenance, repair, replacement and
improvement of the Stormwater Management Facilities. When an offer of
dedication is required by the Municipal Permitting Authority, the Applicant
shall be responsible for the maintenance of these Stormwater Management
Facilities under this chapter until such time (if ever) as they are accepted by
Washington City.
      5.   Standards to Minimize Impacts on Water Quality: New development and
redevelopment projects must have requirements or standards to ensure that any
stormwater controls or management practices will prevent or minimize impacts to
water quality.
      6.   Standards to Minimize Development In Susceptible Areas: New
development and redevelopment projects include nonstructural BMPs such as
requirements and standards to minimize development in areas susceptible to
erosion and sediment loss; to minimize the disturbance of native soils and
vegetation; to preserve areas in Washington City that provide important water
quality benefits; to implement measures for flood control; and to protect the
integrity of natural resources and sensitive areas.
      7.   Projects Greater than or Equal to One (1) Acre: Newly developed and
redeveloped projects that disturb greater than or equal to one (1) acre,
including projects less than one (1) acre that are of a larger common plan of
development or sale, are required to submit a low impact development (LID)
approach to be evaluated by Washington City. An LID approach promotes the
implementation of BMPs that allow stormwater to infiltrate, evapotranspire or
harvest and use stormwater on site to reduce runoff from the site and protect
water quality. Guidance for implementing LID can be found in state of Utah
DWQ's LID controls which are appropriate for use in the state of Utah and can
be found in "A Guide to Low Impact Development within Utah" (the Guide),
available on DWQ's website or "Green Infrastructure and Low Impact Development
Application Guidance for Washington County, Utah," available from Washington
City.
      8.   Specific Criteria: Newly developed and redeveloped projects must
meet specific criteria which require that best management practices (BMPs) are
designed to manage rainfall on site, and prevent the off-site discharge of the
precipitation from all rainfall events less than or equal to the eightieth
(80th) percentile rainfall event or a predevelopment hydrologic condition,
whichever is less. This objective must be accomplished by the use of practices
that are designed, constructed, and maintained to infiltrate, evapotranspire
and/or harvest and reuse rainwater, and must be incorporated into the
permittee's development plans and long-term stormwater management plan which
includes the LID approach. If meeting the eightieth (80th) percentile standard
is infeasible an alternative design approach may be used; provided, that the
permittee documents that infiltration, evapotranspiration, and rainwater
harvesting have been used to the maximum extent feasible and that full
employment of these controls is infeasible due to constraints. For guidance
including alternative design approaches, see "A Guide to Low Impact Development
within Utah" published by the DWQ, and "Green Infrastructure and Low Impact
Development Application Guidance for Washington County, Utah."
      9.   Redevelopment: Redevelopment projects that increase impervious
surface by greater than ten percent (10%) must prevent the off-site discharge
of the net increase in stormwater volume associated with precipitation from all
rainfall events that are less than or equal to the eightieth (80th) percentile
rainfall event.
      10.   Stabilization Requirements: Any area that has been disturbed by
grading activity shall be stabilized according to a schedule provided by the
contractor or the owner/operator and approved by Washington City. A plan must
be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative or other
stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site. This plan will
explain not only how the site will be stabilized, but who will be responsible
for the maintenance of vegetation or other stabilization at the site, and what
practices will be employed to ensure that adequate cover is preserved. A long-
term stormwater management plan and a post-construction stormwater agreement
are required prior to the issuance of a grading permit.
      11.   Engineering and Administrative Fees. At the time of application,
the Applicant shall pay to Washington City a fee as reflected on the Washington
City Master Fee Schedule for the review of the proposal unless it is determined
by the Public Works Department that a third party review of the proposal is
necessary. If it is determined that a third party review is necessary an
estimate will be provided to the owner for payment prior to review by a third
party.
      In addition, any persons required to file an annual certification under
Section 8-7-5(D) of this chapter shall pay, prior to the issuance of any
temporary or permanent certificate of compliance for the New Development or
Redevelopment, a fee as reflected on the Washington City Master Fee Schedule
for review of the annual certification.
      12.   Notice of BMP Discharge to Washington City's MS4. At the time of
application, the Applicant shall notify the Municipal Permitting Authority if
its Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan includes any BMP(s) that will
discharge to Washington City's MS4 and shall include in this notification a
listing of which BMP(s) will so discharge.
      13.   As-Built Certification. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Compliance for a project requiring a Post-Construction Stormwater Management
Plan under this chapter, the Applicant shall submit evidence in the form of a
letter or plan prepared and stamped by a Professional Engineer who either
prepared the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan and its associated
Facilities or supervised the Plan and Facilities construction and
implementation. The letter or plan shall certify that the Stormwater Management
Facilities have been installed in accordance with the approved Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan and that they will function as intended
by said Plan. This certification must specifically include any LID measures
incorporated into the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan and the as
constructed volume of each toward the 80th percentile retention requirement.
Any LID features to be constructed at a later date (such as facilities on
individual building lots) shall be specifically approved by the City Council at
the time of preliminary plat. If the LID proposal is approved, the requirements
of such facility shall record as a deed restriction against the property and
have notes placed upon the final plat describing the specific requirements for
said features.
      14.   Conflict with State Laws or Rules. In addition to any other
applicable requirements of this chapter and Washington City's land use
ordinances, any New Development or Redevelopment which also requires a
stormwater management permit from the State of Utah Department of Environmental
Quality (DEQ) shall comply with the rules adopted by DEQ, as the same may be
amended from time to time, and the Applicant shall document such compliance to
the Municipal Permitting Authority. Where the standards or other provisions of
such stormwater rules conflict with municipal ordinances, the stricter (more
protective) standard shall apply.
   D.   Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan Compliance:
      1.   General Requirements. Any Person owning, operating, leasing or
having control over Stormwater Management Facilities required by a Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan approved under this chapter, and the
Facilities are located in Washington City and Discharge Stormwater to
Washington City's MS4, shall at their own expense demonstrate compliance with
that Plan as follows.
         a.   Scope of Inspection. A Qualified Post-construction Stormwater
Inspector shall, at least annually, inspect the Stormwater Management
Facilities, including but not limited to any parking areas, catch basins, LID
features, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and related
structures, in accordance with all municipal and state inspection requirements,
cleaning and maintenance requirements of the approved Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan.
         b.   Deficiencies Identified. If the Stormwater Management Facilities
require maintenance or repair to function as intended by the approved Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan, that Person shall take or cause to be
taken corrective action(s) to address the deficiency or deficiencies.
         c.   Submission of Inspection Form. A Qualified Post-construction
Stormwater Inspector shall, on or before July 1 of each year, provide a
completed and signed certification to the Public Works Department in a form
identical to that attached as Appendix 1 to this chapter, certifying that he/
she has inspected the Stormwater Management Facilities and that they are
adequately maintained and functioning as intended by the approved Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan, or that they require maintenance or
repair, describing any required maintenance and any deficiencies found during
inspection of the Stormwater Management Facilities and, if the Stormwater
Management Facilities require maintenance or repair of deficiencies in order to
function as intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management
Plan, the Person shall provide a record of the required maintenance or
deficiency and corrective action(s) taken.
      2.   Right of Entry. In order to determine compliance with this chapter
and with the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Enforcement
Authority may enter upon property at reasonable hours with the consent of the
owner, occupant or agent to inspect the Stormwater Management Facilities.
   E.   Enforcement:
      1.   Enforcement Authority. Washington City may issue notices of
violation, stop work orders, citations, and impose civil penalties. Washington
City may complete periodic inspections to ensure that the Applicant's chosen
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Facilities are performing adequately.
If facilities are not performing, Washington City may require changes to be
made to the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.
      2.   Notification of Violation (NOV):
         a.   Written Notice. Whenever Washington City finds that the person
discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this chapter or a permit or
order issued hereunder, Washington City may serve upon such person written
notice of the violation. Within ten (10) days of this notice, an explanation of
the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to Washington
City. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability
for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation.
         b.   Consent Orders. Washington City is empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance.
Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct
the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent
orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued
pursuant to subsection 2.c. and 2.d. of this section.
         c.   Show Cause Hearing. Washington City may order any person who
violates this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
person specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show
cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of
the meeting shall be served personally or by mail.
         d.   Compliance Order. When Washington City finds that any person has
violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued
hereunder, they may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a
specific time period, adequate structures or devices be installed or procedures
implemented and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures,
installation of devices, self-monitoring and management practices.
         e.   Cease and Desist Order. When Washington City finds that any
person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order
issued hereunder, Washington City may issue an order to cease and desist all
such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
            1.   Comply forthwith; or
            2.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may
be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge.
            3.   Conflicting Standards. Whenever there is a conflict between
any standard contained in this chapter and in any other Local, State or Federal
requirements, the strictest standard shall prevail.
   F.   Penalties: Violations. Any person who shall commit any act declared
unlawful under this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, who
violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who
fails or refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or
take corrective action by Washington City, shall be guilty of a Civil
Infraction as set forth in Section
1-4-2 of this Code. A violator of this paragraph, for each and every such
violation, shall be punishable by a fine not greater than the fine set forth in
Section
1-4-1(D)(1) for a Class B Misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate violation.
   G.   Recovery of Damages and Costs
      1.   Washington City may recover:
         a.   All damages caused by the violator to Washington City, which may
include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and
enforcing compliance with this chapter, or any other actual damages caused by
the violation.
         b.   The costs of Washington City's maintenance of Stormwater
Management Facilities when the user of such facilities fails to maintain them
as required by this chapter.
            1.   Other Remedies: Washington City may bring legal action to
enjoin the continuing violation of this chapter, and the existence of any other
remedy, at law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions.
            2.   Remedies Cumulative: The remedies set forth in this section
shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any
action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein
has been sought or granted.
   H.   Appeals
      1.   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or
damage assessment as provided by this chapter may appeal said penalty or damage
assessment to the administrative code enforcement administrative law judge.
      2.   Appeals to be in Writing. The appeal shall be in writing and filed
with the Washington City recorder within fifteen (15) days after the civil
penalty or damage assessment is served.
      3.   Upon Receipt of an Approval. The administrative law judge shall hold
a hearing upon receipt of an appeal. Notice shall be provided to the appealing
party at the address provided by the appealing party at the time of the appeal.
The decision of the administrative law judge shall be the final municipal
administrative decision.
      4.   Appealing Decisions of the Administrative Law Judge. Any alleged
violator may appeal a decision of the administrative law judge pursuant to the
applicable appeal provisions of the administrative law judge section of this
code.
(Ord. 2025-25, 8-13-2025)
8-7-7: ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
   A.   Scope: This section shall apply to all water generated on developed or
undeveloped land entering the city's separate storm sewer system.
   B.   Prohibition of Illicit Discharges:
      1.   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge that is not composed
entirely of stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any non-
stormwater, uncontaminated discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer
system is prohibited except as described as follows:
         a.   Water line flushing or other potable water sources,
         b.   Landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
         c.   Diverted stream flows,
         d.   Rising groundwater,
         e.   Groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
         f.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
         g.   Foundation or footing drains,
         h.   Crawl space pumps,
         i.   Air conditioning condensation,
         j.   Springs,
         k.   Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
         l.   Swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one (1)
ppm chlorine),
         m.   Firefighting activities, and
         n.   Any other uncontaminated water source.
         o.   Discharges specified in writing by Washington City as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
         p.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge if Washington City has so
specified in writing.
         q.   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under a UPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the State of Utah, Division
of Water Quality; provided, that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations; and provided, that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   C.   Prohibition of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the separate municipal storm sewer system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
   D.   Reduction Of Storm Water Pollutants By The Use Of Best Management
Practices: Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge, will be required to implement, at the
person's expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all
terms and conditions of a valid NPDES/UPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section.
   E.   Waste Disposal Prohibitions. No person shall throw, deposit, leave,
maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or
upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley,
sidewalk, component of the storm drain system or water of the U.S., any refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned object, articles and
accumulations so that same may contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in
streets in proper waste receptacles or for the purposes of citywide cleanup, no
less than two days prior to said event, are exempted from this prohibition.
   F.   Notification Of Spills: Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as
soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in,
illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into the city stormwater
facilities, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of
hazardous materials the person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify Washington City in
person or by telephone no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and
mailed to Washington City within three (3) business days of the telephone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3)
years.
   G.   Enforcement Authority: Consistent with the most current state of Utah
Department of Environmental Quality, UPDES stormwater general permits which
include: general stormwater permit for construction activity connected with
single lot housing projects; general permit for stormwater discharges from
construction activities; general permit for discharges from small municipal
separate storm sewer systems (MS4s), and Utah Code Title 19, Environmental
Quality Code Chapter 5, Water Quality Act, Washington City may detect,
investigate, eliminate and enforce against non-stormwater discharges, including
illegal dumping, into the MS4. Washington City may apply escalating enforcement
procedures as necessary for the severity of violation and the recalcitrance of
the violator. Washington City may issue notices of violation, stop work orders,
citations, and impose civil penalties. Washington City may also perform
necessary maintenance or corrective actions it deems necessary at the expense
of the owner/operator.
      Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4, including spills, illicit
connections, illegal dumping, and sanitary sewer overflows into the storm sewer
system, require ceasing the illicit discharge or otherwise eliminating the
discharge or removal of such discharges.
      The city may complete periodic inspections to ensure that the owner's/
operator's chosen BMPs used to address the site's stormwater quality are
performing adequately. If BMPs are not performing adequately, the city will
have the owner/operator update the erosion and sediment control plan and the
stormwater pollution prevention plan. Washington City shall be given access to
inspect stormwater BMPs on private properties that discharge to the MS4.
   H.   Access to Facilities.
      1.   The Public Works Department shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the Public Works Department ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional
duties as defined by state and federal law.
      3.   The Public Works Department shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's stormwater discharge.
      4.   The Public Works Department has the right to require the discharger
to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the Public Works Department and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Public Works Department access
to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of
this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if
the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this chapter.
      7.   If the Public Works Department has been refused access to any part
of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
   I.   Violations:
      1.   Written Notice Of Violation: Whenever Washington City finds that any
permittee or any other person discharging non-stormwater has violated or is
violating this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, the city may
serve upon such person written notice of the violation. An explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted to Washington City.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
      2.   Consent Orders: Washington City is empowered to enter into consent
orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance.
Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct
the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. The order
may also include an order for civil penalties to be paid for the violations.
Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as orders issued pursuant
to subsections I.3 and I.4. of this section.
      3.   Compliance Order: When the city finds that any person has violated
or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, he
may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specific time
period, adequate structures or devices be installed or procedures implemented
and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might
be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including
civil penalties for the violation(s), the construction of appropriate
structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring, and management practices.
      4.   Cease And Desist Orders: When the city finds that any person has
violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, the city may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations
and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
         a.   Comply forthwith;
         b.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge; and
         c.   Pay any civil penalties assessed for the violation(s).
      5.   Conflicting Standards: Whenever there is a conflict between any
standard contained in this chapter and in the Washington City stormwater
management program adopted by Washington City, the strictest standard shall
prevail.
      6.   Section
8-7-9: Suspension of MS4 access
      7.   Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations
         a.   The Public Works Department may, without prior notice, suspend
MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons,
or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply
with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement
agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to
the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
      8.   Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge
         a.   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter
may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
authorized enforcement agency for reconsideration and hearing. A person commits
an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant
to this Section, without the prior approval of Washington City.
   J.   Penalties:
      1.   Violations: Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful
under this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, who violates
the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who fails or
refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take
corrective action as directed by the Washington City, shall be guilty of a a
Civil Infraction as set forth in Section
1-4-2 of this Code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
violation.
      2.   Recovery Of Damages And Costs: The Washington City may recover:
         a.   All damages caused by the violator to the city, which may include
any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of and enforcing
compliance with this chapter, or any other actual damages caused by the
violation.
         b.   The costs of the city's maintenance of stormwater facilities when
the user of such facilities fails to maintain them as required by this chapter.
      3.   Civil Penalties: Any person who shall commit any act declared
unlawful under this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, who
violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who
fails or refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or
take corrective action as directed by Washington City shall be guilty of a
Civil Infraction as set forth in section
1-4-1(2) of City Code. A violator of this paragraph, for each and every such
violation, shall be punishable by a fine not greater than the fine set forth in
Section
1-4-1(D)(1) for a Class B Misdemeanor
      4.   Other Remedies: The city may bring legal action to enjoin the
continuing violation of this chapter, and the existence of any other remedy, at
law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions.
      5.   Remedies Cumulative: The remedies set forth in this section shall be
cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil
or criminal, that one (1) or more of the remedies set forth herein has been
sought or granted.
   K.   Appeals:
      1.   Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or
order to bring their property into compliance as provided by this chapter may
appeal said penalty or order.
      2.   Appeals To Be In Writing: The appeal shall be in writing and filed
with the city recorder within ten (10) business days after the civil penalty or
order is served.
      3.   Upon Receipt Of An Appeal: The administrative law judge shall
conduct a review upon receipt of an appeal. Notice shall be provided to the
appealing party at the address provided by the appealing party at the time of
appeal. The decision of the administrative law judge shall be final.
      4.   Standard Of Review And Proof: The administrative law judge shall
ensure due process is provided. The person appealing bears the burden of proof
that the city's decision was in error. The hearing officer shall review the
facts "de novo" without deference to the city's determination of the factual
matters. The administrative law judge shall determine the correctness of the
city's interpretation and application of the plain meaning of the regulations
and shall decide whether the preponderance of the evidence shows that the
violation(s) exist. Each party may present witnesses and evidence. The hearing
shall be informal, and the rules of evidence do not apply.
      5.   Compliance Required: No provision of this section shall in any way
relieve the violator from compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
all applicable federal, state and city stormwater regulations.
(Ord. 2025-25, 8-13-2025)
8-7-8: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement Authority: The Municipality may issue notices of violation,
stop work orders, citations, and impose civil penalties. The Municipality may
complete periodic inspections to ensure that the Applicant’s chosen Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Facilities are performing adequately. If
facilities are not performing, the Municipality may require changes to be made
to the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.
   B.   Notification of Violation (NOV):
      1.   Written Notice: Whenever the Municipality finds that the person
discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this chapter or a permit or
order issued hereunder, the Municipality may serve upon such person written
notice of the violation. Within ten (10) days of this notice, an explanation of
the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the
Municipality. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation.
      2.   Consent Orders: The Municipality is empowered to enter into consent
orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance.
Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct
the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent
orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued
pursuant to subsections B4 and B5 of this section.
      3.   Show Cause Hearing: The Municipality may order any person who
violates this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
person specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show
cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of
the meeting shall be served personally or by mail.
      4.   Compliance Order: When the Municipality finds that any person has
violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued
hereunder, they may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a
specific time period, adequate structures or devices, be installed or
procedures implemented and properly operated. Orders may also contain such
other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address
the noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures,
installation of devices, self-monitoring and management practices.
      5.   Cease and Desist Orders: When the Municipality finds that any person
has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, the Municipality may issue an order to cease and desist all such
violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
         a.   Comply forthwith; or
         b.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge.
   C.   Conflicting Standards: Whenever there is a conflict between any
standard contained in this chapter and in any other Local, State or Federal
requirements, the strictest standard shall prevail.
(Ord. 2020-16, 9-9-2020)
8-7-9: PENALTIES:
   A.    Violations: Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful
under this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, who violates
the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who fails or
refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take
corrective action by the Municipality, shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2020-16, 9-9-2020)
8-7-10: RECOVERY OF DAMAGES AND COSTS:
The Municipality may recover:
   A.   All damages caused by the violator to the Municipality, which may
include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and
enforcing compliance with this chapter, or any other actual damages caused by
the violation.
   B.   The costs of the Municipality maintenance of Stormwater Management
Facilities when the user of such facilities fails to maintain them as required
by this chapter.
      1.   Other Remedies: The Municipality may bring legal action to enjoin
the continuing violation of this chapter, and the existence of any other
remedy, at law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions.
      2.   Remedies Cumulative: The remedies set forth in this section shall be
cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil
or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought
or granted.
(Ord. 2020-16, 9-9-2020)
8-7-11: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or
damage assessment as provided by this chapter may appeal said penalty or damage
assessment to the administrative code enforcement administrative law judge.
   B.   Appeals to Be In Writing: The appeal shall be in writing and filed with
the Washington City recorder within fifteen (15) days after the civil penalty
or damage assessment is served.
   C.   Upon Receipt of an Appeal: The administrative law judge shall hold a
hearing upon receipt of an appeal. Notice shall be provided to the appealing
party at the address provided by the appealing party at the time of appeal. The
decision of the administrative law judge shall be the final municipal
administrative decision.
   D.   Appealing Decisions of the Administrative Law Judge: Any alleged
violator may appeal a decision of the administrative law judge pursuant to the
applicable appeal provision of the administrative law judge section of this
code.
(Ord. 2020-16, 9-9-2020)
8-7-12: SEVERABILITY:
   If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
entity or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other
sections, provisions, clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented
without the invalid provision(s), clause(s) or application(s) hereof.
(Ord. 2025-25, 8-13-2025)
8-7-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
   This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication or posting in
the manner required by law.
(Ord. 2025-25, 8-13-2025)
CHAPTER 8
NOISE
SECTION:
8-8-1: Generally
8-8-2: Construction Hours And Activities
8-8-3: Emergencies
8-8-4: Cease And Desist Orders
8-8-5: Penalties
8-8-1: GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace or quiet of any
neighborhood by making, continuing, or causing to be made or continued, any
loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others
within the limits of the city. (Ord. 2022-08, 3-9-2022)
8-8-2: CONSTRUCTION HOURS AND ACTIVITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the excavation, construction,
demolition, alteration or repair of any building, street, walk, sewer or
utility line, or to engage in any other construction activities related or
incidental thereto, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the day immediately following. However, for non-public
projects only, pouring of concrete during the months of April through October
may begin at three o'clock (3:00) A.M. rather than six o'clock (6:00) A.M. It
shall also be unlawful to make, continue or cause any construction noise
associated with construction activities during prohibited hours, including,
without limitation: noise attributed to workers arriving on the job (i.e., loud
talking, laughing or singing); vehicular noise; the playing of radios or other
music; assembling, moving or stacking of construction materials; deliveries; or
other site related construction noise. If unusual circumstances exist that
would cause extreme hardship, the City Manager or City Manager's Designee, may
issue a temporary written exception to the construction hours set forth herein,
provided there has been a written request submitted therefor; and reasonable
conditions can be imposed to minimize any adverse effects to neighboring or
nearby property owners. (Ord. 2022-08, 3-9-2022; amd. Ord. 2022-43, 7-27-2022)
8-8-3: EMERGENCIES:
The foregoing shall not apply to city departments and employees attempting to
preserve the public health, safety and welfare, including, without limitation,
the preservation of life, public or private property and/or infrastructure in
cases of flooding, earthquake, fire or other emergency. (Ord. 2022-08, 3-9-
2022)
8-8-4: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
Law enforcement officers are hereby authorized and directed to order any person
determined to be in violation of this chapter to immediately cease and desist
from any and all activities which violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2022-08, 3-9-2022)
8-8-5: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who commits, permits, assists in or attempts any violation
of this chapter, whether by act or omission, is hereby deemed to be a
“responsible person” as used in the city administrative code enforcement
ordinance and shall be liable for all civil penalties set forth therein.
   B.   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and any person who knowingly violates or authorizes
the violation of a cease and desist order from law enforcement concerning a
violation of this chapter shall be subject to immediate arrest by law
enforcement officers. (Ord. 2022-08, 3-9-2022)
CHAPTER 9
LANDSCAPING AND WATER CONSERVATION
SECTION:
8-9-1: Applicability
8-9-2: Definitions
8-9-3: Water Efficiency Standards For Single Family And Multiple Family
Residential Zones
8-9-3-1: Construction Standards
8-9-3-2: Landscape Standards
8-9-3-3: Restrictive Covenants in Conflict with Water Efficiency Standards
8-9-4: Water Efficiency Standards For Nonresidential Zones And Nonresidential
Developments
8-9-4-1: Construction Standards
8-9-4-2: Landscape Standards
8-9-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any provision, clause,
sentence, word, or part thereof is held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or
inapplicable to any person or circumstances, such illegality, invalidity,
unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, sections, words or parts thereof of
this chapter or their applicability to other persons or circumstances. (Ord.
2022-22, 5-11-2022)
8-9-2: APPLICABILITY:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
ACTIVE        Dedicated active play areas where irrigated lawn is used as the playing surface,
RECREATION    such as a sports field designed for public use. Active recreation areas shall
AREA:         be:
             A.   A minimum of 1,500 contiguous square feet of lawn area
             B.   Not less than 30 feet in any dimension
             C.   Not less than 10 feet from areas dedicated to vehicular use, such as a
              street or parking lot
              D.   Designed and located to be accessible to large populations, such as at a
             school, daycare, recreation center, senior center, public park, private park,
              water park or religious institution
              E.   Co-located with amenities, including but not limited to trash bins,
             benches, tables, walking paths, drinking water, playground equipment and/or
              other recreational amenities
GRASS:        A surface layer of earth containing irrigated grass with its roots.
              Elements of landscape constructed from non-living materials such as concrete,
HARDSCAPE:    boulders, brick, blacktop, and lumber. Hardscape includes patios, decks, and
              paths, but does not include driveways and sidewalks.
LANDSCAPE     Area within a lot or parcel that is not the home footprint, driveway, or
AREA:         sidewalk.
              Any combination of berms; living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground
LANDSCAPE OR  covers, annuals, perennials, ornamental grass, or seeding; natural features such
LANDSCAPING:  as rock, stone, or bark chips; and structural features, including but not
              limited to outdoor artwork, screen walls, fences, Hardscape, Pool, or benches
              that create an attractive and pleasing environment.
              A protective covering, spread or left on the ground to reduce evaporation and
MULCH:        provide other benefits. Mulch may consist of organic or inorganic materials such
              as grass clippings, straw, bark chips, stones, brick chips, rubber, and plastic
              as defined by the USDA.
PARK STRIP:   A typically narrow landscaped area located between the back-of-curb and
              sidewalk.
REHABILITATED Landscape area in which over 75% percent of existing landscaping is removed and
LANDSCAPING:  replaced. Includes all landscaping funded in part, or completely, by Washington
              County Water Conservancy District’s landscape conversion program.
ROADWAY:      An area meant for vehicular use. The roadway, for purposes of this chapter, ends
              at the front of the curb and gutter.
SECONDARY     Non-potable water that is untreated and used for irrigation of outdoor
IRRIGATION    landscaping.
WATER:
              A vertical rise in feet measured over a horizontal distance, expressed as a
SLOPE:        percentage, measured generally at right angles to contour lines.(Ord. 2022-22,
              5-11-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-29, 10-25-2023)
 
8-9-3: WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR SINGLE FAMILY AND MULTIPLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
These provisions are applicable to all new construction and new development in
any residential zone, or for any single family or multiple family residential
development in any zone. (Ord. 2022-22, 5-11-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-29, 10-25-
2023)
8-9-3-1: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   New single family or multiple family residential dwellings 1,400 square
feet or greater shall install hot water recirculation pump or pumps, as
necessitated by the particular application.
   B.   All multiple family units with ground floor square footage or
individually platted, shall be separately metered, submetered, or equipped with
alternative technology capable of tracking the water use of the individual
unit, and the information shall be made available to the resident of each unit.
Individually platted condominium units are exempted from the provision of this
Paragraph B if a property owners association owns and maintains the water lines
and meters. All multiple family projects require separate water meters for all
outdoor water usage, including landscaping. Nothing herein shall be interpreted
to require individual and separate landscape water meters for each and every
unit of a multiple family project.
   Nothing in this paragraph nor this Chapter 9 of Title 8 is intended to
influence or modify the calculation and assessment of impact fees under
Washington City Code. (Ord. 2022-22, 5-11-2022; amd. Ord. 2022-63, 11-9-2022;
Ord. 2023-29, 10-25-2023)
8-9-3-2: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
   A.   For all new residential construction, Rehabilitated Landscaping,
residential development, and new landscape improvements, the landscaping shall
meet the following requirements:
      1.   Single Family Dwellings:
         a.   Irrigated Lawn area must not exceed eight percent (8%) of the lot
square footage, up to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet of grass (irrigated lawn area). Lots Less than 7,500 square feet are
allowed up to 600 square feet of grass. No lot, regardless of its size, may
install grass areas that exceed 1,500 square feet of surface area on the lot.
Applicants will identify the size of the building lot in square feet, the
amount of irrigated lawn proposed in square feet, and calculate the percentage
of the lot to be installed with irrigated lawn at the time of building
application. Following construction, the City will verify the installed
irrigated lawn area does not exceed the maximum allowed.
         b.   Grass is prohibited in park strips, in any landscape area that
measures less than eight feet in width, and on any slope that exceeds 15%.
         c.   Where lawns are allowed, spray irrigation may be used. All other
plant material must be irrigated from a drip irrigation system equipped with a
pressure regulator filter, flushend assembly and emitters rated for 20 gallons
per hour (gph) or less.
         d.   Drip irrigation and sprinkler irrigation may not be served from
the same irrigation valve.
         e.   Automated irrigation systems must use a US EPA WaterSense labeled
smart controller or a similar weather-based controller.
         f.   All Planting Beds must have mulch upon the soil surface with
exceptions for areas being restored to appear as native desert.
      2.   Limited Common Area Developments:
         a.   Single family homes with limited common areas designated for the
exclusive use of the adjacent dwelling shall have the same allowances as a
single family home.
      3.   Multiple Family Dwelling Projects comply with the Landscape
Standards in
8-9-4-2, below.
         a.   Multi Family Dwelling Projects are limited to 100 square feet of
grass per unit. Properties with less than six dwelling units are allowed up to
600 square feet of grass. Individual allotments may be combined into a common
area.
         b.   Multi family projects require separate meters for outdoor water
use when irrigating more than 5,000 square feet. (Ord. 2022-22, 5-11-2022; amd.
Ord. 2023-29, 10-25-2023)
8-9-3-3: RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS IN CONFLICT WITH WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS:
Any homeowners or property owners association governing documents, such as
bylaws, operating rules, covenants, conditions, and restrictions that govern
the operation of a common interest development, and that are recorded after
passage of this chapter, are preempted by this chapter and unenforceable by the
owners or association contrary to Washington City Code if they conflict with
the standards in this chapter, or if they have the effect of prohibiting or
restricting compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2022-22, 5-11-2022; amd. Ord.
2023-29, 10-25-2023)
8-9-4: WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES AND NONRESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS:
These provisions are applicable to all new construction and new development in
all nonresidential zones and nonresidential developments in any zone. (Ord.
2022-22, 5-11-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-29, 10-25-2023)
8-9-4-1: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Hot water recirculation pump or pumps, as necessitated by the
particular application, shall be installed, unless hot water delivery can be
demonstrated to occur without first displacing more than 0.6 gallons of system
water.
   B.   All shell units with ground floor square footage, or individually
platted, shall be separately metered, submetered, or equipped with alternative
technology capable of tracking the water use of the individual unit, and the
information shall be made available to the individual unit. Individually
platted condominium units are exempted if a property owners association owns
and maintains the water lines and meters. All nonresidential projects require
separate water meters for all outdoor water usage, including landscaping.
   C.   All non-single family residential projects require separate meters for
outdoor use when irrigating more than 5,000 square feet.
   D.   All commercial car wash projects shall be built and operated to limit
the maximum amount of new consumed water from the utility for car washes to 20
gallons per vehicle washed. Washington City shall have the right to review,
inspect, and audit on recurring review cycles carwash project compliance with
quantity maximums per vehicle washed.
   E.   All golf courses using water district or municipal water supplies shall
irrigate with secondary irrigation water and shall have separate water meters
for the golf course. Irrigation with potable water at golf courses is
prohibited to promote conservation of available drinking water. Each golf
course development shall submit and follow a water budget with the Landscape
Documentation Packet and identify water conservation measures for city review
and approval.
   F.   Outdoor or exterior pools, fountains, or decorative water features that
do not use secondary water are prohibited as part of any non-residential
landscape plan, except as considered by the City Council for consumptive effect
on potable (treated) water supplies and if approved by the City Council as
permitted exception.
   G.   Manmade ornamental water features are limited to 25 square feet per
parcel and are limited to the parcel.
   H.   Misting systems are permitted from May through September when
temperatures exceed 90 degrees. (Ord. 2022-22, 5-11-2022; amd. Ord. 2022-63,
11-9-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-29, 10-25-2023)
8-9-4-2: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
   A.   For all new construction, Rehabilitated Landscaping, new development,
and new landscape improvements in all nonresidential zones, and nonresidential
development in any zone, the landscaping shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Grass is prohibited outside of an active recreation area. Grass is
prohibited in park strips, in all landscape areas that measure less than eight
feet in width, and on any slope that exceeds 15%.
      2.   If secondary irrigation water is available, each project shall
connect to the secondary irrigation water system for all outdoor water use.
Washington City may make minor case-by-case permitted exceptions by approval of
the City Council, allowing use of treated water for outdoor plantings that have
secondary irrigation water available, subject to review and approval at the
sole discretion of the city. An example of such a permitted exception would be
for a small beautification planting of flowers or foliage that may be sensitive
to secondary irrigation water quality. (Ord. 2022-22, 5-11-2022; amd. Ord.
2023-29, 10-25-2023)
TITLE 9
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Short Title
9-1-2: Purpose
9-1-3: Interpretation
9-1-4: Conflict
9-1-5: Effect On Previous Ordinances And Maps
9-1-6: Definitions
9-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF WASHINGTON CITY, UTAH, and
may be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-1-2: PURPOSE:
This title is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and
future inhabitants of the city, including, among other things, the lessening of
congestion in the streets and roads, securing safety from fire and other
dangers, providing adequate light and air, classification of land uses and
distribution of land development and utilization, protection of the tax base,
securing economy in governmental expenditures, fostering industry and the
protection of urban development. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the requirements
contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purposes
set forth. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-1-4: CONFLICT:
This title shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants,
agreements, other ordinances or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such
provisions which are less restrictive. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-1-5: EFFECT ON PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND MAPS:
The existing ordinances covering zoning, in their entirety, and including the
maps heretofore adopted and made a part of said ordinance, are hereby
superseded and amended to read as set forth herein; provided, however, that
this title, including the map attached to the ordinance codified herein, shall
be deemed a continuation of previous ordinances and not a new enactment,
insofar as the substance or revisions of previous ordinances are included in
this title, whether the same or in different language; and this title shall be
interpreted upon all questions of construction relating to the tenure of
officers or boards established by previous ordinances and to the questions of
conforming or nonconforming uses, buildings and structures, and to questions as
to the dates upon which such uses, buildings or structures became conforming or
nonconforming. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used
in the interpretation and construction of this title. Words used in the present
tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the
plural the singular; the word "building" shall include the word "structure";
the word "used" or "occupied" shall include "arranged, designed, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used"; the word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is permissive; the word "person"
includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation, as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the words "plot"
or "parcel".
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: A dwelling unit which is incidental and secondary to the
use of the structure for dwelling purposes by the owner. Generally, the
accessory apartment will be used by relatives or hired workers involved in
approved uses on the property.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
structure.
AGRICULTURE: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and
gardening; breeding, grazing and keeping or raising of domestic animals and
fowl, except household pets, and not including any agricultural industry or
business such as feedlots, fruit packing plants, fur farms, animal hospitals or
similar uses.
AIRPORT: Any landing area, runway or other facility designed, used or intended
to be used either publicly or by any person or persons for the landing and
takeoff of aircraft; including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie
down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare less than sixteen feet (16') but not less than ten
feet (10') in width, which has been dedicated or deeded for public use.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
ANIMAL UNIT: The number of animals equivalent to one mature beef cow, based on
the daily output (in pounds) of manure.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A multiple dwelling in one ownership where individual dwelling
units are rented or leased.
AS GRADED: The surface configuration upon completion of grading.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline or any other motor fuel,
lubrication oil or grease is delivered directly into motor vehicles and where
services performed may include tube and tire repair, battery charging, storage
of merchandise, lubrication of automobiles, replacement of spark plugs, lights,
fans, and other small parts, but not to include major automobile repair.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building more than six feet (6') below grade for
more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter which is below the first
story in a building (see illustrations in chapter 22 of this title).
BENCH: A relatively level step excavated into earth on which fill material is
to be placed for an intermediate drainage area.
BERM: A low mound of earth graded in a linear or undulating form; often used as
a noise or visual barrier.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building with not more than five (5) guestrooms where, for
compensation, meals are provided for at least five (5) but not more than
fifteen (15) persons.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for the use of supporting any use or
occupancy.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A detached subordinate building clearly incidental to and
located on the same lot occupied by the main building (see illustrations in
chapter 22 of this title).
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the ground level grade to
the top of the building.
BUILDING, MAIN: The principal building on a lot which houses the principal use
of the lot. There shall be only one main building located on each lot (see
illustrations in chapter 22 of this title).
CANOPY: A roofed structure supported by a building and/or supports extending to
the ground directly underneath the canopy, and providing a protective shield
for an approved principal or accessory use on the lot.
CARPORT: A motor vehicle storage area not completely enclosed by walls or
doors. For the purposes of this title, a carport shall be subject to all the
regulations prescribed for a private garage, including fire separations found
in the adopted building code.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: An establishment for the care and/or instruction of five
(5) or more children, other than members of the family residing on the
premises, where all state licenses and regulations, including Utah Code
Annotated title 26, chapter 39, are met and all adopted building code and fire
code requirements are complied with. Also, any outdoor areas used for
recreation/playtime will be required to be completely fenced in with a minimum
of a four foot (4') high fence, and any gates will be required to have a self-
closing and self- latching device to keep them closed and secure.
CLUSTERING: A land planning technique appropriate for large subdivisions in
which some areas are reserved as open space. This allows the permitted units in
an area to be grouped more densely in the most developable parts of a site.
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL CONFINEMENT: Any facility where ten (10) or more animal
units are confined within an area with two hundred (200) square feet or less
per animal unit.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use of land for which a conditional use permit is required
pursuant to this title.
CONDOMINIUM: The ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit project, together
with an undivided interest in common in the common areas and facilities of the
property.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A plan or project whereby two (2) or more units, whether
contained in existing or proposed apartments, commercial or industrial
buildings or structures, or otherwise, are separately offered or proposed to be
offered for sale.
CONTOUR: A line drawn on a plan that connects all points of equal elevation.
CONTOUR GRADING: A grading concept designed to result in earth forms that
resemble natural terrain characteristics. Horizontal and vertical curve
variations are often used for slope banks. Contour grading is not necessarily
minimal grading.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A one-story retail store containing less than two thousand
(2,000) square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell
primarily food, beverages and other household items to customers who purchase
only a relatively few items.
CORRAL: A space other than a building less than one acre in area, or less than
one hundred feet (100') in width, used for the confinement of animals.
CUESTA: A landform that has a steep ascent in one direction and a gentle
descent in the opposite direction. The steep slope is the cuesta face and
erosion escarpment, and the gentle descent is the back slope of the cuesta. The
crest of the cuesta forms a ridgeline.
CUT: The mechanical removal of soil, rock or other earth material.
CUT AND FILL: The excavating of earth material in one place as cut and
depositing of it as fill in an adjacent place.
DAIRY: A commercial establishment for the manufacture, processing or packaging
of dairy products and for their sale.
DEVELOPMENT: The carrying out of any building activity or clearing of land as
an adjunct of construction. "Major development" shall be considered to be
subdivision platting, including various land uses and/or housing types.
DEVELOPMENT PARCEL: Any quantity of land capable of being described with such
definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is
designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit
or which has been used or developed as a unit.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the
more or less permanent residence or sleeping place of one or more persons or
families, but not to include a tent, travel trailer, hotel, motel, boarding
house, hospital or nursing home.
DWELLING, FOUR-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by four
(4) families, the structure having only four (4) dwelling units (see
illustrations in chapter 22 of this title).
DWELLING, GROUP: A group of two (2) or more detached buildings used as
dwellings, located on a lot or parcel of land.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by one
family, the structure having only one dwelling unit (see illustrations in
chapter 22 of this title).
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by three
(3) families, the structure having only three (3) dwelling units.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by two (2)
families, the structure having only two (2) dwelling units (see illustrations
in chapter 22 of this title).
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for or occupied by one
family for living or sleeping purposes.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person who is sixty (60) years of age or older, desires or
needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable
of living independently.
EROSION: The process by which the soil and rock components of the earth's crust
are worn away and moved from one place to another by natural forces such as
weathering, solution and transportation.
ESCARPMENT: A long cliff or steep slope resulting from erosion or faulting,
separating two (2) comparatively level or more gently sloping surfaces.
EXCAVATION, MAJOR AND MINOR: Any disturbance to the ground, including, but not
limited to, clearing, grubbing, rock removal, cutting, tunneling, drilling or
any other activity which alters the natural ground. "Minor" excavation shall
mean a vertical cut of three feet (3') or less, or a disturbance of less than
one acre of surface area. "Major" excavation shall mean a vertical cut of more
than three feet (3'), or disturbance of more than one acre of surface area.
EXISTING GRADE: The grade of land prior to grading.
EXPORT: Excess cut material that is removed from a grading project and
deposited off site.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, or a group of not more than five (5) persons (excluding servants) who
are not related, living in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit and
using common cooking facilities.
FAMILY FOOD PRODUCTION: The keeping of domestic animals and fowl for the
production of food for the sole use of the family occupying the premises. The
number of animals shall not exceed more than three (3) of the following groups:
two (2) cows; two (2) steers; two (2) sheep; two (2) goats; twenty (20)
rabbits; fifty (50) chickens or pheasants; ten (10) turkeys, geese or ducks;
and twenty (20) pigeons for every one-half (1/2) acre of lot area; provided,
that not more than three (3) groups of the above listed animals and fowl are
permitted on the lot at any one time.
FENCE: An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of
materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. For the purposes of this
title, chainlink fencing with slats is not considered a solid fence or wall.
FILL: A deposit of rock, soil or other earth material placed by artificial
means.
FINISH GRADE: The final elevation of the ground surface after development, that
conforms to the development's approved plan.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building or portion of a building, not more than one
thousand (1,000) square feet in area, in which only motor vehicles used by the
tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or any portion thereof, other than a private garage,
designed or used for the servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or
storage of motor driven vehicles.
GEOLOGIST, QUALIFIED: A person with a four (4) year degree in engineering
geology from an accredited university offering such a degree, and at least two
(2) years' experience working full time in the field of engineering geology.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER: A person with a four (4) year degree in civil
engineering or engineering geology from an accredited university who, through
training and experience, is able to assure that geological factors affecting
engineering works are recognized, adequately interpreted and presented for use
in engineering practice and for the protection of the public.
GRADE: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground,
paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line
or, when the property line is more than five feet (5') from the building,
between the building and a line five feet (5') from the building (see
illustrations in chapter 22 of this title).
GRADING: To bring an existing surface to a designed form by excavating, filling
or smoothing operations.
HILL: A small area of land that is higher than the larger area of land around
it.
HILLSIDE: The sloping side of a hill.
HILLSIDE ADAPTIVE ARCHITECTURE: Various techniques such as split foundations,
walk out basements, roof slopes parallel to ground slope, and subdivision of
building mass used to enhance the visual harmony of the building and the
existing slope.
HILLTOP: The area on the top of a hill where the hillside transitions from
ascension to the highest portion of the hill, and then to descending the hill
on the opposite side.
HOME OCCUPATION: A. Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on
by persons residing in the dwelling unit. This accessory use shall be clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and
shall not change the character thereof. The dwelling shall be the principal
residence of the occupants. The "home occupation" shall not include any
display, stock in trade, employees, or the use of advertising, except as
provided in this title. The "home occupation" shall not involve the use of any
accessory building or yard space outside the main building.
   B.   A "home occupation" may include, but is not limited to, the following:
the office or studio of a physician, dentist, artist, musician, lawyer,
architect, engineer, teacher or similar professional; workshops; dressmaking or
hairdressing studios; and the care of not more than four (4) children other
than members of the family residing in the dwelling unit.
HOTEL: A building designed for and occupied by six (6) or more guestrooms
intended or designed to be used and occupied for sleeping purposes by guests
and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual unit.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals and/or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house and kept
for company and pleasure, such as dogs, cats, fish and birds. No more than two
(2) dogs or cats over the age of four (4) months and not more than a total of
four (4) animals may be kept in one dwelling unit. "Household pets" shall not
include inherently or potentially dangerous animals, fowl or reptiles.
IMPORT: Fill material obtained off site to complete a grading project.
IMPROVEMENT: An object, facility or structure generally constructed as a part
of development.
JUNK: Any scrap, waste, exchangeable material or debris, whether or not stored
or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage,
building, disposal or other use or disposition.
JUNKYARD: The use of any lot or portion thereof for the sale, storage, keeping,
disassembly or abandonment of junk or discarded or salvaged material, except
for uses incidental to any agricultural use allowed in the zone.
KENNEL: The keeping of three (3) or more dogs at least four (4) months old.
KNOLL: A small, round hill or mound.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT, QUALIFIED: A person with at least a four (4) year degree
in landscape architecture from an accredited university offering such a degree,
and experience with mechanical and vegetative techniques for the stabilization
of surface soils on slopes.
LIVESTOCK FEED YARD: A commercial operation on a parcel of land where livestock
are kept in corrals or yards for extended periods of time at a density which
permits little movement, and where all feed is provided for the purpose of
fattening or maintaining the condition of the livestock prior to their shipment
to a stockyard for sale.
LODGING HOUSE/BED AND BREAKFAST INN: A building or portion thereof containing
not more than five (5) guestrooms where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or
otherwise.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building, use or
group of buildings or uses, together with such yards, open spaces, lot width
and lot areas as are required by this title, having frontage upon a public
street or approved right of way not less than sixteen feet (16') wide. Except
for group dwellings, not more than one dwelling shall occupy any lot (see
illustrations in chapter 22 of this title).
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection
or two (2) parts of the same street where such streets or parts of the same
street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°) (see illustrations in chapter 22 of this title).
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line, or the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and
the midpoint of the rear lot line (see illustrations in chapter 22 of this
title).
LOT, FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of the street between
intersecting streets or between a street and a waterway, end of a dead end
street, or a political subdivision boundary and having vehicular and pedestrian
access to the street (see illustrations in chapter 22 of this title).
LOT, MOBILE HOME: A parcel of land within an approved mobile home subdivision,
which is shown in the records of the Washington County recorder's office and
which is designated and intended for the accommodation of one mobile home.
LOT WIDTH: The distance between the side lot lines at the point back from the
front lot line required for the depth of the front yard (see illustrations in
chapter 22 of this title).
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure built after June 16, 1976, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical systems contained therein.
MASS GRADING: The movement of large quantities of earth over large areas.
Disruption of surface terrain in this manner often results in a successive pad/
terrace configuration. Modification or elimination of natural landforms may
result.
MESA: A typically flat topped landform with generally steep sides.
MINIMAL GRADING: A grading technique designed to minimize excavation and fill.
Allows the movement of earth for projects such as individual building
foundations, driveways, local roads, and utility excavation. It is often
associated with roads conforming closely to natural contours and the structures
being integrated into the natural terrain.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: A. Any business that serves food or beverages from a self-
contained unit either motorized or in a trailer on wheels, and conducts all or
part of its operations on premises other than its own and is readily movable,
without disassembling, for transport to another location. The term "mobile food
vendor" does not include vending carts or mobile ice cream vendors.
   B.   No person shall operate a mobile food vendor business without first
obtaining a business license and site plan approval from the city. Mobile food
vendors' operations and vehicles shall comply with all applicable local,
county, state and federal requirements relating to the handling and
distribution of food, including the Utah department of health and Southwest
Utah department of health. Mobile food vendors shall: not have a drive-through;
be kept in good operating condition; only operate on private property with
written permission from the owner of the property; provide for proper methods
of trash disposal and keep the area maintained and in a clean condition; not
operate within a one hundred foot (100') radius of any public restaurant
entrance or city sponsored event selling food; adhere to the city sign and
other applicable ordinances.
MOBILE HOME: A structure built prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or
more sections, which is eight (8) body feet or more in width and thirty two
(32) body feet or more in length and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when
connected to required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.
MOBILE HOME AWNING OR COVER: A lightweight, overhead structure used in
conjunction with a mobile home for the purpose of shading or weather protection
of areas such as carports, patios, porches, windows and similar uses.
MOBILE HOME PARK: An approved residential development, together with certain
accessory buildings and uses providing for the enjoyment and benefit of the
residents of the park, in which individual spaces are provided for the
placement of a mobile home for a dwelling unit or sleeping purposes, whether or
not a charge is made for such accommodations.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A parcel of land within an approved mobile home park which
is designed and intended for the accommodation of one mobile home.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A residential subdivision as shown in the records of
the Washington County recorder's office designated and approved in accordance
with the subdivision ordinance of Washington City, together with certain
accessory buildings and uses providing for the enjoyment and benefit of the
residents of the subdivision in which individual ownership of a lot is
permitted for the placement of one mobile home for a dwelling unit or sleeping
purposes.
MODULAR HOME: A structure built in accordance with the standards set forth in
the adopted building code adopted and in effect at the time of construction
which is composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing
plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent
foundation.
MOTEL: An establishment providing transient accommodations containing six (6)
or more rooms.
NATIVE VEGETATION: The natural vegetation commonly found in an area.
NATURAL OPEN SPACE: Landforms created by nature or subsequently modified to
meet fuel modification fire standards, including existing trees, riparian
vegetation and native plant communities. Manmade water bodies and trails
through natural open spaces may be considered as natural open space.
NATURAL SLOPE (Also NATURAL GRADE): The existing natural condition of the land;
a slope that is not manmade.
NATURAL WATERWAY: Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks,
springs, gullies or washes which are natural drainage channels as determined by
the building official, within which no buildings shall be constructed.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure, or portion
thereof, lawfully existing at the effective date hereof, which does not conform
to all the height, area and yard regulations herein prescribed for the zone in
which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the
effective date hereof and which does not conform to the regulations of the zone
in which it is located.
NURSING HOME: An establishment where persons are lodged and furnished with
meals and nursing care.
OPEN SPACE: Land not covered by buildings, roads or vehicular accessways, and
including areas that are open to view such as landscaped areas, slopes, natural
areas, agriculture areas and orchards, common areas, greenbelts, parks, etc.
OUTCROPPING: The part of a rock formation that appears above the surface of the
surrounding land.
PAD: A generally flat or stepped area created by grading to accommodate
development.
PARKING LOT: An open area, other than a street, which is covered with an
approved hard surface material and used for the parking of more than four (4)
motor vehicles and available for public or private use, whether free, for
compensation or for the accommodation of clients or customers. This definition
also includes the use of an open area for the display and sale of motor
vehicles.
PARKING SPACE: A hard surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, for the parking of
one motor vehicle which is not less than twenty feet (20') in length and not
less than nine feet (9') in width.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OR PUD: An integrated design for the development of
residential and associated commercial and recreational uses, in which the
developer is allowed flexibility and initiative in site and building design and
location, pursuant to the provisions of this title.
PLATEAU: A flat or predominantly flat area of land that is raised sharply above
adjacent land on at least one side.
PROMINENT RIDGE: A ridge or hilltop that is highly visible from a significant
portion of the community, or that forms an important part of the skyline.
PUBLIC USE: A use operated exclusively by a public body or quasi-public body,
where such use has the purpose of serving the public health, safety or general
welfare. Examples of this use include, but are not limited to, public schools,
parks, playgrounds, other public recreation facilities, administrative and
service facilities and public utilities.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: A use operated by a private, nonprofit educational,
religious, recreational, charitable or philanthropic institution which
primarily serves the general public. Such uses include, but are not limited to,
churches, private schools, universities and other similar uses.
RECREATIONAL HOME: A structure built in accordance with the standards set forth
in the adopted building code for which the building official has issued a
building permit and inspected and approved the structure for occupancy. In the
case where the structure is prefabricated outside the city limits of Washington
City, the applicant for a building permit shall obtain a certificate of
approval, as allowed under the adopted building code indicating compliance with
such code. Recreational homes are restricted to location only in an approved
"mobile home subdivision" or "recreational vehicle subdivision", as defined in
this section.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit, other than a mobile home, primarily
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use,
which is either self-propelled or is mounted on or pulled by another vehicle,
including, but not limited to: a travel trailer, a camping trailer, a truck
camper, a motor home, a fifth wheel trailer and a van.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AWNING: A lightweight overhead structure used in
conjunction with a recreational vehicle, for the purpose of shading or weather
protection of areas such as carports, patios, porches and windows. Said awnings
shall not be permitted to have attached siding, or be enclosed in any way.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: An approved residential development, together with
certain accessory buildings and uses, providing for the enjoyment and benefit
of patrons of the park, in which individual spaces are provided for the parking
of a recreational vehicle for temporary portable housing and sleeping purposes,
whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE: A parcel of land within an approved recreational
vehicle park which is designed and intended for the accommodation of one
recreational vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SUBDIVISION: An approved residential development, together
with certain accessory buildings and uses providing for the sale of individual
lots in fee simple for the purpose of accommodating a recreational vehicle or
home.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS:
   A.   A single-family or multiple-family dwelling unit that is:
      1. Not operated as a business, and that is owned by one of the residents
or by an immediate family member of one of the residents, or by an
eleemosynary, charitable or beneficial organization. For purposes of this
definition, a facility for which the title has been placed in trust for a
resident shall be considered to be owned by that resident;
      2. Consistent with existing zoning of the desired location;
      3. Occupied on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis by eight (8) or
fewer elderly persons in a family type arrangement; and
      4. In conformance with applicable standards of the department of social
services, and is licensed and inspected by that department.
   B.   "Residential facility for elderly persons" does not include a
healthcare facility as defined by Utah Code Annotated section 26-21-2. A
"residential facility for elderly persons" shall not be deemed to be operated
as a business by reason of the fact that a fee is charged for food or for
actual and necessary costs of operation and maintenance of the facility.
RIDGE: A long, narrow, or sharply defined conspicuous elevation of land.
RIDGELINE: The junction of a rising steep slope on one side and a descending
slope that may either be gentle or steep on the other side.
ROOM ADDITION: Any building or structure addition or alteration to a home other
than factory designed and assembled.
SCAR: A highly visible cut in a hillside or ridge in which topsoil has been
removed such that vegetation will be unable to establish itself within a
reasonable period of time. A deposit of earth or manmade materials not removed
upon finish grade completion is also considered a scar.
SETBACK: The shortest horizontal distance between the boundary line of a lot
and the building or structure or part thereof (see illustrations in chapter 22
of this title).
SIGN: See chapter 18 of this title.
SITE: Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the
same ownership.
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: Those provisions of this title which regulate the
development of lots or parcels of land in Washington City.
SLOPE: An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a
ratio of the vertical distance (rise), or change in elevation, divided by the
horizontal distance (run), and expressed as a percentage.
SLOPE TRANSITION: The area where a slope bank meets the natural terrain or a
level graded area either vertically or horizontally.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building used for the keeping of horses
owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire or
sale.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the finished surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above (see illustrations in
chapter 22 of this title).
STORY, HALF: A story with at least two (2) of its opposite sides situated in a
sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the
floor immediately below it (see illustrations in chapter 22 of this title).
STREET, ACCESS: A thoroughfare which provides direct access to adjacent
property.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A public street which has the function of carrying traffic at
relatively high speeds for moderate trip lengths. "Arterial streets" generally
surround neighborhoods and form a continuous system.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A public street extending from an arterial street into a
neighborhood. A "collector street" generally carries locally generated traffic
for short trips at low speeds.
STREET, PRIVATE: A right of way or easement in private ownership, not dedicated
or accepted as a public street, which has been approved as the principal means
of access to one or more sites and which provides a minimum unobstructed width
of twenty six feet (26') for firefighting access.
STREET, PUBLIC: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated to the public and
accepted by a proper public authority, or a thoroughfare which has been made
public by right of use and which serves as the principal means of access to
abutting property.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, an edifice or building of any kind,
or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together
in some definite manner.
TIP OUT OR SLIDE OUT: A recreational vehicle component which rides within the
main structure of the recreational vehicle while traveling, which either tips
out or slides out at the site.
TOE OF SLOPE: The lowest elevation of a slope that transitions to a flatter
area or pad.
TOP OF SLOPE: The highest elevation of a slope that transitions to a flatter
area or pad.
TOPOGRAPHY: A general term to include the characteristics of the ground
surface, such as plains, hills, mountains, degree of relief, steepness of
slope, and other physiographic features.
TOWNHOUSE/TWIN HOUSE: A single-family dwelling in a row of at least two (2)
such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside,
no unit is located over another unit, each unit is separated from any other
unit by one or more common fire resistant walls constructed to meet the
requirements of the adopted building code in effect at the time of
construction, and each unit is situated on an individual lot (see illustrations
in chapter 22 of this title).
UTAH LICENSED PROFESSIONAL: A Utah registered or licensed civil engineer,
geologist, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect.
UTILITIES: Includes culinary water lines, pressure and gravity irrigation
lines, sanitary and storm sewer lines, electric power, gas and telephone or
like utility transmission and distribution lines, underground conduits and
junction boxes. Transmission lines are intended to convey a specific utility
from place to place without service taps or transformers. Distribution lines
are intended to provide direct service access to customers.
VEGETATION: Growing native or nonnative plants.
VIEWSHED: Views to prominent visual features such as ridgelines.
YARD: A space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as provided herein (see illustrations in chapter 22 of this
title).
YARD, FRONT: A space on the same lot with a building which is located between
the front line of a building and the front lot line, extending across the full
width of the lot. The "depth" of the front yard is the minimum distance between
the front lot line and the front of the building (see illustrations in chapter
22 of this title).
YARD, REAR: A space on the same lot with a building which is located between
the rear line of the building and the rear lot line, extending the full width
of the lot. The "depth" of the rear yard is the minimum distance between the
rear lot line and the rear line of the building (see illustrations in chapter
22 of this title).
YARD, SIDE: A space on the same lot with a building which is located between
the side line of a building and the side lot line and extending from the front
yard to the rear yard. The "width" of the side yard shall be the minimum
distance between the side lot line and the side line of the building (see
illustrations in chapter 22 of this title).
ZERO LOT LINE: The location of a building on a lot in such manner that one of
the building's sides rests directly on a lot line (see illustrations in chapter
22 of this title). (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989; amd. Ord. 89-13, 8-23-1989; Ord. 96-5,
2-14-1996; Ord. 96-23, 10-9-1996; Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003; 2007 Code; Ord.
2008-23, 6-11-2008; Ord. 2013-25, 11-26-2013; Ord. 2015-19, 6-24-2015; Ord.
2015-25, 9-9-2015)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-2-1: Enforcement By City Official
9-2-2: Building Permits Required
9-2-3: Building Permits To Comply
9-2-4: Inspection
9-2-5: Fees
9-2-6: Other Permits Or Licenses
9-2-7: Changes And Amendments
9-2-8: Remedies
9-2-9: Penalty
9-2-10: Severability
9-2-11: Occupancy Permit
9-2-1: ENFORCEMENT BY CITY OFFICIAL:
A designated city official, appointed pursuant to city policy and procedures,
shall be the official charged with the administration and enforcement of this
title. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-2-2: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
Except for buildings and structures that are exempt from the requirement of a
building permit according to the building codes adopted by the city, no person,
firm or corporation, or the agent of either, shall erect, construct,
reconstruct, alter, repair or remove any building or other structure in the
city without having first obtained a building permit from the designated city
official charged with the administration and enforcement of the building codes
adopted by the city. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-2-3: BUILDING PERMITS TO COMPLY:
The city official charged with the administration and enforcement of this
title, or any other city official, shall not grant a permit for the erection,
construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building or structure if such
building or structure would be in violation of any provision of this title. Any
permit granted in violation of this or any other applicable city ordinance
shall be null and void. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-2-4: INSPECTION:
The designated city official charged with the administration and enforcement of
this title is hereby authorized to inspect, or cause to be inspected, all
buildings or structures in the course of erection, construction, reconstruction
or alteration and to inspect land uses to determine compliance with the
provisions of this title. The designated city official shall have the right to
enter the premises for the purpose of determining compliance with the
provisions of this title; provided, that such entry shall be exercised only at
reasonable hours and that in no case shall entry be made to any occupied
building in the absence of the owner or a tenant thereof without the written
permission of the owner or the written order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. If the designated city official determines that this title is not
being complied with, or if the designated city official is refused reasonable
entry to inspect the premises, the designated city official may order the
construction, erection, reconstruction or alteration to cease immediately, by
the issue of a stop order on a form to be approved by the city council. Any
person, firm, corporation, agent or employee who wilfully continues to
construct, reconstruct, erect or alter after having received notice of the stop
order, unless authorized by the designated city official, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code, for each day that the person continues to construct, erect
or alter on the premises. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989; amd. 2007 Code)
9-2-5: FEES:
Fees may be charged to applicants for zone changes, conditional use permits,
design review, sign permit review, overlay zone review, temporary use permit
review, planned unit development review, planned community development review,
annexations, planning commission and board of adjustment meetings, and other
such services as are required by this title to be performed by public officers
or agencies. Such fees shall be established by the city council by resolution
and shall be in such amounts reasonably necessary to defray costs to the
public. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-2-6: OTHER PERMITS OR LICENSES:
All departments, officials and public employees of the city which are vested
with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the
provisions of this title and shall issue no permit or license for uses,
buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions
of this title. Any such permits or licenses so issued shall be null and void.
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-2-7: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated, this title, including the official
zoning map, may be amended from time to time by the city council after proper
notice (as per Utah Code Annotated), and following a public hearing. A
completed application, along with all required exhibits and studies, including
the description of the land subject to amendment or change (the “subject
land”), shall be submitted to the community development department by the
approved meeting schedule cutoff date prior to the regularly scheduled meeting
of the planning commission, at which the application is to be first considered.
   B.   After the application is reviewed and recommended by the planning
commission, the application shall be submitted to the city council. The city
council may accept, modify or deny the recommendation of the planning
commission.
   C.   Written notices of the planning commission or city council public
hearings (“public hearing notices”) shall be mailed via U.S. postal service,
standard postage prepaid, to the owner(s) of record of parcels of land
appearing on the latest ownership plats maintained in the Washington County
recorder’s office (“adjacent owners”), according to the following:
      1.   To the mailing address (as provided in the county recorder’s office
ownership plats) of each adjacent owner whose parcel is located within a three
hundred foot (300') radius as measured from any point on the real property
boundary line of the subject land; and
      2.   The owner(s) of record (with identical mailing address information)
of more than one parcel of land within the public hearing notice provisions of
this section, shall be entitled to, and considered to be, only one public
hearing notice hereunder; and
      3.   To the extent that fewer than thirty (30) public hearing notices
have been identified/mailed pursuant to this section, additional public hearing
notices shall be mailed to the owners of record of the next nearest parcels of
land (extending concentrically outward) until thirty (30) public hearing
notices have been identified/mailed
      4.   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for such action to
provide two (2) sets of address labels necessary to provide the public hearing
notices as well as a list showing the names and addresses of all property
owners being notified pursuant to subsection C of this section. All costs
incurred by the city in processing a zone change or amendment shall be the
responsibility of the person requesting such zone change or amendment. (Ord.
2016-11, 4-13-2016; amd. Ord. 2021-35, 8-11-2021; Ord. 2022-55, 10-12-2022)
9-2-8: REMEDIES:
The city or any owner of real estate within a zoning district in which a
building or structure is being erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or
used in violation of this title may, in addition to other remedies provided by
law, institute injunctions, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate action or
actions, proceeding or proceedings, to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or maintenance of
such use. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-2-9: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent employee or
otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the violation of the provisions
of this title, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Any such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of
any violation of this ordinance is committed, continues or is permitted by such
person, firm or corporation. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989; amd. 2007 Code)
9-2-10: SEVERABILITY:
The sections, subsections, paragraphs, clauses and phrases of this title are
severable, and if any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or phrase of this
title shall be declared unconstitutional or without effect by any final
judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment or
decree shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses or paragraphs.
(Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-2-11: OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
   A.   Land, buildings and premises in any zone shall hereafter be used only
for the purposes listed herein as permitted in that zone and in accordance with
the regulations herein established for that zone. A certificate of occupancy
shall be issued by the designated city official charged with the administration
and enforcement of this title to the effect that the use and/or building or
premises conforms to the provisions of this and related ordinances prior to the
occupancy of any building hereafter erected, enlarged or structurally altered.
A certificate of occupancy shall also be issued when any vacant land is
hereafter proposed to be occupied or used, except for permitted agricultural
uses. Such certificate of occupancy shall also be issued whenever the character
or use of any building or land is proposed to be changed from one use to
another use.
   B.   Upon written request from the owner, such a certificate of occupancy
shall be issued covering any lawful use of a building or premises existing on
the effective date hereof, including nonconforming buildings and uses. (Ord.
89-5, 3-1-1989)
CHAPTER 3
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
9-3-1: Established; Membership; Appointment
9-3-2: Term Of Office
9-3-3: Vacancies; Removal
9-3-4: Compensation
9-3-5: Officers
9-3-6: Meetings
9-3-7: Rules And Procedures
9-3-8: Quorum And Vote
9-3-9: Employees And Expenditures
9-3-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT:
   A.   The planning commission is hereby established for the purpose of
developing plans for the physical development of the city, making reports and
recommendations relating to the development of the city, administering the
applicable provisions of this title, and to carry out any other activities
authorized by the city council to enable the planning commission to perform its
functions and to promote municipal planning.
   B.   The planning commission shall consist of five (5) members and one
alternate, appointed by the city council. All persons appointed to the planning
commission shall be residents of the city and owners of real property therein.
At least three (3) of the members shall hold no other public office or
position. The city council shall appoint a representative from among its
members to act as a liaison between the city council and planning commission.
One member of the planning commission shall be a member of the board of
adjustment. The alternate member of the planning commission shall attend all
meetings of the planning commission and may participate in all discussions and
proceedings; however, he or she may vote only in the case where another
planning commissioner is absent. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-3-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office of the appointed members of the planning commission shall be
three (3) years and until their respective successors have been appointed. The
member terms shall be filled so as to bring about staggered terms so that the
terms of two (2) members expire each year. The city council may reappoint any
planning commissioner to any number of subsequent terms. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-3-3: VACANCIES; REMOVAL:
Vacancies of appointed members occurring other than through the expiration of
terms shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the city
council. The city council shall have the right to remove any member of the
planning commission for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. Nonperformance of
duty shall include a repeated failure to attend planning commission meetings.
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-3-4: COMPENSATION:
The planning commission may receive compensation for their services as
determined by the city council. Furthermore, the city council shall provide for
the reimbursement of the planning commission for actual expenses incurred, upon
presentation of proper receipts and vouchers. (Ord. 2010-06, 2-24-2010)
9-3-5: OFFICERS:
The city council shall appoint from the members of the planning commission, a
chairperson, whose term shall be for one year. The planning commission may
create and fill other offices as it may deem necessary. (Ord. 2008-29, 8-13-
2008)
9-3-6: MEETINGS:
The planning commission shall conduct regularly scheduled meetings, which shall
be properly advertised and open to the public. Notice of planning commission
meetings shall be mailed to all property owners appearing on the latest
ownership plat in the county recorder's office within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of any property for which an action of the planning commission is
being requested. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for such
action to provide the mailing labels necessary to provide such notice. All
other costs involved with processing planning commission applications shall be
the responsibility of the party or parties making such application. (Ord. 89-5,
3-1-1989; amd. 2007 Code)
9-3-7: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
The planning commission may adopt such rules and procedures as it may deem
necessary for the proper conduct of its business. The planning commission shall
keep a record of its proceedings, which shall be open to inspection by the
public at all reasonable times. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-3-8: QUORUM AND VOTE:
A quorum shall consist of three (3) members. Evidence shall not be presented
unless a quorum is present. The concurring vote of at least three (3) members
of the planning commission is required to carry any motion. (Ord. 98-27, 10-28-
1998)
9-3-9: EMPLOYEES AND EXPENDITURES:
The planning commission may, upon approval of the city council, employ such
staff as it may deem necessary for its work, and may contract with city
planners or other consultants for such services as it requires; provided, that
the expenditures of the planning commission shall not be in excess of such sums
as may be appropriated by the city council. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
SECTION:
9-3-1: Established; Membership; Appointment
9-3-2: Term Of Office
9-3-3: Vacancies; Removal
9-3-4: Compensation
9-3-5: Officers
9-3-6: Meetings
9-3-7: Rules And Procedures
9-3-8: Quorum And Vote
9-3-9: Employees And Expenditures
9-3-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT:
   A.   The planning commission is hereby established for the purpose of
developing plans for the physical development of the city, making reports and
recommendations relating to the development of the city, administering the
applicable provisions of this title, and to carry out any other activities
authorized by the city council to enable the planning commission to perform its
functions and to promote municipal planning.
   B.   The planning commission shall consist of five (5) members and one
alternate, appointed by the city council. All persons appointed to the planning
commission shall be residents of the city and owners of real property therein.
At least three (3) of the members shall hold no other public office or
position. The city council shall appoint a representative from among its
members to act as a liaison between the city council and planning commission.
One member of the planning commission shall be a member of the board of
adjustment. The alternate member of the planning commission shall attend all
meetings of the planning commission and may participate in all discussions and
proceedings; however, he or she may vote only in the case where another
planning commissioner is absent. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-3-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office of the appointed members of the planning commission shall be
three (3) years and until their respective successors have been appointed. The
member terms shall be filled so as to bring about staggered terms so that the
terms of two (2) members expire each year. The city council may reappoint any
planning commissioner to any number of subsequent terms. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-3-3: VACANCIES; REMOVAL:
Vacancies of appointed members occurring other than through the expiration of
terms shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the city
council. The city council shall have the right to remove any member of the
planning commission for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. Nonperformance of
duty shall include a repeated failure to attend planning commission meetings.
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-3-4: COMPENSATION:
The planning commission may receive compensation for their services as
determined by the city council. Furthermore, the city council shall provide for
the reimbursement of the planning commission for actual expenses incurred, upon
presentation of proper receipts and vouchers. (Ord. 2010-06, 2-24-2010)
9-3-5: OFFICERS:
The city council shall appoint from the members of the planning commission, a
chairperson, whose term shall be for one year. The planning commission may
create and fill other offices as it may deem necessary. (Ord. 2008-29, 8-13-
2008)
9-3-6: MEETINGS:
The planning commission shall conduct regularly scheduled meetings, which shall
be properly advertised and open to the public. Notice of planning commission
meetings shall be mailed to all property owners appearing on the latest
ownership plat in the county recorder's office within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of any property for which an action of the planning commission is
being requested. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for such
action to provide the mailing labels necessary to provide such notice. All
other costs involved with processing planning commission applications shall be
the responsibility of the party or parties making such application. (Ord. 89-5,
3-1-1989; amd. 2007 Code)
9-3-7: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
The planning commission may adopt such rules and procedures as it may deem
necessary for the proper conduct of its business. The planning commission shall
keep a record of its proceedings, which shall be open to inspection by the
public at all reasonable times. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-3-8: QUORUM AND VOTE:
A quorum shall consist of three (3) members. Evidence shall not be presented
unless a quorum is present. The concurring vote of at least three (3) members
of the planning commission is required to carry any motion. (Ord. 98-27, 10-28-
1998)
9-3-9: EMPLOYEES AND EXPENDITURES:
The planning commission may, upon approval of the city council, employ such
staff as it may deem necessary for its work, and may contract with city
planners or other consultants for such services as it requires; provided, that
the expenditures of the planning commission shall not be in excess of such sums
as may be appropriated by the city council. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
CHAPTER 4
APPEALS
ARTICLE A. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
9-4A-1: Membership; Appointment; Term; Removal; Vacancy
9-4A-2: Compensation
9-4A-3: Officers
9-4A-4: Quorum
9-4A-5: Meetings; Notice
9-4A-6: Rules And Procedures
9-4A-7: Powers And Duties
9-4A-8: Appeal To Board; Persons Entitled; Transmission Of Records
9-4A-9: Stay Of Proceedings Pending Appeal
9-4A-10: Decision On Appeal
9-4A-11: Vote Necessary For Reversal
9-4A-12: Judicial Review Of Board Decision; Time Limitations
9-4A-1: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM; REMOVAL; VACANCY:
The board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members and one alternate,
each to be appointed by the city council for a term of five (5) years;
provided, that the terms of the existing members of the board of adjustment
shall be staggered so as to be such that the term of one member shall expire
each year. The alternate member shall attend all meetings of the board and may
participate in the deliberations of the board, but may vote only in the event
of the absence of another board member. Any member may be removed for cause by
the city council. Repeated failure to attend board of adjustment meetings is
cause for removal. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any
member whose term becomes vacant. One member, but not more than one, of the
planning commission shall be a member of the board of adjustment. (Ord. 2012-
11, 7-11-2012)
9-4A-2: COMPENSATION:
The board of adjustment shall serve without compensation, except that the city
shall provide for reimbursement of the board of adjustment for actual expenses
incurred, upon presentation of proper receipts and vouchers. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-
11-2012)
9-4A-3: OFFICERS:
The board of adjustment shall elect a chairperson from among its members, whose
term shall be one year. The board of adjustment may create and fill other
offices as it deems necessary. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4A-4: QUORUM:
A quorum shall consist of three (3) members of the board of adjustment. No
evidence shall be presented to the board unless a quorum is present. (Ord.
2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4A-5: MEETINGS; NOTICE:
   A.   Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the
chairperson and at other times as the board may determine.
   B.   All meetings shall be properly advertised and shall be open to the
public. Where applicable, notice of board of adjustment meetings shall be
mailed to all property owners appearing on the latest ownership plat in the
county recorder's office within a three hundred foot (300') radius of any
property for which an action of the board of adjustment is being requested. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant for such action to provide the
stamped, addressed envelopes necessary to provide such notice. The chairperson
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-
11-2012)
9-4A-6: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for the regulation of its procedure
and the conduct of its duties not inconsistent with the provisions of this
title or of state law. Such rules, to become effective, shall first be approved
by the city council. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4A-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of adjustment shall have the following powers:
   A.   To authorize upon appeal such variance from the terms of this title as
will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will result
in unnecessary hardship; provided, that the spirit of this title shall be
observed and substantial justice done. Before any variance may be authorized,
however, it shall be shown that all of the standards and requirements as found
in the Utah code, title 10, chapter 9A, section 702 (10-9a-702) variances, have
been met.
In granting a variance, the board of adjustment may impose additional
requirements that will mitigate any harmful affects of the variance or that may
serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is being waived or
modified.
   B.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any administrative
official in the enforcement of this title or of any ordinance adopted pursuant
thereto. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4A-8: APPEAL TO BOARD; PERSONS ENTITLED; TRANSMISSION OF RECORDS:
Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by
any officer, department or board of the city affected by the decision of the
designated city official charged with the administration and enforcement of
this title, or any other administrative officer or board. Such appeal shall be
taken within ten (10) working days following the date upon which the decision
was made that is being appealed, by submitting an application to appear before
the board to the community development department, stating the reason for
petitioning an appearance before the board. The community development
department shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the
documents constituting the record of the action from which the appeal was
taken. A meeting with the board of adjustment shall be scheduled within twenty
(20) working days after receiving an application to appear before the board.
(Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4A-9: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS PENDING APPEAL:
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer or board from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
board of adjustment, after the application to appear before the board has been
submitted, that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by restraining order of the
district court upon application and notice and with due cause shown. (Ord.
2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4A-10: DECISION ON APPEAL:
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, in
conformity with provisions of this title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination from which the
appeal is taken and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4A-11: VOTE NECESSARY FOR REVERSAL:
The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board of adjustment shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement or determination of any
administrative official, or to affect any variation in the provisions of this
title. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4A-12: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF BOARD DECISION; TIME LIMITATIONS:
The city, or any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment,
may have and maintain a plenary action for relief therefrom in any court of
competent jurisdiction; provided, petition for such relief is presented to the
court within thirty (30) days after the final decision of the board of
adjustment. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
ARTICLE B. ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE
SECTION:
9-4B-1: Appointment; Term; Removal; Vacancy
9-4B-2: Compensation
9-4B-3: Meetings; Notice
9-4B-4: Rules And Procedures
9-4B-5: Powers And Duties
9-4B-6: Appeal To Administrative Law Judge; Time Limit; Persons Entitled;
Transmission Of Records
9-4B-7: Stay Of Proceedings Pending Appeal
9-4B-8: Decision On Appeal
9-4B-9: Judicial Review Of Administrative Law Judge Decision; Time Limitations
9-4B-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM; REMOVAL; VACANCY:
The administrative law judge shall be appointed by the city council for a term
of three (3) years. An alternate administrative law judge shall also be
appointed by the city council in the event that the primary administrative law
judge is not available to hear an appeal. The administrative law judge may be
removed for cause by the city council. Repeated failure to attend meetings is
cause for removal. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term of the
administrative law judge by the appointed alternate. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4B-2: COMPENSATION:
The administrative law judge shall serve with compensation as established by
the city council. Provisions will also be made for reimbursement for actual
expenses incurred, upon presentation of proper receipts and vouchers. (Ord.
2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4B-3: MEETINGS; NOTICE:
All meetings shall be properly advertised and shall be open to the public.
(Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4B-4: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
The administrative law judge shall adopt rules for the regulation of his/her
procedures and the conduct of his/her duties not inconsistent with the
provisions of this title or of state law. Such rules, to become effective,
shall first be approved by the city council. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4B-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The administrative law judge shall have the power to serve in the capacity as
the board of appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of the building codes adopted by the city. Examples of such
building codes include, but are not limited to, international building code
(IBC), international residential code (IRC), national electrical code (NEC),
international plumbing code (IPC), international mechanical code (IMC) and the
international fire code (IFC). (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4B-6: APPEAL TO ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE; TIME LIMIT; PERSONS ENTITLED;
TRANSMISSION OF RECORDS:
Appeals to the administrative law judge may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by any officer, department or board of the city affected by the decision of the
designated city official charged with the administration and enforcement of the
building codes adopted by the city, or any other administrative officer or
board. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) working days following the
date upon which the decision was made that is being appealed, by submitting an
application to appear before the administrative law judge to the community
development department, stating the reason for petitioning an appearance before
the administrative law judge. The community development department shall
forthwith transmit to the administrative law judge all the documents
constituting the record of the action from which the appeal was taken. A
meeting with the administrative law judge shall be scheduled within twenty (20)
working days after receiving an application to appear before the administrative
law judge. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4B-7: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS PENDING APPEAL:
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer or board from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
administrative law judge, after the application to appear before the
administrative law judge has been submitted, that a stay would cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed,
except by restraining order of the district court upon application and notice
and with due cause shown. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4B-8: DECISION ON APPEAL:
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the administrative law judge may, in
conformity with provisions of this title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination from which the
appeal is taken and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
9-4B-9: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE DECISION; TIME LIMITATIONS:
The city, or any person aggrieved by any decision of the administrative law
judge, may have and maintain a plenary action for relief therefrom in any court
of competent jurisdiction; provided, petition for such relief is presented to
the court within thirty (30) days after the final decision of the
administrative law judge. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Establishment Of Zones
9-5-2: Boundaries Of Zoning Districts
9-5-3: Ordinances And Map Filed
9-5-4: Rules For Locating Boundaries
9-5-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES:
For the purpose of this title, the following zoning districts are created to be
applied as necessary to regulate the development of land and land uses in the
City:
Open Space Zone                              OS
Agricultural Zone                            A
Residential Agricultural Zone                RA
Single-Family Residential Zone               R-1
One- and Two-Family Residential Zone         R-2
Multiple-Family Residential Zone             R-3
Mobile Home - Recreational Vehicle Zone      MH
Planned Unit Development - Residential Zone  PUD-R
Administrative and Professional Zone         AP
Community Commercial Zone                    C-1
Service Commercial Zone                      C-2
General Commercial Zone                      C-3
Downtown Mixed Use Zone                      DM
Planned Unit Development - Commercial/       PUD-C
Industrial Zone
Light Industrial Zone                        I-1
Heavy Industrial Zone                        I-2
Business Park Zone                           BP
Hillside Protection Overlay Zone             HP
Interstate Corridor Overlay Zone             IC
Extractive Industries Overlay Zone           EI
Residential Rentals, Short Term Overlay Zone  
Planned Community Development                PCD
 
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2008-02, 1-9-2008; Ord. 2009-14, 10-
14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, 1-28-2015; Ord. 2018-02, 1-10-2018; Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-
2018)
9-5-2: BOUNDARIES OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
The boundaries of each of the said zones are hereby established as described
herein or shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of Washington City, Utah",
which map is on file at the City offices, and all boundaries, notations and
other data shown thereon are made by this reference as much a part of this
title as if fully described and detailed herein. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-5-3: ORDINANCES AND MAP FILED:
This title and map shall be filed with the City Recorder and may be examined by
the public subject to any reasonable regulations established by the City
Council. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-5-4: RULES FOR LOCATING BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zoning district, the
following rules shall apply:
   A.   Where the zone boundary is indicated as being approximately upon the
centerline of a street, alley or block, or along a property line; then, unless
otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the centerline of such street,
alley, block or property line shall be construed to be the boundary of such
zone.
   B.   Whenever the zone boundary line is indicated as being approximately at
the line of any river, irrigation canal or other waterway, public park or
section line; then in such case, the center of such stream, canal, waterway,
public park or section line shall be deemed to be the boundary of such zone.
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
CHAPTER 6
OPEN SPACE (OS) ZONE
SECTION:
9-6-1: Purpose
9-6-2: Use Regulations
9-6-3: Site Design Regulations
9-6-4: Height Regulations
9-6-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the open space zone is to minimize flooding, erosion and other
environmental hazards; to protect the natural scenic character of areas not
suitable for development; to promote the well being of present and future
residents of the city; and to ensure the efficient expenditure of public funds.
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-6-2: USE REGULATIONS:
In the open space zone, no property shall be used and no building shall be
erected or altered so as to be arranged, intended or designed to be used for
other than one or more of the following uses:
Airport.
Cemetery.
Emergency equipment routes to provide essential emergency services, such as
fire control.
Livestock grazing, including incidental corrals, barns or pens.
Public or private recreation facilities which will not significantly alter the
natural form of the landscape.
Public utilities and transmission lines.
Raising of crops, horticulture and gardening. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-6-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements are subject to conditional use review and
recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city council as
outlined in chapter 17 of this title. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-6-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/2)
stories in height, unless otherwise approved with a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-6-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                                Yards In Feet
District Area     Width In Feet Front Side Rear
OS       20 acres 500           50    30   50
 
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
CHAPTER 7
AGRICULTURAL (A) ZONE
SECTION:
9-7-1: Purpose
9-7-2: Use Regulations
9-7-3: Site Design Regulations
9-7-4: Height Regulations
9-7-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-7-6: Modifying Regulations
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the agricultural zone is to preserve appropriate areas of the
city for predominantly agricultural use. Uses normally and necessarily related
to agriculture may be permitted under appropriate conditions, while uses of
land which may prove to adversely affect agricultural activities will not be
allowed. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-7-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Accessory buildings and uses.
Crop production.
Farm buildings and uses.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Livestock feeding (excluding concentrated animal confinement and livestock feed
yards).
One single-family dwelling built in accordance with chapter 21 of this title.
Private riding stables.
Public park, playground or recreation facilities.
Wholesale nurseries and greenhouses.
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Airport.
Cemetery.
Childcare facilities.
Church.
Dairy production.
Fur farms, livestock feed yards and other "concentrated animal confinement", as
defined in section
9-1-6 of this title.
Kennel.
One accessory apartment inside the owner's dwelling for use by the owner's
parents, son, daughter or hired worker.
One secondary dwelling, built in accordance with chapter 21 of this title, for
use by the owner's parents, son, daughter or hired worker, as long as:
      1.   The dwelling is located on the same lot as the permitted dwelling
occupied by the owner.
      2.   The owner's property is registered with the county assessor under
the farmland assessment act.
      3.   The sewage disposal system is approved by the Southwest Utah public
health department.
Poultry raising.
Public or commercial riding stables.
Public utilities.
Residential facility for persons with a disability which meets the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated, to the extent that state and/or federal law allows such
facilities to be subject to conditional use permits.
Retail nurseries and greenhouses.
School.
Silage pits, manure pits and vertical silos.
Stands for sale of produce grown and sold on the premises.
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, which are determined by the planning commission to be in harmony with
the character and intent of this zone. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Except as otherwise provided for in this title, the
following uses shall be excluded from the city: recreational/timeshare rentals,
overnight rentals, vacation rentals, and any and all other types of short term
rentals consisting of a period of twenty seven (27) days or less. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-13-2013)
9-7-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed conditional uses are subject to
review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city
council. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-7-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall be erected to a height greater than two and one-half (21/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35'), whichever is greater, unless otherwise
approved with a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-7-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                                Yards In Feet
District Area     Width In Feet Front Side Rear
    A5 acres  300           30    15   30
    A10 acres 400           30    15   30
    A20 acres 400           30    15   30
 
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-7-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: One-story private garages and other accessory buildings,
twenty feet (20') or less in height, located at least ten feet (10') behind the
main building, may have a side yard of three feet (3'), except on the street
side of a corner lot, which shall be the same as the front yard setback. The
provisions of subsection D of this section shall be met for encroachment into
the side yard setback.
   B.   Rear Yards: One-story private garages and other accessory buildings,
twenty feet (20') or less in height, located at least ten feet (10') behind the
main building, may have a rear yard of three feet (3'); provided, that on
corner lots rearing the side yard of another lot, the minimum rear yard for all
buildings shall be ten feet (10'). The provisions of subsection D of this
section shall be met for encroachment into the rear yard setback.
   C.   Distance Between Buildings: No building, structure, enclosure or fence
housing animals or fowl shall be located closer than one hundred feet (100') to
a dwelling on the same or adjacent lots.
   D.   Provisions For Detached Accessory Buildings To Encroach Into Side Or
Rear Yard Setback: In order for a detached one- story private garage or
accessory building, twenty feet (20') or less in height, to encroach into the
side or rear yard setback, the following conditions shall be met:
      1.   The roof shall not project across a property line;
      2.   Stormwater runoff from the building shall not run onto an adjacent
property;
      3.   Any nonportable building to be placed over a drainage and/or utility
easement shall require written approval, obtained by the applicant, from the
electrical power department and public works department, and all other utility
companies with easement rights, prior to obtaining a building permit, and shall
require the property owner to provide and sign a recordable waiver and
indemnification document that waives and indemnifies the city from any
liability for any damages or expenses (including reimbursement to the city for
removing the building) associated with the building being placed over an
easement, and granting the city permission to remove such building at any time
the city determines that said building must be removed to repair drainage
facilities or utilities, or for other safety, health or welfare reasons; and
      4.   All other provisions of this title and applicable building and fire
codes regarding accessory buildings shall be adhered to. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-
2004)
CHAPTER 8
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL (RA) ZONE
SECTION:
9-8A-1: Purpose
9-8A-2: Use Regulations
9-8A-3: Site Design Regulations
9-8A-4: Height Regulations
9-8A-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-8A-6: Modifying Regulations
9-8A-7: Bonus Density Program
9-8A-8: Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit (DADU)
9-8A-9: Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit (IADU)
9-8A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the residential agricultural zone is to provide appropriate
areas in the city where low density residential development can be accompanied
by small scale agricultural activities, such as gardening and animal husbandry.
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-8A-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Accessory buildings and uses.
Agriculture.
Family food production.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
One single-family dwelling built in accordance with chapter 21 of this title.
Private riding stables.
Public park, playground or recreation facilities.
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Cemetery.
Childcare facilities.
Church.
Kennel on properties five (5) acres or larger in size.
Public buildings.
Public or commercial riding stables on properties five (5) acres or larger in
size.
Public utilities.
Residential facility for persons with a disability which meets the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated to the extent that state and/or federal law allows such
facilities to be subject to conditional use permits.
School.
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, which are determined by the planning commission to be in harmony with
the character and intent of this zone. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Except as otherwise provided for in this title, the
following uses shall be excluded from the city: recreational/timeshare rentals,
overnight rentals, vacation rentals, and any and all other types of short term
rentals consisting of a period of twenty seven (27) days or less. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-13-2013)
9-8A-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed conditional uses are subject to
review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city
council. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8A-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall be erected to a height greater than two and one-half (21/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35'), whichever is greater, unless otherwise
approved with a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8A-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                                        Yards In Feet
District      Area        Width In Feet Front Side Rear
          1/2 ac100           30    10   30
          1 acre125           30    15   30
          2 acre250           30    15   30
          5 acre300           30    15   30
 
(Ord. 2012-17, 9-26-2012)
9-8A-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards:
      1.   Detached one-story private garages and other accessory buildings and
structures, located at least ten feet (10') away from the main building, may
have a side yard setback of three feet (3'), subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
         a.   Where applicable, a building permit is obtained.
         b.   The detached accessory building or structure is twenty feet (20')
or less in height. Additional height may be acquired by moving the building or
structure inward into the lot. For each foot added to the side yard setback
(beyond three feet (3')), an additional foot may be added to the height of the
structure, but in no case shall the detached accessory building or structure be
taller than the main building.
         c.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
         d.   The detached private garage or other accessory building or
structure shall be located at least ten feet (10') behind the nearest corner of
the front of the main building in the given side yard.
         e.   In no case shall the square footage of the detached accessory
building or structure exceed fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the
main building.
         f.   Accessory buildings and structures located in the side yard shall
not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the side yard area.
         g.   The provisions of subsection D of this section shall be met for
encroachment into the side yard setback.
      2.   One-story attached accessory shade structures, open on three (3)
sides, may be located in the side yard area to within three feet (3') (at the
furthest projection) of the side property line, subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
         a.   A building permit is required for all attached accessory shade
structures
         b.   The shade structure roof and support columns must be fire rated
and built of fire resistant materials in compliance with the International
Residential Code and International Fire Code;
         c.   The shade structure shall not be built higher than the existing
roof line that it abuts or exceed twelve feet (12') maximum in height, nor
shall it exceed twenty feet (20') in width;
         d.   A six foot (6') high masonry wall shall be along the side
property line adjacent to the shade structure;
         e.   Only one side yard area may be covered with an accessory shade
structure, the other side yard shall remain open;
         f.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
         g.   Before installation of any accessory shade structure, a building
permit will be required along with approval by the Community Development
Director, or his/her designee will be obtained as to materials, location and
attachment to the main building; and
         h.   The provisions of subsection D of this section shall be met for
encroachment into the side yard setback.
   B.   Rear Yards:
      1.   Detached one-story private garages and other accessory buildings and
, structures located at least ten feet (10') away from the main building, may
haveDetached one-story private garages and other accessory buildings and ,
structures located at least ten feet (10') away from the main building, may
have a rear yard setback of three feet (3'), subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
         a.   Where applicable, a building permit is obtained.
         b.   The detached accessory building or structure is twenty feet (20')
or less in height. Additional height may be acquired by moving the building or
structure into the lot. For each foot added to the side/rear yard setback
(beyond three feet (3'), an additional foot may be added to the height of the
building or structure, but in no case shall the detached accessory building or
structure be taller than the main building.
         c.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages.
         d.   The detached private garage or other accessory building or
structure shall be located at least ten feet (10') behind the nearest corner of
the front of the main building in the given side yard.
         e.   Accessory buildings and structures (including shade structures as
outlined below) located in the rear yard shall not cover more than thirty
percent (30%) of the rear yard area.
         f.   The provisions of subsection D of this section shall be met for
encroachment into the rear yard setback.
      2.   One-story attached accessory shade structures, open on three sides,
may be located in the rear yard area to within three feet (3') (at the furthest
projection) of the rear property line, subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
         a.   A building permit is required for all attached accessory shade
structures.
         b.   The shade structure roof and support columns must be fire rated
and built of fire-resistant materials in compliance with the International
Residential Code and the International Fire Code;
         c.   The shade structure shall not be built higher than the existing
roof line that it abuts, and where there is no existing one-story roof line, it
shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height;
         d.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
         e.   Where an adjoining lot exist along the rear property line, a six
foot (6') high masonry wall shall be required along the rear property line
adjacent to the shade structure. Where a setback of at least ten feet (10')
will be maintained between the shade structure and the rear property line, no
block wall is required;
         f.   The shade structure along with any other accessory structures
located in the rear yard shall not cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of
the rear yard area.
   C.   Distance Between Buildings: No building, structure, enclosure or fence
housing animals or fowl shall be located closer than one hundred feet (100') to
a dwelling on the same or adjacent lots.
   D.   Provisions For Detached Accessory Buildings To Encroach Into Side Or
Rear Yard Setback: In order for a detached one-story private garage or
accessory building, twenty feet (20') or less in height, to encroach into the
side or rear yard setback, the following conditions shall be met:
      1.   The roof shall not project across a property line;
      2.   Stormwater runoff from the building shall not run onto an adjacent
property;
      3.   Any nonportable building to be placed over a drainage and/or utility
easement shall require written approval, obtained by the applicant, from the
electrical power department and public works department, and all other utility
companies with easement rights, prior to obtaining a building permit, and shall
require the property owner to provide and sign a recordable waiver and
indemnification document that waives and indemnifies the city from any
liability for any damages or expenses (including reimbursement to the city for
removing the building) associated with the building being placed over an
easement, and granting the city permission to remove such building at any time
the city determines that said building must be removed to repair drainage
facilities or utilities, or for other safety, health or welfare reasons; and
      4.   All other provisions of this title and applicable building and fire
codes regarding accessory buildings shall be adhered to. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-
2004; amd. Ord. 2019-24, 12-11-2019; Ord. 2023-20, 5-24-2023)
9-8A-7: BONUS DENSITY PROGRAM:
   A.   Program Outline: Specific areas in the Washington Fields area and some
of the area north of I-15 have been designated as bonus density areas on the
general plan land use map to provide incentives that will help preserve open
space. These areas are allowed a base density of one dwelling unit per acre,
which corresponds to the RA-1 zone. However, bonus density credits may be given
as multiples of the base density for specific open space amenities (outlined
below) that are incorporated into developments and are beneficial to the
public. If higher density zoning is present at the time of subdivision or
rezoning, credits are reduced proportionally. If all of the credits were to be
granted, a property could theoretically achieve a density of three and five-
tenths plus (3.5+) units per acre (2.5 plus units per acre in bonus density,
plus the original 1 unit per acre in base density). However, it is unlikely
that all of the density bonus categories could or would be earned on a given
parcel (e.g., it is not desirable to have a public park on every parcel), plus
there must be a density cap to meet the intent of the general plan. Therefore,
the actual density increases resulting will average close to the two and five-
tenths (2.5) units per acre identified as a goal in the general plan.
   B.   Program Participation: If the property is already zoned RA-1, then an
applicant may simply propose a subdivision that meets the RA-1 zone development
standards. If the applicant wants to participate in the bonus density program,
a development agreement may be proposed that incorporates the open space
amenities for the bonus density credits, along with a proposed subdivision. If
the property has a zoning designation that is less dense than the RA-1 zone,
then a zone change request to RA-1 must first be approved by the city council
after a recommendation by the planning commission. If the applicant wants to
participate in the bonus density program, a development agreement may be
proposed along with the zone change request, or the applicant may wait until
the RA-1 zone is approved and then propose a development agreement along with a
proposed subdivision. If the applicant does not want to participate in the
bonus density program, then a proposed subdivision must meet the RA-1 zone
development standards. If the property has a zoning designation that is more
dense than the RA-1 zone and an applicant wants to participate in the bonus
density program, density credits will be proportionally reduced and identified
in a development agreement.
   C.   Modified Area, Width And Yard Regulations: Since the purpose of the
bonus density program is to help preserve open space, lots in a subdivision may
be clustered and the areas of the lots may be reduced. As lots are reduced in
size, their widths and minimum yard setbacks must also be proportionally
reduced in size. Lot setbacks must be noted on the final plat of each
subdivision. The following table outlines the modified area, width and yard
regulations for lots when an applicant participates in the bonus density
program:
                             Yards In Feet
Area In Square Feet1 Width2  Front Side Rear
(Closest Size Range) In Feet
                                    Yards In Feet
Area In Square Feet1        Width2  Front Side            Rear
(Closest Size Range)        In Feet
         6,000        6620          8 an1010
(absolute minimum lot size)
         8,000        7020          8 an1010
         10,000       8020          10 a20 10
         12,000       9020          10 a20 10
         15,000       1020          10 a20 10
         21,780       1020          10 a20 10
    (1/2 acre)
         30,000       1020          15 a20 15
         40,000       2030          15 a30 15
         43,560       2030          15 a30 15
    (1 acre)
 
Notes:
      1.   The absolute minimum lot size is 6,000 square feet. The smallest
lots of a subdivision are to be internal to the project, and the lot sizes
along the subdivision boundaries are to be within a single density transition
category of adjacent properties.
      2.   Unlike the minimum yard setbacks, the lot widths are more of a
general guideline than a minimum standard. The intent is for the lot widths to
be proportional to the corresponding lot size range. It is undesirable to have
lots extremely narrow compared to their depths. Each proposed subdivision will
be evaluated to see if this intent is being met. Flag lots may also be
considered for properties that have irregular shapes and/or topography.
   D.   Open Space Amenities And Bonus Density Credits:
      1.   Interconnectivity Of Internal Streets: Streets connect to each other
within the project to create an informal grid that provides multiple routes for
emergency vehicles and distributes traffic evenly through a neighborhood. To
qualify for this density bonus, no more than twenty percent (20%) of the lots
shall be located on cul-de- sacs.
Credit:    Twenty five percent (25%) increase in density.
      2.   Interconnectivity Of External Streets: Streets connect to adjoining
parcels/subdivisions to create an informal grid that provides multiple routes
for emergency vehicles and distributes traffic evenly through a subarea. To
qualify for this density bonus, access streets in addition to what is already
required (the basic minimum number of access streets for each subdivision is 2,
but larger subdivisions or subdivisions that have specific access and/or
circulation issues may require more than 2 access streets), shall be provided,
and the additional connecting streets provided shall be stubbed internal to
adjacent properties and not perpendicular to streets external to the
development.
Credit:    Fifteen percent (15%) increase in density for one additional street.
Twenty five percent (25%) increase in density for more than one additional
street.
      3.   Houses Facing Onto Arterial And Major Collector Streets: It is
acknowledged that major and minor arterial streets (106 foot and 80 foot rights
of way) and major collector streets (66 foot rights of way) are designed to
optimize for traffic capacity and speed. Residential lots may be allowed to
back (double frontage lots) onto arterial and major collector streets as long
as there are adequate setbacks and landscape screening. Additionally,
residential streets (60 foot and 50 foot rights of way) are intended to
optimize for convenient travel, safe mixing of pedestrians and vehicles, and to
be attractive settings for homes. Accordingly, double frontage lots are not
allowed (except in cases of topographical constraints and factors relating to
safety) along residential streets. It is possible to front homes onto arterial
and major collector streets through the use of rear alleys or frontage roads.
To qualify for this density bonus, double frontage lots are not allowed on
streets classified as arterials (106 foot and 80 foot rights of way) and major
collectors (66 foot rights of way). Keep in mind that intersection spacing must
meet city standards for alleys and frontage roads as well as all other streets.
(Note: Except in cases of topographical constraints and factors relating to
safety, and if it makes no difference to traffic impacts, double frontage lots
are prohibited along rights of way less than 66 feet.)
Credit:    Twenty five percent (25%) increase in density.
      4.   Mix Of Lot Sizes: Consistent with the general plan, the objective of
this incentive is to encourage developments that have a mix of lot sizes so as
to create a varied appearance (avoiding "cookie cutter" character). To qualify
for this density bonus, credit is given for distinct variations in lot sizes.
Credit:    Five percent (5%) increase in density for each variation of lot size
that pertains to at least ten percent (10%) of the lots (a variation is a
change of at least 25 percent in lot size), up to a maximum of twenty five
percent (25%). To qualify for this density bonus, no more than fifty percent
(50%) of the area may be within one size range (±12.5 percent constitutes a
size range).
      5.   Neighborhood Park Land Dedication: Through the general plan, the
city has adopted a neighborhood park level of service (LOS) standard of six (6)
acres of park for every one thousand (1,000) population. In circumstances where
a development does not actually generate a need for at least a four (4) acre
park (minimum size for efficient city maintenance), this density bonus provides
an incentive to dedicate additional park land without losing development units.
To qualify for this density bonus, land in excess of the LOS standard for the
proposed development shall be conveyed to the city, the park must be
constructed, it must be four (4) acres or more, and its design must be accepted
by the city.
Credit:    Five percent (5%) increase in density for each one percent (1%) of
the site dedicated to park land that is in excess of the city neighborhood park
level of service standard (6 acres per 1,000 population), up to a maximum of
twenty five percent (25%).
      6.   Provisions For Affordable Housing: "Moderate income housing" (or
affordable housing) is defined as housing occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to or less than eighty percent
(80%) of the median gross income for households of the same size in the county
in which the city is located. Although providing for affordable housing is not
a method for preserving open space, it is a public amenity listed in the bonus
density program of the general plan, and may be included as a means to receive
an increase in density as long as other open space amenities are incorporated
into the development. Some of the techniques used to provide for affordable
housing include the utilization of state or federal funds or tax incentives to
promote the construction of moderate income housing, the utilization of
programs offered by the Utah housing corporation, and the utilization of
affordable housing programs administered by the Utah department of community
and economic development. To qualify for this density bonus, a minimum of four
(4) additional categories of the bonus density program must be implemented in
the development and include the "public trails through and along the
development" category, the design and quality of the moderate income housing
shall be similar to the design and quality of all other housing in the
development, and a minimum of five percent (5%) of the total housing must be
dedicated to moderate income housing.
Credit:    Twenty five percent (25%) increase in density for five percent (5%)
of the total housing dedicated to moderate income housing.
Fifty percent (50%) increase in density for ten percent (10%) or more of the
total housing dedicated to moderate income housing.
      7.   Landscaped Open Space: The objective of this density bonus is to
encourage provisions for open areas that, pursuant to the general plan,
preserve the open space character of the Washington Fields area and the area
north of I-15. To qualify for this density bonus, the development shall provide
for landscaped open space, with at least fifty percent (50%) of the landscaped
areas visible from public streets. Landscaping shall be reflective of the area
in which it is located and shall be developed as approved by the city.
Xeriscape landscaping (drought tolerant vegetation) is encouraged for the type
of vegetation, but the amount of vegetation must be dense enough to reflect the
greenery of the area (especially if irrigation rights are still available for
property in the Washington Fields area). Shade trees and shrubs shall be an
integral part of the landscaping and shall meet sight distance requirements.
All landscaping shall be installed by the developer and shall be maintained by
the homeowners' association. The responsibility for landscape maintenance shall
be cited on the plat, in the development agreement, and recorded against the
properties within the development.
Credit:    Three percent (3%) increase in density for each one percent (1%) of
the site preserved in open space (not including areas within rights of way or
areas that have received credit through other provisions of the bonus density
program), up to a maximum of twenty five percent (25%).
      8.   Open Space At Intersection Corners At Periphery Of Development:
Pursuant to the general plan, open areas created at intersection corners at the
periphery of a development will generally make a greater contribution to
preserving the open space character of the Washington Fields area and the area
north of I-15 than open space internal to a development. To qualify for this
density bonus, landscaping shall be reflective of the area in which it is
located and shall be developed as approved by the city. Xeriscape landscaping
(drought tolerant vegetation) is encouraged for the type of vegetation, but the
amount of vegetation must be dense enough to reflect the greenery of the area
(especially if irrigation rights are still available for property in the
Washington Fields area). Shade trees and shrubs shall be an integral part of
the landscaping and shall meet sight distance requirements. All landscaping
shall be installed by the developer and shall be maintained by the homeowners'
association. The responsibility for landscape maintenance shall be cited on the
plat, in the development agreement, and recorded against the properties within
the development.
Credit:    Five percent (5%) increase in density for each one percent (1%) of
the site preserved in open space that is located at intersection corners (not
including areas within rights of way or areas that have received credit through
other provisions of the bonus density program), up to a maximum of twenty five
percent (25%).
      9.   Landscaped Rights Of Way And Front Yard Setbacks Along Arterials And
Major Collectors: It is the city's desire, pursuant to the general plan, to
preserve the open space character of the Washington Fields area and the area
north of I-15 by having generous building setbacks with broad landscaped areas
defined by open fencing. Therefore, along these major corridors, the following
choices are available to qualify for a selection of density bonuses:
         a.   An additional landscape setback between the street ROW line and
fence/wall of the development, beyond the required landscape strip for double
frontage lots, shall be installed by the developer and shall be maintained by
the homeowners' association. The responsibility for landscape maintenance shall
be cited on the plat, in the development agreement, and recorded against the
properties within the development. An average width of fifty feet (50') is
desirable, with the width varying between thirty feet (30') and seventy feet
(70'). A landscape setback of at least thirty feet (30') is required to get a
density bonus.
         b.   Landscaping shall be reflective of the area in which it is
located and shall be developed as approved by the city. Xeriscape landscaping
(drought tolerant vegetation) is encouraged for the type of vegetation, but the
amount of vegetation must be dense enough to reflect the greenery of the area
(especially if irrigation rights are still available for property in the
Washington Fields area). Shade trees and shrubs shall be an integral part of
the landscaping and shall meet sight distance requirements.
         c.   The desired fencing along the major roadway corridors is open
three (3) rail or four (4) rail fencing. Wrought iron fencing and/or solid
fence/wall panels may be as approved by the city if they match or are
compatible with fences of adjoining developments. Overall transparency of at
least fifty percent (50%) is required to get a density bonus. (Note: Thin wire
mesh fencing, as approved by the city, may be used to confine animals and/or
children.)
Credit:    If a landscape setback varying between thirty feet (30') and seventy
feet (70'), with an average of at least fifty feet (50') is created, with no
section less than thirty feet (30') wide, the bonus density will be five
percent (5%) for each one percent (1%) of the total land area of the parcel
that is in the landscape setback, up to a maximum of twenty five percent (25%).
Where homes face arterials and major collectors, a five percent (5%) density
credit will be granted for each ten feet (10') of building setback beyond the
minimum front yard setback of the closest size range, up to a maximum of twenty
five percent (25%).
If fencing is less than seventy five percent (75%) transparent but at least
fifty percent (50%) transparent, a density increase may be transferred to the
rest of the property. The density credit will be derived by dividing the area
of the landscape setback by the average lot size of the development.
(Hypothetical example: 30 foot landscape setback x 1,000 foot property length =
30,000 square feet/15,000 square foot average lot size = total of 2 additional
lots.)
If fencing is seventy five percent (75%) or more transparent, a density
increase may be transferred to the rest of the property. The density credit
will be derived by dividing the area of the landscape setback by the average
lot size of the development, plus fifty percent (50%). (Hypothetical example:
30 foot landscape setback x 1,000 foot property length = 30,000 square feet/
15,000 square foot average lot size = 2 units + 50 percent = total of 3
additional lots.)
      10.   Public Trails Through And Along Development: Where indicated in the
general plan and/or city trails plan, the proposed development shall provide
public trails that generally follow trail alignments shown in said plans.
Unless otherwise approved by the city, trail alignments must traverse through
the property or around its periphery, according to the plans. To qualify for
this density bonus, trails shall be open to the general public, and shall
connect to adjacent trails, parks, open space and public streets, in a manner
as approved by the city. The trails shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide,
meet AASHTO standards, and shall be installed by the developer. Trail
maintenance responsibility will be as agreed upon in the development agreement.
If trails are proposed that are not indicated in the general plan and/or city
trails plan, a density bonus may be granted for these trails as well. To
qualify for a density bonus for these trails, the same criteria as outlined for
trails indicated in the general plan and/or city trails plan shall be met.
Again, trail maintenance responsibility will be as agreed upon in the
development agreement.
Credit:    Twenty five percent (25%) increase in density.
      11.   Tree Lined Streets: Tree lined street sections for all streets
(internal and periphery) are desirable to provide shade for sidewalks
(encourage walking) and to reduce solar heat gain on streets and buildings. To
qualify for this density bonus, all streets within the development, on both
sides of the streets, shall have a landscape strip between the curb and
sidewalk, planted with shade trees at forty foot (40') spacing or less. The
shade trees shall be from twenty four inch (24") box containers with a minimum
caliper of one and one-half inch (11/2") (1 inch above grade). Smaller trees
may be interplanted where overhead obstructions (power lines, etc.) may result
in problems that could be caused by the taller varieties. However, the sizes of
the trees at planting are to remain the same. A list of approved tree species
and landscaping guidelines are available in the community development
department. As approved by the city, trees may be grouped and/or staggered as
long as the average spacing of forty feet (40') is maintained.
Credit:    Twenty five percent (25%) increase in density.
      12.   Miscellaneous Public Benefits: Other types of open space benefits,
such as school sites, recreation centers, libraries, fire stations, the pooling
of adjoining properties for regional detention basins, regional parks or other
public benefits, etc., may also be explored for inclusion into bonus density
credits. These facilities will have to incorporate a degree of open space in
their design, and the design will have to be approved by the city, with the
density bonus credit determined during the project's evaluation. (Ord. 2005-40,
11-14-2005)
9-8A-8: DETACHED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (DADU):
   A.   Purpose and Intent:
      1.   The purpose and intent of detached accessory dwelling units (DADU)
is to provide additional housing for the owners of qualifying single family
dwelling units that are located in residential zoning districts. The separate
sale of such detached accessory dwelling units is prohibited in order to
protect the residential character of the neighborhoods in which they are
located.
      2.   A detached accessory dwelling unit is defined as an adjunct living
unit, with a sleeping area, a bathroom, acceptable kitchen facilities with a
commercially-manufactured cooking appliance, has no attached garage or carport,
and is detached from the primary residence on the same lot.
      3.   The owner of the property containing a single-family residence and a
detached accessory dwelling unit must reside in the primary residence or the
detached accessory dwelling unit.
   B.   General Standards: The following standards shall be adhered to for all
detached accessory dwelling units:
      1.   Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit, attached or detached, may be
constructed on any qualifying residentially zoned lot.
      2.   The proposed lot for a detached accessory dwelling unit shall
contain an already existing single-family dwelling unit, and the lot must be a
minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size.
      3.   Any accessory dwelling unit on a qualifying residentially zoned lot
being added to an existing single-family residence, shall in no case be greater
than one thousand (1000) total square feet. The accessory dwelling unit square
footage (added to all other existing or future structures), will not cover more
than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard area.
      4.   All detached accessory dwelling units shall be limited to a maximum
of seventeen feet (17') in height, and in no case shall the roof exceed the
height of the existing residence.
      5.   Detached accessory dwelling units shall be located at least ten feet
(10') away from the existing single-family residence, and can be located no
closer than five feet (5') to any side or rear property line.
      6.   One additional on-site parking space shall be provided in addition
to the required parking standards for the single-family residential lot. The
parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide and nineteen feet (19')
long.
      7.   Under no circumstances, shall accessory dwelling units, whether
attached or detached, be used for nightly or vacation rental purposes (unless
approved through a conditional use permit as outlined in this title).
      8.   Construction of all accessory dwelling units shall meet all
applicable building codes adopted by the city.
   C.   Required Deed Restriction:
      1.   As a condition of securing a building permit for construction of a
detached accessory dwelling unit being developed on a lot with an existing
single-family residence; the property owner shall record against the deed to
the subject property, a deed restriction, in a form provided by the city, and
will contain the following language:
“A permit for an accessory dwelling was issued to ________________, the current
owner of this property located at ______________________. The Owner shall
strictly adhere to the prohibition of the use of the accessory dwelling as a
nightly, short-term or vacation rental.”
      2.   Proof that such a deed restriction has been recorded shall be
provided to the Community Development Director prior to the issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy for the accessory dwelling unit.
   D.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the violation of the
provision of this section, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Any such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of
any violation of this ordinance is committed, continues or is permitted by such
person, firm or corporation. (Ord. 2019-25, 12-11-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-42, 7-
27-2022; Ord. 2023-21, 5-24-2023; Ord. 2024-25, 11-13-2024)
9-8A-9: INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (IADU):
   A.   Purpose and Intent:
      1.   The purpose and intent of the internal accessory dwelling unit
(IADU) is to provide for additional and affordable housing units located in
residential zoning districts within the city.
      2.   An internal accessory dwelling unit is defined as a separate
dwelling unit located entirely within a primary dwelling or within the
footprint of a primary dwelling at the time the IADU is created in association
with an owner-occupied single family detached dwelling on residentially zoned
property, that is clearly incidental and accessory to the primary dwelling on
the property. In addition to the standards described in this section, internal
accessory dwelling units must adhere to the standards described in state code.
      3.   A primary dwelling is defined as a single-family detached dwelling
that is occupied as the primary residence of the owner of record.
   B.   Permitted Zones: An internal accessory dwelling unit is a permitted use
in all residential zones, subject to the standards set forth in this section.
   C.   General Standards: The following standards shall be adhered to for all
internal accessory dwelling units:
      1.   Only one (1) internal accessory dwelling unit may exist on any
qualifying residentially zoned lot.
      2.   The proposed property location for an internal accessory dwelling
unit shall be a residential zoned lot that is a minimum of six thousand (6,000)
square feet (or greater) in size.
      3.   The lot where the internal accessory dwelling unit is located must
maintain the single-family appearance and character of the neighborhood.
Internal accessory dwelling units shall be compatible in design and appearance
with the primary dwelling on the property and shall not be located in detached
structures connected only by a roofed passage connecting two separate
buildings, such as a breezeway. Exterior doors to the internal accessory
dwelling units shall be located on the primary dwelling so as to avoid the
street-appearance of multiple unit entry doors on the primary dwelling’s
street-frontage.
      4.   The owner of the property must occupy the primary dwelling on the
property.
      5.   Internal accessory dwelling units shall meet all applicable Health,
Fire and Building Codes.
      6.   The internal accessory dwelling unit must contain complete cooking
and bathroom facilities that are separate from the facilities located in the
primary dwelling.
         a.   The cooking facility must contain:
            (1)   A sink and water faucet;
            (2)   Capacity for food refrigeration; and
            (3)   A commercially-manufactured appliance, such as a stove-top,
range, or other similar appliance for cooking and preparation of food. Devices
such as hot-plates, microwave ovens, and propane grills are not sufficient to
meet this health, fire and building standard.
         b.   The bathroom facility must contain:
            (1)   A sink and water faucet;
            (2)   A toilet; and
            (3)   A shower and/or bathtub.
      7.   One additional off-street parking space shall be provided in
addition to the required parking standards for the single-family residential
lot. The parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide and nineteen
feet (19") long.
      8.   The total number of residents that reside in an internal accessory
dwelling unit may not exceed the number allowed for a single-family dwelling.
      9.   If a garage or carport is converted to an interior accessory
dwelling unit, the property owner must provide the required off-street parking
spaces somewhere on the property in a manner that complies with all standards
found within this Title.
      10.   Internal accessory dwelling units are not permitted within a
“mobile home” as said definition is adopted by Utah Code 57-16-3, and as
amended.
      11.   If rented, an internal accessory dwelling unit must be rented for a
minimum of thirty-one (31) days or longer.
      12.   Under no circumstances, shall internal accessory dwelling units be
used for nightly, short-term or vacation rental purposes. Rental periods of
thirty (30) days or less are prohibited in an IADU.
      13.   A city license for the renting of the internal accessory dwelling
unit is required.
   C.   Required Deed Restriction:
      1.   As a condition of securing a building permit for construction and/or
a business license for an internal accessory dwelling unit being developed on a
lot with an existing single-family residence; the property owner shall record
against the deeded title to the subject property, a deed restriction, in a form
provided by the city.
      2.   Proof that such a deed restriction has been recorded shall be
provided to the Community Development Department prior to the issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy or a Business License for the internal accessory
dwelling unit.
   D.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the violation of the
provision of this section, shall be guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Any such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of
any violation of this ordinance is committed, continues or is permitted by such
person, firm or corporation.
      2.   In addition, the city may hold a lien against a property that
contains an internal accessory dwelling unit if the property owner violates any
standard for operation of an internal accessory dwelling unit. The amount,
notice, and procedure for the lien shall be in accordance with state law. (Ord.
2022-41, 7-13-2022)
ARTICLE B. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) ZONE
SECTION:
9-8B-1: Purpose
9-8B-2: Use Regulations
9-8B-3: Site Design Regulations
9-8B-4: Height Regulations
9-8B-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-8B-6: Modifying Regulations
9-8B-7: Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit (DADU)
9-8B-8: Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit (IADU)
9-8B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the single-family residential zone is to provide appropriate
areas in the city where medium density single-family residential neighborhoods
may be established, maintained and protected. Other uses serving the needs of
families may be approved with proper controls. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-8B-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Accessory buildings and uses.
Home gardening.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Keeping of chickens (hens only, no roosters) for the production of food for the
sole use of the family occupying the premises, providing the following are met:
      1.   Chickens may only be kept on lots that are ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or larger.
      2.   No more than twelve (12) chickens may be kept on a qualifying lot.
      3.   Chickens shall be confined within a secure outdoor enclosed area,
which area shall contain a covered, ventilated, and predator resistant coop,
pen, or cage, which shall be restricted to the rear or back yard of the
dwelling, shall be located not less than twenty feet (20') from any neighboring
residence, and shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height nor be larger than
one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area.
      4.   All coops, pens, cages, and surrounding areas shall be maintained in
such a way as to avoid the unreasonable accumulation of debris or waste or
conditions that cause an unreasonable odor that affects the health, safety and
comfort of adjoining properties.
One single-family dwelling built in accordance with chapter 21 of this title.
Public park, playground or recreation facilities. (Ord. 2010-19, 8-25-2010,
eff. 1-1-2011)
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Cemetery.
Childcare facilities under the following conditions:
      1.   Outdoor activities be confined to a fenced back yard.
      2.   All provisions of state laws concerning childcare facilities are
complied with.
Church.
Public buildings.
Public utilities.
Residential facility for persons with a disability which meets the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated to the extent that state and/or federal law allows such
facilities to be subject to conditional use permits.
School.
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, which are determined by the planning commission to be in harmony with
the character and intent of this zone. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Except as otherwise provided for in this title, the
following uses shall be excluded from the city: recreational/timeshare rentals,
overnight rentals, vacation rentals, and any and all other types of short term
rentals consisting of a period of twenty seven (27) days or less. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-13-2013)
9-8B-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed conditional uses are subject to
review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city
council. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8B-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No main building shall be erected to a height greater than two and one-half
(21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'), whichever is greater, unless
otherwise approved with a conditional use permit. No accessory building shall
be erected to a height greater than one story or twenty feet (20'), whichever
is greater, unless otherwise approved with a conditional use permit. (Ord.
2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8B-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
                                   Yards In Feet
District Area In     Width In Feet Front Side Rear
         Square Feet
                                    Yards In Feet
District  Area In     Width In Feet Front Side      Rear
          Square Feet
   R-1-6,000       66            20    8 and 10  10
   R-1-8,000       70            20    8 and 10  10
   R-1-10,000      80            20    8 and 10  20
   R-1-12,000      90            20    10 and 10 20
   R-1-15,000      100           20    10 and 10 20
   R-1-30,000      100           20    20 and 20 20
   R-1-40,000      200           30    20 and 20 30
 
(Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-12, 5-8-2024)
9-8B-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards:
      1.   Detached one-story private garages and other accessory buildings and
structures, located at least ten feet (10') away from the main building, may
have a side yard setback of three feet (3'), subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
         a.   Where applicable, a building permit is obtained.
         b.   The detached accessory building or structure is twenty feet (20')
or less in height. Additional height may be acquired by moving the building or
structure inward into the lot. For each foot added to the side yard setback
(beyond three feet (3')), an additional foot may be added to the height of the
structure, but in no case shall the detached accessory building or structure be
taller than the main building.
         c.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
         d.   The detached private garage or other accessory building or
structure shall be located at least ten feet (10') behind the nearest corner of
the front of the main building in the given side yard.
         e.   In no case shall the square footage of the detached accessory
building or structure exceed fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the
main building.
         f.   Accessory buildings and structures located in the side yard shall
not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the side yard area.
         g.   The provisions of subsection D of this section shall be met for
encroachment into the side yard setback.
      2.   One-story attached accessory shade structures, open on three (3)
sides, may be located in the side yard area to within three feet (3') (at the
furthest projection) of the side property line, subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
         a.   A building permit is required for all attached accessory shade
structures
         b.   The shade structure roof and support columns must be fire rated
and built of fire resistant materials in compliance with the International
Residential Code and International Fire Code;
         c.   The shade structure shall not be built higher than the existing
roof line that it abuts or exceed twelve feet (12') maximum in height, nor
shall it exceed twenty feet (20') in width;
         d.   A six foot (6') high masonry wall shall be along the side
property line adjacent to the shade structure;
         e.   Only one side yard area may be covered with an accessory shade
structure, the other side yard shall remain open;
         f.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
         g.   Before installation of any accessory shade structure, a building
permit will be required along with approval by the Community Development
Director, or his/her designee will be obtained as to materials, location and
attachment to the main building; and
         h.   The provisions of subsection D of this section shall be met for
encroachment into the side yard setback.
   B.   Rear Yards:
      1.   Detached one-story private garages and other accessory buildings and
, structures located at least ten feet (10') away from the main building, may
have a rear yard setback of three feet (3'), subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
         a.   Where applicable, a building permit is obtained.
         b.   The detached accessory building or structure is twenty feet (20')
or less in height. Additional height may be acquired by moving the building or
structure into the lot. For each foot added to the side/rear yard setback
(beyond three feet (3')), an additional foot may be added to the height of the
building or structure, but in no case shall the detached accessory building or
structure be taller than the main building.
         c.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages.
         d.   The detached private garage or other accessory building or
structure shall be located at least ten feet (10') behind the nearest corner of
the front of the main building in the given side yard.
         e.   Accessory buildings and structures including detached shade
structures located in the rear yard shall not cover more area than the
following:
 
R-1-6  A maximum coverage of thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard, except when
R-1-8  combined with an attached shade structure, the combined coverage shall
       not exceed fifty percent (50%).
       A maximum coverage of thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard, except when
R-1-10 combined with an attached shade structure, the combined coverage shall
       not exceed forty percent (40%).
R-1-12 A maximum coverage of thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard, whether
R-1-15 detached structures, attached shade structures, or a combination of
R-1-30 both.
R-1-40
 
      2.   One-story attached accessory shade structures, open on three sides,
may be located in the rear yard area to within three feet (3') (at the furthest
projection) of the rear property line, subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
         a.   A building permit is required for all attached accessory shade
structures.
         b.   The shade structure roof and support columns must be fire rated
and built of fire-resistant materials in compliance with the International
Residential Code and the International Fire Code;
         c.   The shade structure shall not be built higher than the existing
roof line that it abuts, and where there is no existing one-story roof line, it
shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height;
         d.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
         e.   Where an adjoining lot exist along the rear property line, a six
foot (6') high masonry wall shall be required along the rear property line
adjacent to the shade structure. Where a setback of at least ten feet (10')
will be maintained between the shade structure and the rear property line, no
block wall is required;
         f.   The covered area for attached shade structures that would extend
into the restricted setback area, shall be in accordance with the following
yard coverage standards:
 
R-1-6  A maximum coverage of fifty percent (50%) of the rear yard for attached
R-1-8  shade structures unless combined with other detached structures, see
       subsection 6(B)(1)(e) above.
       A maximum coverage of forty percent (40%) of the rear yard for attached
R-1-10 shade structures unless combined with other detached structures, see
       subsection 6(B)(1)(e) above.
R-1-12
R-1-15 A maximum coverage of thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard, whether
R-1-30 attached shade structure, detached structures, or a combination of both.
R-1-40
 
   C.   Provisions For Detached Accessory Buildings To Encroach Into Side Or
Rear Yard Setback: In order for a detached one-story private garage or
accessory building, twenty feet (20') or less in height, to encroach into the
side or rear yard setback, the following conditions shall be met:
      1.   The roof shall not project across a property line;
      2.   Stormwater runoff from the building shall not run onto an adjacent
property;
      3.   Any nonportable building to be placed over a drainage and/or utility
easement shall require written approval, obtained by the applicant, from the
electrical power department and public works department, and all other utility
companies with easement rights, prior to obtaining a building permit, and shall
require the property owner to provide and sign a recordable waiver and
indemnification document that waives and indemnifies the city from any
liability for any damages or expenses (including reimbursement to the city for
removing the building) associated with the building being placed over an
easement, and granting the city permission to remove such building at any time
the city determines that said building must be removed to repair drainage
facilities or utilities, or for other safety, health or welfare reasons; and
   4.   All other provisions of this title and applicable building and fire
codes regarding accessory buildings shall be adhered to.
(Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004; amd. Ord. 2019-24, 12-11-2019; Ord. 2023-20, 5-24-
2023; Ord. 2024-19, 8-28-2024; Ord. 2024-20, 8-28-2024)
9-8B-7: DETACHED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (DADU):
   A.   Purpose and Intent:
      1.   The purpose and intent of detached accessory dwelling units (DADU)
is to provide additional housing for the owners of qualifying single family
dwelling units that are located in residential zoning districts. The separate
sale of such detached accessory dwelling units is prohibited in order to
protect the residential character of the neighborhoods in which they are
located.
      2.   A detached accessory dwelling unit is defined as an adjunct living
unit, with a sleeping area, a bathroom, acceptable kitchen facilities with a
commercially-manufactured cooking appliance, has no attached garage or carport,
and is detached from the primary residence on the same lot.
      3.   The owner of the property containing a single-family residence and a
detached accessory dwelling unit must reside in the primary residence or the
detached accessory dwelling unit.
   B.   General Standards: The following standards shall be adhered to for all
detached accessory dwelling units:
      1.   Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit, attached or detached, may be
constructed on any qualifying residentially zoned lot.
      2.   The proposed lot for a detached accessory dwelling unit shall
contain an already existing single-family dwelling unit, and the lot must be a
minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size.
      3.   Any accessory dwelling unit on a qualifying residentially zoned lot
being added to an existing single-family residence, shall in no case be greater
than one thousand (1,000) total square feet. The accessory dwelling unit square
footage (added to all other existing or future structures), will not cover more
than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard area.
      4.   All detached accessory dwelling units shall be limited to a maximum
of seventeen feet (17') in height, and in no case shall the roof exceed the
height of the existing residence.
      5.   Detached accessory dwelling units shall be located at least ten feet
(10') away from the existing single-family residence, and can be located no
closer than five feet (5') to any side or rear property line.
      6.   One additional on-site parking space shall be provided in addition
to the required parking standards for the single-family residential lot. The
parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide and nineteen feet (19')
long.
      7.   Under no circumstances, shall accessory dwelling units, whether
attached or detached, be used for nightly or vacation rental purposes (unless
approved through a conditional use permit as outlined in this title).
      8.   Construction of all accessory dwelling units shall meet all
applicable building codes adopted by the city.
   C.   Required Deed Restriction:
      1.   As a condition of securing a building permit for construction of a
detached accessory dwelling unit being developed on a lot with an existing
single-family residence; the property owner shall record against the deed to
the subject property, a deed restriction, in a form provided by the city, and
will contain the following language:
“A permit for an accessory dwelling was issued to ________________, the current
owner of this property located at ______________________. The Owner shall
strictly adhere to the prohibition of the use of the accessory dwelling as a
nightly, short-term or vacation rental.”
      2.   Proof that such a deed restriction has been recorded shall be
provided to the Community Development Director prior to the issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy for the accessory dwelling unit.
   D.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the violation of the
provision of this section, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Any such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of
any violation of this ordinance is committed, continues or is permitted by such
person, firm or corporation.  (Ord. 2019-25, 12-11-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-42, 7-
27-2022; Ord. 2023-21, 5-24-2023; Ord. 2024-25, 11-13-2024)
9-8B-8: INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (IADU):
   A.   Purpose and Intent:
      1.   The purpose and intent of the internal accessory dwelling unit
(IADU) is to provide for additional and affordable housing units located in
residential zoning districts within the city.
      2.   An internal accessory dwelling unit is defined as a separate
dwelling unit located entirely within a primary dwelling or within the
footprint of a primary dwelling at the time the IADU is created in association
with an owner-occupied single family detached dwelling on residentially zoned
property, that is clearly incidental and accessory to the primary dwelling on
the property. In addition to the standards described in this section, internal
accessory dwelling units must adhere to the standards described in state code.
      3.   A primary dwelling is defined as a single-family detached dwelling
that is occupied as the primary residence of the owner of record.
   B.   Permitted Zones: An internal accessory dwelling unit is a permitted use
in all residential zones, subject to the standards set forth in this section.
   C.   General Standards: The following standards shall be adhered to for all
internal accessory dwelling units:
      1.   Only one (1) internal accessory dwelling unit may exist on any
qualifying residentially zoned lot.
      2.   The proposed property location for an internal accessory dwelling
unit shall be a residential zoned lot that is a minimum of six thousand (6,000)
square feet (or greater) in size.
      3.   The lot where the internal accessory dwelling unit is located must
maintain the single-family appearance and character of the neighborhood.
Internal accessory dwelling units shall be compatible in design and appearance
with the primary dwelling on the property and shall not be located in detached
structures connected only by a roofed passage connecting two separate
buildings, such as a breezeway. Exterior doors to the internal accessory
dwelling units shall be located on the primary dwelling so as to avoid the
street-appearance of multiple unit entry doors on the primary dwelling’s
street-frontage.
      4.   The owner of the property must occupy the primary dwelling on the
property.
      5.   Internal accessory dwelling units shall meet all applicable Health,
Fire and Building Codes.
      6.   The internal accessory dwelling unit must contain complete cooking
and bathroom facilities that are separate from the facilities located in the
primary dwelling.
         a.   The cooking facility must contain:
            (1)   A sink and water faucet;
            (2)   Capacity for food refrigeration; and
            (3)   A commercially-manufactured appliance, such as a stove-top,
range, or other similar appliance for cooking and preparation of food. Devices
such as hot-plates, microwave ovens, and propane grills are not sufficient to
meet this health, fire and building standard.
         b.   The bathroom facility must contain:
            (1)   A sink and water faucet;
            (2)   A toilet; and
            (3)   A shower and/or bathtub.
      7.   One additional off-street parking space shall be provided in
addition to the required parking standards for the single-family residential
lot. The parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide and nineteen
feet (19") long.
      8.   The total number of residents that reside in an internal accessory
dwelling unit may not exceed the number allowed for a single-family dwelling.
      9.   If a garage or carport is converted to an interior accessory
dwelling unit, the property owner must provide the required off-street parking
spaces somewhere on the property in a manner that complies with all standards
found within this Title.
      10.   Internal accessory dwelling units are not permitted within a
“mobile home” as said definition is adopted by Utah Code 57-16-3, and as
amended.
      11.   If rented, an internal accessory dwelling unit must be rented for a
minimum of thirty-one (31) days or longer.
      12.   Under no circumstances, shall internal accessory dwelling units be
used for nightly, short-term or vacation rental purposes. Rental periods of
thirty (30) days or less are prohibited in an IADU.
      13.   A city license for the renting of the internal accessory dwelling
unit is required.
   C.   Required Deed Restriction:
      1.   As a condition of securing a building permit for construction and/or
a business license for an internal accessory dwelling unit being developed on a
lot with an existing single-family residence; the property owner shall record
against the deeded title to the subject property, a deed restriction, in a form
provided by the city.
      2.   Proof that such a deed restriction has been recorded shall be
provided to the Community Development Department prior to the issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy or a Business License for the internal accessory
dwelling unit.
   D.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the violation of the
provision of this section, shall be guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Any such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of
any violation of this ordinance is committed, continues or is permitted by such
person, firm or corporation.
      2.   In addition, the city may hold a lien against a property that
contains an internal accessory dwelling unit if the property owner violates any
standard for operation of an internal accessory dwelling unit. The amount,
notice, and procedure for the lien shall be in accordance with state law. (Ord.
2022-41, 7-13-2022)
ARTICLE C. ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) ZONE
SECTION:
9-8C-1: Purpose
9-8C-2: Use Regulations
9-8C-3: Site Design Regulations
9-8C-4: Height Regulations
9-8C-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-8C-6: Modifying Regulations
9-8C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the one- and two-family residential zone is to provide
appropriate areas in the city where medium density single-family and duplex
development may be established, maintained and protected. Other uses serving
the needs of families may be approved with proper controls. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-
1989)
9-8C-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Accessory buildings and uses.
Home gardening.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
One single-family dwelling built in accordance with chapter 21 of this title.
One two-family dwelling or two (2) single-family dwellings on an individual
lot, built in accordance with chapter 21 of this title, and conforming to the
density standards outlined in subsection 9-8C-6C of this article.
Public park, playground or recreation facilities.
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Cemetery.
Childcare facilities under the following conditions:
      1.   Outdoor activities be confined to a fenced back yard.
      2.   All provisions of state laws concerning childcare facilities are
complied with.
Church.
Condominium or townhouse projects conforming to the density standards outlined
in subsection 9-8C-6C of this article.
Educational institutions.
Public buildings.
Public utilities.
Radio towers for amateur radio operators.
Residential facility for persons with a disability which meets the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated to the extent that state and/or federal law allows such
facilities to be subject to conditional use permits.
School.
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, which are determined by the planning commission to be in harmony with
the character and intent of this zone. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Except as otherwise provided for in this title, the
following uses shall be excluded from the city: recreational/timeshare rentals,
overnight rentals, vacation rentals, and any and all other types of short term
rentals consisting of a period of twenty seven (27) days or less. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-13-2013)
9-8C-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed conditional uses are subject to
review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city
council. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8C-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No main building shall be erected to a height greater than two and one-half
(21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'), whichever is greater, unless
otherwise approved with a conditional use permit. No accessory building shall
be erected to a height greater than one story or twenty feet (20'), whichever
is greater, unless otherwise approved with a conditional use permit. (Ord.
2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8C-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                                   Yards In Feet
District Area In     Width In Feet Front Side      Rear
         Square Feet
    R6,000       70            20    10 and 10 20
 
(Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8C-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: Detached one-story private garages and other accessory
buildings and structures, located at least ten feet (10') away from the main
building, may have a side yard setback of three feet (3'), subject to the
following conditions and restrictions:
      1.   Where applicable, a building permit is obtained.
      2.   The detached accessory building or structure is twenty feet (20') or
less in height. Additional height may be acquired by moving the building or
structure inward into the lot. For each foot added to the side yard setback
(beyond three feet (3')), an additional foot may be added to the height of the
structure, but in no case shall the detached accessory building or structure be
taller than the main building.
      3.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
      4.   The detached private garage or other accessory building or structure
shall be located at least ten feet (10') behind the nearest corner of the front
of the main building in the given side yard.
      5.   In no case shall the square footage of the detached accessory
building or structure exceed fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the
main building.
      6.   Accessory buildings and structures located in the side yard shall
not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the side yard area.
      7.   The provisions of subsection D of this section shall be met for
encroachment into the side yard setback.
   B.   Rear Yards:
      1.   Detached one-story private garages and other accessory buildings and
structures, located at least ten feet (10') away from the main building, may
have a rear yard setback of three feet (3'), subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
         a.   Where applicable, a building permit is obtained.
         b.   The detached accessory building or structure is twenty feet (20')
or less in height. Additional height may be acquired by moving the building or
structure inward into the lot. For each foot added to the side yard setback
(beyond three feet (3')), an additional foot may be added to the height of the
structure, but in no case shall the detached accessory building or structure be
taller than the main building.
         c.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
         d.   The detached private garage or other accessory building or
structure shall be located at least ten feet (10') behind the nearest corner of
the front of the main building in the given side yard.
         e.   In no case shall the square footage of the detached accessory
building or structure exceed fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the
main building.
         f.   Accessory buildings and structures (including shade structures as
outlined below) located in the rear yard shall not cover more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the rear yard area.
         g.   The provisions of subsection D of this section shall be met for
encroachment into the side yard setback.
      2.   One-story attached accessory shade structures, open on three sides,
may be located in the rear yard area to within three feet (3') (at the furthest
projection) of the rear property line, subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
         a.   A building permit is required for all attached accessory shade
structures.
         b.   The shade structure roof and support columns must be fire rated
and built of fire-resistant materials in compliance with the International
Residential Code and the International Fire Code;
         c.   The shade structure shall not be built higher than the existing
roof line that it abuts, and where there is no existing one-story roof line, it
shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height;
         d.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
         e.   Where an adjoining lot exist along the rear property line, a six
foot (6') high masonry wall shall be required along the rear property line
adjacent to the shade structure. Where a setback of at least ten feet (10')
will be maintained between the shade structure and the rear property line, no
block wall is required;
         f.   The shade structure along with any other accessory structures
located in the rear yard shall not cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of
the rear yard area.
   C.   Density: A minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet is required for
each dwelling unit constructed. Excess area less than six thousand (6,000)
square feet must be combined with the area of an allowed dwelling unit and may
not be considered for construction of an additional dwelling unit.
   D.   Provisions For Detached Accessory Buildings To Encroach Into Side Or
Rear Yard Setback: In order for a detached one-story private garage or
accessory building, twenty feet (20') or less in height, to encroach into the
side or rear yard setback, the following conditions shall be met:
      1.   The roof shall not project across a property line;
      2.   Stormwater runoff from the building shall not run onto an adjacent
property;
      3.   Any nonportable building to be placed over a drainage and/or utility
easement shall require written approval, obtained by the applicant, from the
electrical power department and public works department, and all other utility
companies with easement rights, prior to obtaining a building permit, and shall
require the property owner to provide and sign a recordable waiver and
indemnification document that waives and indemnifies the city from any
liability for any damages or expenses (including reimbursement to the city for
removing the building) associated with the building being placed over an
easement, and granting the city permission to remove such building at any time
the city determines that said building must be removed to repair drainage
facilities or utilities, or for other safety, health or welfare reasons; and
      4.   All other provisions of this title and applicable building and fire
codes regarding accessory buildings shall be adhered to. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-
2004; amd. Ord. 2019-24, 12-11-2019)
ARTICLE D. MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3) ZONE
SECTION:
9-8D-1: Purpose
9-8D-2: Use Regulations
9-8D-3: Site Design Regulations
9-8D-4: Height Regulations
9-8D-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-8D-6: Modifying Regulations
9-8D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the multiple-family residential zone is to provide appropriate
areas in the city where multiple-family neighborhoods may be established,
maintained and protected and where appropriate density and uses which
complement the lifestyles of city residents can be developed. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-
1989)
9-8D-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Accessory buildings and uses.
Home gardening.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
One single-family dwelling built in accordance with chapter 21 of this title.
One two-, three- or four-family dwelling, or up to four (4) single-family
dwellings, or a combination of single-family and multiple-family dwellings not
exceeding four (4) dwellings, on an individual lot, with each single-family
dwelling and each two-family dwelling being built in accordance with chapter 21
of this title, and conforming to the density standards outlined in subsection
9-8D-6C of this article.
Public park, playground or recreation facilities.
Residential facilities for persons with a disability which meet the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated.
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Boarding house.
Cemetery.
Childcare facilities under the following conditions:
      1.   Outdoor activities be confined to a fenced back yard.
      2.   All provisions of state laws concerning childcare facilities are
complied with.
Church.
Condominium or townhouse projects conforming to the density standards outlined
in subsection 9-8D-6C of this article.
Educational institutions.
Multiple-family developments containing more than four (4) dwelling units on an
individual lot, and conforming to the density standards outlined in subsection
9-8D-6C of this article.
Public buildings.
Public utilities.
School.
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, which are determined by the planning commission to be in harmony with
the character and intent of this zone. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Except as otherwise provided for in this title, the
following uses shall be excluded from the city: recreational/timeshare rentals,
overnight rentals, vacation rentals, and any and all other types of short term
rentals consisting of a period of twenty seven (27) days or less. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-13-2013)
9-8D-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed conditional uses are subject to
review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city
council. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8D-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No main building shall be erected to a height greater than forty-two feet
(42'), unless otherwise approved by the city council. No accessory building or
structure shall be erected to a height greater than twenty feet, unless
approved by the city council. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 2-12-
2020)
9-8D-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                                   Yards In Feet
District Area In     Width In Feet Front Side      Rear
         Square Feet
    R6,000       70            20    10 and 10 20
 
(Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8D-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: Detached one-story private garages and other accessory
buildings and structures, located at least ten feet (10') away from the main
building, may have a side yard setback of three feet (3'), subject to the
following conditions and restrictions:
      1.   Where applicable, a building permit is obtained.
      2.   The detached accessory building or structure is twenty feet (20') or
less in height. Additional height may be acquired by moving the building or
structure inward into the lot. For each foot added to the side yard setback
(beyond three feet (3')), an additional foot may be added to the height of the
structure, but in no case shall the detached accessory building or structure be
taller than the main building.
      3.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
      4.   The detached private garage or other accessory building or structure
shall be located at least ten feet (10') behind the nearest corner of the front
of the main building in the given side yard.
      5.   In no case shall the square footage of the detached accessory
building or structure exceed fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the
main building.
      6.   Accessory buildings and structures located in the side yard shall
not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the side yard area.
      7.   The provisions of subsection G of this section shall be met for
encroachment into the side yard setback.
   B.   Rear Yards:
      1.   Detached one-story private garages and other accessory buildings and
structures, located at least ten feet (10') away from the main building, may
have a rear yard setback of three feet (3'), subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
         a.   Where applicable, a building permit is obtained.
         b.   The detached accessory building or structure is twenty feet (20')
or less in height. Additional height may be acquired by moving the building or
structure inward into the lot. For each foot added to the side yard setback
(beyond three feet (3')), an additional foot may be added to the height of the
structure, but in no case shall the detached accessory building or structure be
taller than the main building.
         c.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
         d.   The detached private garage or other accessory building or
structure shall be located at least ten feet (10') behind the nearest corner of
the front of the main building in the given side yard.
         e.   In no case shall the square footage of the detached accessory
building or structure exceed fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the
main building.
         f.   Accessory buildings and structures (including shade structures as
outlined below) located in the rear yard shall not cover more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the rear yard area.
         g.   The provisions of subsection G of this section shall be met for
encroachment into the side yard setback.
      2.   One-story attached accessory shade structures, open on three sides,
may be located in the rear yard area to within three feet (3') (at the furthest
projection) of the rear property line, subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
         a.   A building permit is required for all attached accessory shade
structures.
         b.   The shade structure roof and support columns must be fire rated
and built of fire-resistant materials in compliance with the International
Residential Code and the International Fire Code;
         c.   The shade structure shall not be built higher than the existing
roof line that it abuts, and where there is no existing one-story roof line, it
shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height;
         d.   On corner lots, the required twenty foot (20') front yard setback
will be maintained on both street frontages;
         e.   Where an adjoining lot exist along the rear property line, a six
foot (6') high masonry wall shall be required along the rear property line
adjacent to the shade structure. Where a setback of at least ten feet (10')
will be maintained between the shade structure and the rear property line, no
block wall is required;
         f.   The shade structure along with any other accessory structures
located in the rear yard shall not cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of
the rear yard area.
   C.   Density: A minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet is required for
the first dwelling unit constructed. An additional two thousand (2,000) square
feet of lot area is required for each additional unit. Excess area less than
two thousand (2,000) square feet must be combined with the area of an allowed
dwelling unit and may not be considered for construction of an additional
dwelling unit.
   D.   Outdoor Living Space: A minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of
outdoor living space shall be provided for each dwelling unit, exclusive of any
building, parking areas, drives, etc.
   E.   Coverage: Building coverage may not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the
total lot area.
   F.   Group Dwellings: Self-contained structures which accommodate more than
one dwelling unit shall be considered as one building for the purpose of
determining the yard requirements of this zoning district. Each such group
dwelling shall include a court of twenty feet (20') in width in order to
separate the group home from adjacent structures. Specific design aspects will
be reviewed and approved by staff for permitted uses, and reviewed and
recommended by the planning commission and approved by the city council for
conditional uses.
   G.   Provisions For Detached Accessory Buildings To Encroach Into Side Or
Rear Yard Setback: In order for a detached one-story private garage or
accessory building, twenty feet (20') or less in height, to encroach into the
side or rear yard setback, the following conditions shall be met:
      1.   The roof shall not project across a property line;
      2.   Stormwater runoff from the building shall not run onto an adjacent
property;
      3.   Any nonportable building to be placed over a drainage and/or utility
easement shall require written approval, obtained by the applicant, from the
electrical power department and public works department, and all other utility
companies with easement rights, prior to obtaining a building permit, and shall
require the property owner to provide and sign a recordable waiver and
indemnification document that waives and indemnifies the city from any
liability for any damages or expenses (including reimbursement to the city for
removing the building) associated with the building being placed over an
easement, and granting the city permission to remove such building at any time
the city determines that said building must be removed to repair drainage
facilities or utilities, or for other safety, health or welfare reasons; and
      4.   All other provisions of this title and applicable building and fire
codes regarding accessory buildings shall be adhered to. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-
2004; amd. Ord. 2019-24, 12-11-2019)
ARTICLE E. MOBILE HOME - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (MH) ZONE
SECTION:
9-8E-1: Purpose
9-8E-2: Use Regulations
9-8E-3: Site Design Regulations
9-8E-4: Height Regulations
9-8E-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-8E-6: Modifying Regulations
9-8E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the mobile home - recreational vehicle zone is to provide
appropriate areas in the city where mobile home and recreational vehicle parks
and subdivisions may be suitably developed for the following purposes: a) the
placement and occupancy of manufactured and/or mobile homes for residential
purposes on rented or leased spaces; b) the placement of manufactured and/or
mobile homes on individually owned lots on a long term or temporary basis; c)
the occupancy of recreational vehicles for temporary residential purposes on
rented or leased spaces; and d) the occupancy of recreational vehicles on
individually owned lots, all of which will include the necessary accessory uses
and amenities. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-8E-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Accessory buildings and uses.
Home gardening.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
One "manufactured home" or "mobile home", as defined in section
9-1-6 of this title, on each approved lot or space in a mobile home park or
subdivision, including covered carports, patio awnings and room additions,
which meet the standards set forth in chapter 13, article B of this title, and
which have been approved by the official charged with the enforcement of this
title and appear to be an integral part of the manufactured or mobile home.
One "recreational vehicle" or "recreational home", as defined in section
9-1-6 of this title, on each approved lot or space in an approved recreational
vehicle park or subdivision which meets the standards set forth in chapter 13,
article B of this title, and which has been approved by the official charged
with the enforcement of this title.
Public park, playground or recreation facilities.
Residential facilities for persons with a disability which meet the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated.
Travel trailers on lots specifically approved for such use.
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Boat or recreational vehicle storage and washing areas.
Cemetery.
Childcare facilities under the following conditions:
      1.   Outdoor activities be confined to a fenced back yard.
      2.   All provisions of state laws concerning childcare facilities are
complied with.
Church.
Coin operated laundry facilities and outdoor drying areas for use by residents
of approved mobile home or recreational vehicle parks or subdivisions.
Mobile home parks and subdivisions.
Outdoor recreation facilities for use by the residents of an approved mobile
home or recreational vehicle park or subdivision.
Parking lots for the permitted and conditional uses listed in this article.
Public buildings.
Public utilities.
Recreation and social centers for use by the residents of an approved mobile
home or recreational vehicle park or subdivision.
Recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions.
School.
Security guard structures at the entrances of approved mobile home or
recreational vehicle parks or subdivisions.
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, which are determined by the planning commission to be in harmony with
the character and intent of this zone. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Except as otherwise provided for in this title, the
following uses shall be excluded from the city: recreational/timeshare rentals,
overnight rentals, vacation rentals, and any and all other types of short term
rentals consisting of a period of twenty seven (27) days or less. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-13-2013)
9-8E-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed conditional uses are subject to
review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city
council, who shall apply the standards and other provisions listed in chapter
17 and chapter 13, article B of this title. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8E-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall be erected to a height greater than two and one-
half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'), whichever is greater, unless
otherwise approved with a conditional use permit. No accessory building shall
be erected to a height greater than one story or twenty feet (20'), whichever
is greater, unless otherwise approved with a conditional use permit. (Ord.
2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-8E-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                                                       Yards In Feet
Use                        Area In     Width   Depth   Front Side     Rear
                           Square Feet In Feet In Feet
Mobile home space          4,000       40      60      5     5 and 5  10
Mobile home lot            6,000       60      94      20    5 and 10 10
Recreational vehicle space 1,200       28      40      5     5 and 5  3
Recreational vehicle lot   1,750       35      50      7     5 and 5  5
Recreational home lot      1,800       35      60      15    5 and 10 5
 
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-8E-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: One-story private garages and other accessory buildings,
twenty feet (20') or less in height, located at least ten feet (10') behind the
main building, may have a side yard of three feet (3'), except on the street
side of a corner lot, which shall be the same as the front yard setback. The
provisions of subsection E of this section shall be met for encroachment into
the side yard setback. Also, subsection D of this section still applies for
setbacks from exterior boundaries.
   B.   Rear Yards: One-story private garages and other accessory buildings,
twenty feet (20') or less in height, located at least ten feet (10') behind the
main building, may have a rear yard of three feet (3'); provided, that on
corner lots rearing the side yard of another lot, the minimum rear yard for all
buildings shall be five feet (5'), with the exception of a recreational vehicle
space, which may still have a rear yard of three feet (3'). The provisions of
subsection E of this section shall be met for encroachment into the rear yard
setback. Also, subsection D of this section still applies for setbacks from
exterior boundaries.
   C.   Skirting: All manufactured and mobile homes not installed on an
approved permanent foundation shall be skirted with material matching the
design and color of the respective manufactured or mobile home within sixty
(60) days of installation. All skirting shall be kept in place and in good
repair at all times.
   D.   Setbacks From Exterior Boundaries: No manufactured home, mobile home,
recreation home, recreational vehicle or associated and approved room
additions, awnings or storage buildings shall be located within ten feet (10')
of any exterior park boundary.
   E.   Provisions For Detached Accessory Buildings To Encroach Into Side Or
Rear Yard Setback: In order for a detached one- story private garage or
accessory building, twenty feet (20') or less in height, to encroach into the
side or rear yard setback, the following conditions shall be met:
      1.   The roof shall not project across a property line;
      2.   Stormwater runoff from the building shall not run onto an adjacent
property;
      3.   Any nonportable building to be placed over a drainage and/or utility
easement shall require written approval, obtained by the applicant, from the
electrical power department and public works department, and all other utility
companies with easement rights, prior to obtaining a building permit, and shall
require the property owner to provide and sign a recordable waiver and
indemnification document that waives and indemnifies the city from any
liability for any damages or expenses (including reimbursement to the city for
removing the building) associated with the building being placed over an
easement, and granting the city permission to remove such building at any time
the city determines that said building must be removed to repair drainage
facilities or utilities, or for other safety, health or welfare reasons; and
      4.   All other provisions of this title and applicable building and fire
codes regarding accessory buildings shall be adhered to. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-
2004)
ARTICLE F. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - RESIDENTIAL (PUD-R) ZONE
SECTION:
9-8F-1: Purpose
9-8F-2: Rezone Approval Process
9-8F-3: Permitted Uses
9-8F-4: General Requirements
9-8F-5: Content Of Written Text/Site Plan
9-8F-6: Residential - Single Lot Development Standards
9-8F-7: Residential - Multiple Family Development Standards
9-8F-8: Residential - Short Term Rental Development Standards
9-8F-9: Other Requirements
9-8F-10: Amendments And Modifications
9-8F-11: Plan Review Conference
9-8F-1: PURPOSE:
Washington City's Planned Unit Development - Residential (PUD-R) Zones have
been established to encourage creative and efficient planning and development
of land within our community by providing greater flexibility in the placement
of buildings and structures on the land, the consolidation and preservation of
community-valued view corridors, open spaces and trails, and the clustering of
residential units. Proposed developments should be designed to maximize the
integration of improvements into the natural and proposed landscape, thereby
minimizing the visual impact on both view corridors/viewsheds as well as from
property to property within the community. These PUD provisions are intended to
create more attractive and desirable environments within the residential areas
of the City. (Ord. 2018-02, 1-10-2018)
9-8F-2: REZONE APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Application For Zone Change: Any person desiring to develop property
under the provisions of this article shall first file an application for a zone
change on the standard form provided by the City.
   B.   Conceptual Plan: The zone change application shall include a conceptual
plan, and supporting text materials which describe the proposed land uses,
density and the proposal’s relationship to the City general plan, as well as
elevations of proposed buildings within the development. Though the City
strongly encourages conceptual plans be approved at the time of zoning
approval, the applicant may request to defer the conceptual plan design
approval to a later date. Deferred conceptual plans will have a time limitation
of eighteen (18) months. Approval process for deferred conceptual plans will be
required to follow subsections C, D and E of this section.
   C.   Public Hearing By Planning Commission, With Review And Recommendation:
The Planning Commission will schedule a public hearing to consider the proposed
zone change and shall review the conceptual plan, supporting text materials and
staff comments for compliance with applicable general plan policies. The
Planning Commission shall also make recommendations concerning the zone change
request which will be forwarded to the City Council.
   D.   Review by City Council: The City Council will receive the
recommendations of the Planning Commission and schedule a public meeting to
consider official action on the zone change request.
   E.   Decision Of City Council: The City Council may approve, modify and
approve, or deny the zone change request. (Ord. 2018-02, 1-10-2018; amd. Ord.
2022-55, 10-12-2022)
9-8F-3: PERMITTED USES:
"Home occupations", as defined in section
9-1-6 of this title.
Household pets.
Mobile homes or recreational vehicle developments.
Multiple-family residential uses.
Single-family residential uses.
Townhouse and condominiums (20,000 square foot lot and 4 unit minimum).
Any combination of the above uses, or other uses that may be determined by the
Planning Commission to be compatible and in harmony with each other according
to the designated and approved development. (Ord. 2018-02, 1-10-2018)
9-8F-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application And Plan: The applicant will submit an application for a
zone change on the standard zone change application form of the City, along
with a site development plan, as outlined in section
9-8F-5 of this article, for a Planned Unit Development - Residential Zone
change.
   B.   Planning Staff Review: Prior to the review of the development plan and
text by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall pre-file the proposed
request with the planning staff for review. The planning staff shall contact
interested department personnel of the City or other agencies for review
purposes. After review by staff, the staff shall furnish to the applicant any
comments regarding the zone change request that may help the applicant in
preparing the request for submission. Staff shall hold such meetings with the
applicant as are deemed necessary for proper review.
   C.   Development Plan: All requests shall be accompanied by a colored site
development plan and written text for the entire property proposed to be
developed.
   D.   Ownership: A planned unit development shall be in single or corporate
ownership at the time of application, or the subject of an application filed
jointly by all owners of the property.
   E.   Open Spaces: Preservation, maintenance and ownership of open spaces
within the development shall be accomplished by:
      1.   Dedication of land as a public park or parkway system; or
      2.   Granting to the City a permanent open space easement on or over the
said private open spaces to guarantee that the open space will remain
perpetually in common use, with ownership and maintenance being the
responsibility of a homeowner's association established with articles of
association and bylaws which are satisfactory to the City Council; or
      3.   Complying with the provisions of the Condominium Ownership Act, Utah
Code Annotated title 57, chapter 8, as amended, which provides for the payment
of common expenses for the upkeep of the common areas and facilities. (Ord.
2018-02, 1-10-2018)
9-8F-5: CONTENT OF WRITTEN TEXT/SITE PLAN:
   A.   Use Of Land: The applicant shall prepare a site plan and written text
that show and clearly explain the projected use of land including percentages
of land devoted to various types of land use, such as building coverage,
parking area, landscaped area, etc.
   B.   Buildings: The text shall indicate the type, character and proposed
height of all buildings. The plot plan, elevations and perspective drawings
shall be prepared by the applicant to help the Planning Commission and City
Council better understand the proposal. (Elevations may not be required when
applying for a residential - single lot development.)
   C.   Density: The density in terms of dwelling units per gross acre of land
shall be indicated.
   D.   Common And Open Spaces: The location of any proposed school sites,
churches, parks and other common or open spaces shall be identified.
   E.   Phasing Plan: A phasing plan, if the development is proposed to be
developed in phases, shall be submitted.
   F.   Topography: Topography at contour intervals of two feet (2') shall be
submitted unless waived by the planning staff.
   G.   Landscape Plan: A landscape plan showing the general location of lawn
area, shrubs, trees and fencing shall be submitted. (This may be part of the
site or plot plan.)
   H.   Developable Area Reserved For Landscaping: The amount of developable
land area reserved for landscaping shall be indicated (with a minimum of 20
percent of the site area developed as landscaping).
   I.   Utilities Underground: All utilities shall be underground unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. Transformer equipment shall be
screened from the streets and from adjacent properties.
   J.   Refuse Storage Areas: Refuse storage areas shall be screened so that
materials stored within these areas shall not be visible from access streets,
freeways and adjacent properties. Storage or refuse areas shall not be located
within required building setbacks nor within utility easements.
   K.   Lighting Plan: The plans submitted shall include a general lighting
plan indicating location of lights to be installed on site.
   L.   Turning Spaces: Safe and convenient turning space shall be provided for
cars, sewer vehicles, refuse collection vehicles, fire-fighting equipment,
etc., at the end of private drives and dead end streets.
   M.   Traffic Conditions: The effect of the development on traffic conditions
on abutting streets shall be shown.
   N.   Layout: The layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions
of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, driveways and walkways.
   O.   Off Street Parking: The arrangement and adequacy of off street parking
facilities.
   P.   Planning Objectives: The text material shall set forth planning
objectives to be accomplished through the development of the project, and show
that the requested PUD zoning is in conformance with the City general plan and
complies with the requested zoning designation.
   Q.   Improvements: Location, grades, widths, and type of all improvements
proposed for all streets.
   R.   Line Locations: A plan showing the location of all water, sewer and
drainage lines in and through the project.
   S.   Deed Restrictions; Covenants: Copies of any deed restrictions,
restrictive covenants, bylaws, architectural controls or other requirements
that may be appurtenant to the proposed development.
   T.   Signage: The size, location, design and nature of signs, if any, and
the intensity and direction of area flood-lighting shall be detailed in the
text materials.
   U.   Grading And Drainage Plan: A grading and drainage plan shall be
submitted with the site development plan.
   V.   Geotechnical Report: A geotechnical report identifying any possible
flood, slope, faulting, soils or other related hazards on the site shall be
submitted with the application. (Ord. 2018-02, 1-10-2018)
9-8F-6: RESIDENTIAL - SINGLE LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Building Coverage: The land coverage by all buildings shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the net lot or parcel acreage.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size in single-family residential
subdivisions with private individual lots (no common area within lots) is five
thousand (5,000) square feet; provided, that at least twenty percent (20%) of
the total project is developed and maintained as common open landscape or
recreation area.
   C.   Density: The density of a planned unit residential - single lot
development shall conform to the density limitations of the general plan,
except that the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning Commission may
approve a density greater than the general plan designation where the following
findings are made:
      1.   The proposed dwellings are platted for individual ownership of the
dwelling units, and
      2.   The density and building scale of the proposed units are similar in
scale to an adjoining developed parcel or is considered in scale with the
surrounding area and fits harmoniously into the neighborhood, as determined by
the City Council but in no case shall exceed eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
To be considered for density increases, the applicant will include, as part of
the development design, any of the following credits:
         a.   Landscaping Along Periphery Of Development: If a common area
landscaped strip between twenty feet (20') and twenty five feet (25') is
created along the periphery of the development (which is beyond the 50 percent
requirement of parcel coverage for non-structures), and surrounds at least
sixty seven percent (67%) of the development, an increase of one dwelling unit
per acre shall be added to the minimum density for the development.
         b.   Tree Lined Streets: Tree lined streets for all streets (internal
and periphery) to provide shade for sidewalks and to reduce solar heat gain. If
all streets within the development, on both sides of the streets, will have a
landscape strip between the curb and sidewalk planted with shade trees at forty
foot (40') spacing or less, with trees that are of twenty four inch (24") box
containers with a minimum of one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper, an increase
of one dwelling unit per acre shall be added to the minimum density for the
development.
         c.   Landscaped Open Spaces: For every ten percent (10%) of landscaped
open space incorporated into the development (which is beyond the 50 percent
requirement of parcel coverage for non-structures), and not receiving density
increases through other provisions of this section, may receive an increase of
one dwelling unit per acre which shall be added to the minimum density for the
development.
         d.   Increased Recreational Facilities: Additional designated
recreational amenities, above the requirements as already set forth for planned
unit development, may receive an increase in density, as approved by the
Planning Commission and City Council on case by case basis.
   D.   Setbacks: The setbacks for all Planned Unit Developments - Residential
will be as follows, unless an approved setback alternative plan is granted by
the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yard setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20'). The street side of corner lots, shall be the same as the front yard
setback.
      2.   Building, Parking Required: The front yard setback area shall not be
used for long term parking of any motor vehicles, or for required additional
visitor parking, except for the driveway directly in front of the garage or
carport of the dwelling unit.
      3.   Side Setbacks: Side yard setbacks on interior lot lines shall be a
minimum of five feet (5') on one side and ten feet (10') on the opposite side
for all dwellings, with a minimum of fifteen feet (15') between homes. Side
yard setbacks on exterior lot lines (boundary lines) shall be a minimum of ten
feet (10').
      4.   Rear Setbacks: Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet
(10').
   E.   Parking Requirements: The parking requirements of chapter 16 of this
title shall apply.
   F.   Signs And Advertising: The requirements of chapter 18 of this title
shall apply, except that in large residential planned unit developments (those
containing more than 200 dwelling units), the Planning Commission may approve
an overall sign scheme for the project which may exceed the restrictions
contained in chapter 18 of this title.
   G.   Height Restrictions: No building shall be erected to a height greater
than thirty five feet (35') unless specifically approved as part of the zone
change approval.
   H.   Size Requirement: Each Planned Unit Development Zone shall contain a
minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and four (4) dwelling units.
   I.   Landscape Requirement: All planned unit developments shall have a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the developable site area developed and
maintained as landscaped or natural open space. Floodways and slopes that
exceed a specific percentage and/or have unsuitable soil conditions for
hillside development, as identified in the Hillside Protection Overlay Zone,
are not considered developable. The applicant of the requested PUD Zone shall
show what areas are to be landscaped and what areas are to be left in a natural
state. The City Council shall determine if the proposed landscaped areas and
the areas proposed to be left in a natural state will satisfy the fifty percent
(50%) landscape or natural open space requirement. In any event, all landscaped
and open green space areas shall be kept in a weed free condition. All proposed
structures, future structures, roads and parking areas are excluded from the
calculations used to satisfy this requirement.
   J.   Time Limitations: Building permits for construction within Planned Unit
Development Residential - Single Lot Zones must be obtained within eighteen
(18) months of the approval of a zone change to planned unit development -
single lots. If eighteen (18) months elapse without the issuance of building
permits for the construction of the approved plans within the Planned Unit
Development Zone, all conceptual and preliminary plan approvals shall be deemed
null and void, unless an extension is granted. The applicant shall request an
extension on an approved development plan prior to the expiration of the
eighteen (18) month time limit. The Community Development Director may approve
a six (6) month extension on an approved development plan. In the case that a
second six (6) month extension is needed, the applicant shall request a second
extension on the approved development plan prior to the expiration of the first
six (6) month extension time limit. The City Council will approve or deny the
requested second extension on the development plan. In the case that an
approved development plan does expire, the zoning of the property shall remain
planned unit development, but no construction will be allowed on the property
until a new plan is submitted and approved by the Planning Commission and the
City Council as outlined in section
9-8F-2 of this article.
   K.   Recreation Or Playground Areas: In developments with five (5) or more
units, there shall be provided usable recreation or playground areas with a
total minimum area of one thousand (1,000) square feet for five (5) units and
an additional two hundred (200) square feet for each unit over five (5) units.
No side measurement of each usable recreation or playground area shall be less
than twenty feet (20') in width/length. At least fifty percent (50%) of the
usable area shall be in the form of open playground and green space. (Ord.
2018-02, 1-10-2018)
9-8F-7: RESIDENTIAL - MULTIPLE FAMILY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Building Coverage: The land coverage by all buildings shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the net lot or parcel acreage.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size in multiple-family residential
subdivisions with private individual building pads and associated common area
is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; provided, that at least twenty percent
(20%) of the total project is developed and maintained as common open landscape
or recreation area.
   C.   Density: The density of a planned unit residential - multiple family
development shall conform to the density limitations of the general plan,
except that the City upon recommendation of the Planning Commission may approve
a density greater than the general plan designation where the following
findings are made:
      1.   The proposed development is considered an infill development where
the surrounding land is already developed, and
      2.   The proposed dwellings are platted for individual ownership of the
dwelling units, and
      3.   The density and building scale of the proposed units are similar in
scale to an adjoining developed parcel or is considered in scale with the
surrounding area and fits harmoniously into the neighborhood, as determined by
the City Council but in no case shall exceed a twenty five percent (25%)
dwelling units per acre increase as stated in the general plan. To be
considered for density increases, the applicant will include, as part of the
development design, any of the following credits:
         a.   Landscaping Along Periphery Of Development: If a common area
landscaped strip between twenty feet (20') and twenty five feet (25') is
created along the periphery of the development (which is beyond the 50 percent
requirement of parcel coverage for non-structures), and surrounds at least
sixty seven percent (67%) of the development, an increase of one dwelling unit
per acre shall be added to the minimum density for the development.
         b.   Tree Lined Streets: Tree lined streets for all streets (internal
and periphery) to provide shade for sidewalks and to reduce solar heat gain. If
all streets within the development, on both sides of the streets, will have a
landscape strip between the curb and sidewalk planted with shade trees at forty
foot (40') spacing or less, with trees that are of twenty four inch (24") box
containers with a minimum of one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper, an increase
of one dwelling unit per acre shall be added to the minimum density for the
development.
         c.   Landscaped Open Spaces: For every ten percent (10%) of landscaped
open space incorporated into the development (which is beyond the 50 percent
requirement of parcel coverage for non-structures), and not receiving density
increases through other provisions of this section, may receive an increase of
one dwelling unit per acre which shall be added to the minimum density for the
development.
         d.   Increased Recreational Facilities: Additional designated
recreational amenities, above the requirements as already set forth for planned
unit development, may receive an increase in density, as approved by the
Planning Commission and City Council on case by case basis.
   D.   Setbacks: The setbacks for all planned unit developments - multiple
family will be as follows, unless an approved setback alternative plan is
granted by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yard setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20'). The street side of corner lots, shall be the same as the front yard
setback.
      2.   Building, Parking Required: The front yard setback area shall not be
used for long term parking of any motor vehicles, or for required additional
visitor parking, except for the driveway directly in front of the garage or
carport of the dwelling unit.
      3.   Side And Rear Setbacks: Side and rear setbacks on interior lot lines
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') for all dwellings.
      4.   Group Dwellings: In group dwellings, no two (2) buildings may be
located closer together than ten feet (10') for one- story buildings, fifteen
feet (15') for two-story buildings, and twenty feet (20') for approved three-
story (or more) buildings.
      5.   Two-Story Buildings: For two-story (or more) buildings, the side and
rear setbacks shall be at least twenty five feet (25') along the boundary of a
Single-Family Zone, and twenty feet (20') along the boundary of other zones.
   E.   Parking Requirements: The parking requirements of chapter 16 of this
title shall apply.
   F.   Signs And Advertising: The requirements of chapter 18 of this title
shall apply, except that in large residential planned unit developments (those
containing more than 200 dwelling units), the Planning Commission may approve
an overall sign scheme for the project which may exceed the restrictions
contained in chapter 18 of this title.
   G.   Height Restrictions: No building shall be erected to a height greater
than thirty five feet (35') unless specifically approved as part of the zone
change approval.
   H.   Size Requirement: Each Planned Unit Development Zone shall contain a
minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and four (4) dwelling units.
   I.   Landscape Requirement: All planned unit developments shall have a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the developable site area developed and
maintained as landscaped or open green space. Floodways and slopes that exceed
a specific percentage and/or have unsuitable soil conditions for hillside
development, as identified in the Hillside Protection Overlay Zone, are not
considered developable. The applicant of the requested PUD Zone shall show what
areas are to be landscaped and what areas are to be left in a natural state.
The City Council shall determine if the proposed landscaped areas and the areas
proposed to be left in a natural state will satisfy the fifty percent (50%)
landscape or open green space requirement. In any event, all landscaped and
open green space areas shall be kept in a weed free condition. All proposed
structures, future structures, roads and parking areas are excluded from the
calculations used to satisfy this requirement.
   J.   Time Limitations: Building permits for construction within Planned Unit
Development Residential - Multiple Family Lot Zones must be obtained within
eighteen (18) months of the approval of a zone change to planned unit
development - multiple family. If eighteen (18) months elapse without the
issuance of building permits for the construction of the approved plans within
the Planned Unit Development Zone, all conceptual and preliminary plan
approvals shall be deemed null and void, unless an extension is granted. The
applicant shall request an extension on an approved development plan prior to
the expiration of the eighteen (18) month time limit. The Community Development
Director may approve a six (6) month extension on an approved development plan.
In the case that a second six (6) month extension is needed, the applicant
shall request a second extension on the approved development plan prior to the
expiration of the first six (6) month extension time limit. The City Council
will approve or deny the requested second extension on the development plan. In
the case that an approved development plan does expire, the zoning of the
property shall remain planned unit development, but no construction will be
allowed on the property until a new plan is submitted and approved by the
Planning Commission and the City Council as outlined in section
9-8F-2 of this article.
   K.   Recreation Or Playground Areas: In developments with five (5) or more
units, there shall be provided usable recreation or playground areas with a
total minimum area of one thousand (1,000) square feet for five (5) units and
an additional two hundred (200) square feet for each unit over five (5) units.
No side measurement of each usable recreation or playground area shall be less
than twenty feet (20') in width/length. At least fifty percent (50%) of the
usable area shall be in the form of open playground and green space. (Ord.
2018-02, 1-10-2018)
9-8F-8: RESIDENTIAL - SHORT TERM RENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Building Coverage: The land coverage by all buildings shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the net lot or parcel acreage.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size in the short term rental
residential subdivisions is five (5) acres, with a minimum of five (5) dwelling
units; provided, that at least twenty percent (20%) of the total project is
developed and maintained as common open landscape or recreation area.
   C.   Density: The density of a planned unit residential - short term rental
development shall conform to the density limitations of the general plan,
except that the City upon recommendation of the Planning Commission may approve
a density greater than the general plan designation where the following
findings are made:
      1.   The proposed development is considered an infill development where
the surrounding land is already developed, and
      2.   The proposed dwellings are platted for individual ownership of the
dwelling units, and
      3.   The density and building scale of the proposed units are similar in
scale to an adjoining developed parcel or is considered in scale with the
surrounding area and fits harmoniously into the neighborhood, as determined by
the City Council but in no case shall exceed a twenty five percent (25%)
dwelling units per acre increase as stated in the general plan. To be
considered for density increases, the applicant will include, as part of the
development design, any of the following credits:
         a.   Landscaping Along Periphery Of Development: If a common area
landscaped strip between twenty feet (20') and twenty five feet (25') is
created along the periphery of the development (which is beyond the 50 percent
requirement of parcel coverage for non-structures), and surrounds at least
sixty seven percent (67%) of the development, an increase of one dwelling unit
per acre shall be added to the minimum density for the development.
         b.   Tree Lined Streets: Tree lined streets for all streets (internal
and periphery) to provide shade for sidewalks and to reduce solar heat gain. If
all streets within the development, on both sides of the streets, will have a
landscape strip between the curb and sidewalk planted with shade trees at forty
foot (40') spacing or less, with trees that are of twenty four inch (24") box
containers with a minimum of one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper, an increase
of one dwelling unit per acre shall be added to the minimum density for the
development.
         c.   Landscaped Open Spaces: For every ten percent (10%) of landscaped
open space incorporated into the development (which is beyond the 50 percent
requirement of parcel coverage for non-structures), and not receiving density
increases through other provisions of this section, may receive an increase of
one dwelling unit per acre which shall be added to the minimum density for the
development.
         d.   Increased Recreational Facilities: Additional designated
recreational amenities, above the requirements as already set forth for planned
unit development, may receive an increase in density, as approved by the
Planning Commission and City Council on case by case basis.
   D.   Setbacks: The setbacks for all planned unit developments - residential
will be as follows, unless an approved setback alternative plan is granted by
the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yard setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20'). The street side of corner lots, shall be the same as the front yard
setback.
      2.   Building, Parking Required: The front yard setback area shall not be
used for long term parking of any motor vehicles, or for required additional
visitor parking, except for the driveway directly in front of the garage or
carport of the dwelling unit.
      3.   Side And Rear Setbacks: Side and rear setbacks on interior lot lines
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') for all dwellings.
      4.   Group Dwellings: In group dwellings, no two (2) buildings may be
located closer together than ten feet (10') for one- story buildings, fifteen
feet (15') for two-story buildings, and twenty feet (20') for approved three-
story (or more) buildings.
      5.   Two-Story Buildings: For two-story (or more) buildings, the side and
rear setbacks shall be at least twenty five feet (25') along the boundary of a
Single-Family Zone, and twenty feet (20') along the boundary of other zones. An
additional ten feet (10') shall be added to the setback for each additional
story over two (2) stories.
   E.   Parking Requirements: At a minimum, two (2) parking stalls for each
dwelling unit (at least 1 will be required to be a covered stall), with
additional stalls for visitor parking. The development will also be required to
provide additional stalls at a minimum of thirty five feet (35') in length, for
vehicles such as boats, trailers, ATVs, etc. Due to the complexity of this
particular use, the Planning Commission and City Council reserve the right to
review the parking requirements on case by case basis for each planned unit
development - short term rental proposal.
   F.   The Home Owners Association (or their designee) for each short term
rental development, will be responsible for providing to the city, a single
point of contact (that resides either on the property, or within Washington
County, Utah) that will be directly responsible for:
      1.   Any, and all circumstances and/or disturbances that may need
addressing due to the property owners or their guest, and;
      2.   Assuring that all units being used as Short Term Rentals, have a
current Washington City Business License, and;
      3.   Assuring that all units being used as Short Term Rentals, will be
scheduled for, and pass, a Washington City Fire Department yearly inspection of
the unit being used as a Short Term Rental.
   G.   Signs And Advertising: The requirements of chapter 18 of this title
shall apply, except that in large residential planned unit developments (those
containing more than 200 dwelling units), the Planning Commission may approve
an overall sign scheme for the project which may exceed the restrictions
contained in chapter 18 of this title.
   H.   Height Restrictions: No building shall be erected to a height greater
than thirty five feet (35') unless specifically approved as part of the zone
change approval.
   I.   Landscape Requirement: All planned unit developments shall have a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the developable site area developed and
maintained as landscaped or open green space. Floodways and slopes that exceed
a specific percentage and/or have unsuitable soil conditions for hillside
development, as identified in the Hillside Protection Overlay Zone, are not
considered developable. The applicant of the requested PUD Zone shall show what
areas are to be landscaped and what areas are to be left in a natural state.
The City Council shall determine if the proposed landscaped areas and the areas
proposed to be left in a natural state will satisfy the fifty percent (50%)
landscape or open green space requirement. In any event, all landscaped and
open green space areas shall be kept in a weed free condition. All proposed
structures, future structures, roads and parking areas are excluded from the
calculations used to satisfy this requirement.
   J.   Time Limitations: Building permits for construction within Planned Unit
Development Residential - Short Term Rental Lot Zones must be obtained within
eighteen (18) months of the approval of a zone change to planned unit
development - short term rental. If eighteen (18) months elapse without the
issuance of building permits for the construction of the approved plans within
the Planned Unit Development Zone, all conceptual and preliminary plan
approvals shall be deemed null and void, unless an extension is granted. The
applicant shall request an extension on an approved development plan prior to
the expiration of the eighteen (18) month time limit. The Community Development
Director may approve a six (6) month extension on an approved development plan.
In the case that a second six (6) month extension is needed, the applicant
shall request a second extension on the approved development plan prior to the
expiration of the first six (6) month extension time limit. The City Council
will approve or deny the requested second extension on the development plan. In
the case that an approved development plan does expire, the zoning of the
property shall remain planned unit development, but no construction will be
allowed on the property until a new plan is submitted and approved by the
Planning Commission and the City Council as outlined in section
9-8F-2 of this article.
   K.   Recreation Or Playground Areas: In developments with five (5) or more
units, there shall be provided usable recreation or playground areas with a
total minimum area of one thousand (1,000) square feet for five (5) units and
an additional two hundred (200) square feet for each unit over five (5) units.
No side measurement of each usable recreation or playground area shall be less
than twenty feet (20') in width/length. At least fifty percent (50%) of the
usable area shall be in the form of open playground and green space. (Ord.
2018-02, 1-10-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-06, 3-11-2020)
9-8F-9: OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Public Meeting by City Council: Subsequent to review and recommendation
by the Planning Commission, the proposed Planned Unit Development Zone change
request shall be forwarded to the City Council for a public meeting to consider
official action on the zone change.
   B.   Recommendation Of Planning Commission: The Planning Commission shall
forward any recommendations for approval, disapproval or modification of the
planned unit development request as reviewed by them to the City Council to be
considered as a part of the zone change hearing.
   C.   Advertising And Procedure: The zone change request shall be advertised
and heard according to the same requirements as any other zone change request
submitted to the City Council.
   D.   Conditions Of Approval: The City Council may approve a Planned Unit
Development Zone change request only after finding that the requirements of
this title and any other ordinances or restrictions affecting the property have
been satisfied. In granting such approval, the City Council may impose and
enforce such specific conditions as to development, phasing and building
construction or maintenance and operation as it deems necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City.
   E.   Compliance With Approved Plan: All development within the Planned Unit
Development Zone shall comply with the development plan as approved and adopted
by the City Council.
   F.   Filing Of Plan And Materials: The development plan and supplementary
text materials, after adoption, shall be filed in the offices of the City, and
all development within the zone shall comply therewith, unless the development
plan and supplementary materials are amended as prescribed herein.
   G.   Final Subdivision Plat: A final subdivision plat as described in the
Subdivision Ordinance in effect at the time of application shall be submitted
for a recommendation of approval or disapproval to the Planning Commission, who
shall forward their recommendation to the City Council for final plat approval
as outlined elsewhere in this title.
   H.   Other Applicable Provisions: All other applicable provisions of this
title shall apply, i.e., mobile home or recreational vehicle requirements for
mobile or recreational vehicle developments, etc. (Ord. 2018-02, 1-10-2018;
amd. Ord. 2022-55, 10-12-2022)
9-8F-10: AMENDMENTS AND MODIFICATIONS:
Any amendments to the development plan shall be accomplished in the same manner
as any other amendment to this title. Revised text and/or plan shall be
submitted, along with a zone change request, to the Planning Commission and
shall be reviewed in the same manner as the initial zone change request. The
plan, as approved by the City Council, constitutes the zone, and any
significant change in the plan shall be processed as an amendment to the zone.
(Ord. 2018-02, 1-10-2018)
9-8F-11: PLAN REVIEW CONFERENCE:
   A.   Required: Following the approval of the Planned Unit Development -
Residential Zone change and upon request for issuance of any building permit
therein, the developer and contractor and the planning staff shall meet
together to review the requirements of the zone change and to make sure that
the developer and contractor are aware of the conditions under which the zone
change was granted.
   B.   Plans Stamped And Signed: At the plan review conferences, the plans
will be stamped and signed by the staff, developer and contractor as the
official set of construction plans from which the work will be performed.
   C.   Changes or Modifications: Any changes or modifications to the approved
plan for development during the period of construction shall first be re-
submitted to the planning staff for approval and if deemed significant and at
the discretion of the staff, returned to the Planning Commission for their
review and recommendations and to the City Council for a public meeting to
consider official action on the zone change as provided for in section 9-8F-
9 of this article. (Ord. 2018-02, 1-10-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-55, 10-12-2022)
CHAPTER 9
ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROFESSIONAL (AP) ZONE
SECTION:
9-9-1: Purpose
9-9-2: Use Regulations
9-9-3: Site Design Regulations
9-9-4: Height Regulations
9-9-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-9-6: Modifying Regulations
9-9-7: Landscaping And Fencing Regulations
9-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the administrative and professional zone is to provide
appropriate locations for the development and operation of administrative and
professional offices, publicly owned and operated community facilities and
related uses. This zone is also intended to serve as a buffer between
residential and more intensive commercial uses. (Ord. 94-9, 4-13-1994)
9-9-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following principal uses may be allowed in new or
existing structures, which have received site development plan approval and
have obtained occupancy review and approval from the zoning administrator:
Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate to an
approved permitted use.
Administrative, executive, professional, medical and research offices.
Banking and other financial institutions.
General research, not involving industrial or manufacturing processes.
Mobile food vendor.
Parking lots for approved principal uses.
Public buildings and offices.
Public park, playground or recreation facilities. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004; amd.
Ord. 2015-19, 6-24-2015)
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to the conditional use
approval process outlined in chapter 17 of this title:
Cemetery.
Development of any parcel of land for any of the principal uses listed in
subsection A of this section, if said development exceeds five thousand (5,000)
square feet of total building floor area, or of any parcel of land adjacent to
Buena Vista Boulevard, Telegraph Road, Washington Parkway, 300 East or
Washington Fields Road, and 3650 South.
Public utility service and maintenance facilities. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004;
amd. Ord. 2014-18, 6-25-2014)
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, which are determined by the planning commission to be in harmony with
the character and intent of this zone. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004)
9-9-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed conditional uses are subject to
review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city
council, who shall apply the standards and provisions found in chapter 17 of
this title. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004)
9-9-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall be erected to a height greater than forty-five
feet (45'), unless otherwise approved by the city council. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-
2004; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 2-12-2020)
9-9-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                           Yards In Feet
District Area In     Width Front Side      Rear
         Square Feet
AP       8,500       None  30    10 and 10 10
 
(Ord. 94-9, 4-13-1994)
9-9-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: Buildings shall have a minimum side yard of ten feet (10')
and the total of the two (2) side yards shall be twenty feet (20'). Accessory
buildings located at least ten feet (10') behind the main building may have a
side yard of three feet (3'), except on the street side of a corner lot, which
shall be the same as the front yard setbacks.
   B.   Rear Yards: Accessory buildings located at least ten feet (10') behind
the main building may have a rear yard of three feet (3'); provided, that on
corner lots rearing the side yard of another lot, the minimum rear yard for all
buildings shall be ten feet (10'). (Ord. 94-9, 4-13-1994)
9-9-7: LANDSCAPING AND FENCING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Landscaping: At least five percent (5%) of the private lot area shall
be improved and maintained with landscaping. At least half of that landscaped
area shall be in the form of live trees, shrubs or ground cover. A minimum ten
foot (10') wide landscaped strip within the private lot area shall be installed
and maintained along all street frontages. With the exception of the pedestrian
and vehicular access portions of buildings, landscaping shall be installed and
maintained along all building walls that face street frontages and parking
lots. Where those building walls are longer than sixty feet (60'), trees shall
be included in the landscaping with one tree every thirty feet (30'). The trees
shall be a minimum size of fifteen (15) gallons (at least one inch in diameter)
at planting. In addition to these requirements, the landscaping requirements
cited elsewhere in this title shall be met, including the requirements for
right of way and parking lot landscaping.
   B.   Fencing: Except in the front yard setback area, a six foot (6') high
solid decorative fence or wall shall be installed and maintained along the
boundary line of any agricultural or residential zone. Chainlink fencing with
slats is not considered a solid fence or wall for the purposes set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004)
CHAPTER 10
COMMERCIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A. COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (C-1) ZONE
SECTION:
9-10A-1: Purpose
9-10A-2: Use Regulations
9-10A-3: Site Design Regulations
9-10A-4: Height Regulations
9-10A-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-10A-6: Modifying Regulations
9-10A-7: Landscaping And Fencing Regulations
9-10A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the community commercial zone is to provide appropriate
locations for the development and operation of community retail and service
activities in locations intended to conveniently serve area residents.
Development standards are intended to protect adjacent residential zones,
promote orderly development and avoid the creation of traffic volumes which
cannot be accommodated by the existing street network. (Ord. 94-9, 4-13-1994)
9-10A-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following principal uses may be allowed in new or
existing structures, which have received site development plan approval and
have obtained occupancy review and approval from the zoning administrator:
Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate to an
approved permitted use.
Any permitted uses listed in the administrative and professional (AP) zone.
Mobile food vendor.
Restaurants.
Retail operation of cleaning, laundry, cosmetic and repair services.
Retail sale and/or rental of goods, merchandise and equipment conducted wholly
within an enclosed building. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004; amd. Ord. 2015-19, 6-24-
2015)
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to the conditional use
approval process outlined in chapter 17 of this title:
Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate to an
approved conditional use.
Automobile car wash, not to exceed four (4) bays.
Automobile service stations, excluding the repairing, painting or upholstering
of automobiles.
Child daycare or preschool center which meets all state and local regulations.
Churches, temples and other places used exclusively for religious worship.
Commercial recreation and entertainment facilities, not to include sexually
oriented businesses.
Development of any parcel of land for any of the principal uses listed in
subsection A of this section, if said development exceeds five thousand (5,000)
square feet of total building floor area, or of any parcel of land adjacent to
Buena Vista Boulevard, Telegraph Road, Washington Parkway, 300 East or
Washington Fields Road, and 3650 South.
One accessory apartment attached to and on the same parcel as an approved
retail use, for occupancy by the manager or employee of the approved retail
use.
Private business and technical schools.
Reception center and/or wedding chapel.
Any combination of the above uses which meets all other provisions of this
title. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004; amd. Ord. 2014-18, 6-25-2014)
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, that are determined by the planning commission to be compatible and in
harmony with the intent of this zone, according to the designated and approved
development plan. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004)
9-10A-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed conditional uses are subject to
review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city
council, who shall apply the standards and provisions found in chapter 17 of
this title, as well as the following provisions:
   A.   Location Within Enclosed Building: All approved business uses shall be
located wholly within an enclosed building, except for the parking and
servicing of automobiles and service to individuals in automobiles;
   B.   Objectional Factors: All uses shall be free from objectionable odor,
noise, dust, smoke, vibration or other such factors; and
   C.   Advertising Signs: All advertising signs shall comply with the
provisions of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004)
9-10A-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall be erected to a height greater than forty-five
feet (45'), unless otherwise approved by the city council. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-
2004; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 2-12-2020)
9-10A-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                             Yards In Feet
District Area In     Width   Front Side                 Rear
         Square Feet In Feet
                                   May be zero if       May be zero if approved
                                   approved by planning by planning commission
C-1      None        20      20    commission in        in conditional use
                                   conditional use      approval
                                   approval
 
(Ord. 2000-12B, 7-26-2000)
9-10A-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: A ten foot (10') side yard shall be required where a side
yard abuts an agricultural or residential zone. Side yards abutting a street
require a twenty foot (20') side yard.
   B.   Rear Yards: A ten foot (10') rear yard will be required where a rear
yard abuts a residential or agricultural zone. (Ord. 94-9, 4-13-1994)
9-10A-7: LANDSCAPING AND FENCING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Landscaping: At least five percent (5%) of the private lot area shall
be improved and maintained with landscaping. At least half of that landscaped
area shall be in the form of live trees, shrubs or ground cover. A minimum ten
foot (10') wide landscaped strip within the private lot area shall be installed
and maintained along all street frontages. With the exception of the pedestrian
and vehicular access portions of buildings, landscaping shall be installed and
maintained along all building walls that face street frontages and parking
lots. Where those building walls are longer than sixty feet (60'), trees shall
be included in the landscaping with one tree every thirty feet (30'). The trees
shall be a minimum size of fifteen (15) gallons (at least 1 inch in diameter)
at planting. In addition to these requirements, the landscaping requirements
cited elsewhere in this title shall be met, including the requirements for
right of way and parking lot landscaping.
   B.   Fencing: Except in the front yard setback area, a six foot (6') high
solid decorative fence or wall shall be installed and maintained along the
boundary line of any agricultural or residential zone. Chainlink fencing with
slats is not considered a solid fence or wall for the purposes set forth in
this article. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004)
ARTICLE B. SERVICE COMMERCIAL (C-2) ZONE
SECTION:
9-10B-1: Purpose
9-10B-2: Use Regulations
9-10B-3: Site Design Regulations
9-10B-4: Height Regulations
9-10B-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-10B-6: Modifying Regulations
9-10B-7: Landscaping And Fencing Regulations
9-10B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the service commercial zone is to provide appropriate locations
for the development and operation of service type commercial activities which
may be established in locations intended to provide the "day to day"
commodities demanded by area residents and to conveniently serve said
residents. (Ord. 94-9, 4-13-1994)
9-10B-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following principal uses may be allowed in new or
existing structures which have received site development plan approval and have
obtained occupancy review and approval from the zoning administrator:
Any permitted use listed in the AP or C-1 zones.
Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate to an
approved permitted use.
Auditoriums, conference rooms, museums, theaters, libraries and community
social centers.
Mobile food vendor.
Repairing, renovating, painting and cleaning of goods, merchandise and
equipment where all operations are conducted entirely within a fully enclosed
building.
Retail and/or wholesale sale and/or rental of goods, merchandise and equipment,
which may include storage and display outside an enclosed building. Examples of
such uses include, but are not limited to, art shop, bank, beauty shop,
bookstore, clothing store, drugstore, florist, laundry, theater and variety
store.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following uses are subject to the conditional use
approval process outlined in chapter 17 of this title:
Any conditional use listed in the AP or C-1 zones.
Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate to an
approved conditional use.
Development of any parcel of land for any of the principal uses listed in
subsection A of this section, if said development exceeds five thousand (5,000)
square feet of total building floor area, or of any parcel of land adjacent to
Buena Vista Boulevard, Telegraph Road, Washington Parkway, 300 East or
Washington Fields Road, and 3650 South.
Hospital.
Hotel or motel.
Motor vehicle, trailer, camper and recreational vehicle sales agency.
State approved and operated liquor store.
Any combination of the above uses which meets all other provisions of this
title.
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, that are determined by the planning commission to be compatible and in
harmony with the intent of this zone, according to the designated and approved
development plan. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004; amd. Ord. 2014-18, 6-25-2014; Ord.
2015-19, 6-24-2015; Ord. 2022-12, 3-9-2022)
9-10B-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed conditional uses are subject to
review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city
council, who shall apply the standards and provisions found in chapter 17 of
this title, as well as the following provisions:
   A.   Objectionable Factors: All uses shall be free from objectionable odor,
noise, dust, smoke, vibration or other such factors; and
   B.   Advertising Signs: All advertising signs shall comply with the
provisions of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004)
9-10B-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall be erected to a height greater than forty-five
feet (45'), unless otherwise approved by the city council. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-
2004; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 2-12-2020)
9-10B-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                             Yards In Feet
District Area In     Width   Front Side                 Rear
         Square Feet In Feet
                                   May be zero if       May be zero if approved
                                   approved by planning by planning commission
C-2      None        20      20    commission in        in conditional use
                                   conditional use      approval
                                   approval
 
(Ord. 2000-12B, 7-26-2000)
9-10B-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: A twenty foot (20') side yard shall be required where a
side yard abuts an agricultural or residential zone. Side yards abutting a
street also require a twenty foot (20') side yard.
   B.   Rear Yards: A twenty foot (20') rear yard open and accessible for
emergency access will be required where a rear yard abuts a residential or
agricultural zone. (Ord. 94-9, 4-13-1994)
9-10B-7: LANDSCAPING AND FENCING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Landscaping: At least five percent (5%) of the private lot area shall
be improved and maintained with landscaping. At least half of that landscaped
area shall be in the form of live trees, shrubs or ground cover. A minimum ten
foot (10') wide landscaped strip within the private lot area shall be installed
and maintained along all street frontages. With the exception of the pedestrian
and vehicular access portions of buildings, landscaping shall be installed and
maintained along all building walls that face street frontages and parking
lots. Where those building walls are longer than sixty feet (60'), trees shall
be included in the landscaping with one tree every thirty feet (30'). The trees
shall be a minimum size of fifteen (15) gallons (at least one inch in diameter)
at planting. In addition to these requirements, the landscaping requirements
cited elsewhere in this title shall be met, including the requirements for
right of way and parking lot landscaping.
   B.   Fencing: Except in the front yard setback area, a six foot (6') high
solid decorative fence or wall shall be installed and maintained along the
boundary line of any agricultural or residential zone. Chainlink fencing with
slats is not considered a solid fence or wall for the purposes set forth in
this article. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004)
ARTICLE C. GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-3) ZONE
SECTION:
9-10C-1: Purpose
9-10C-2: Use Regulations
9-10C-3: Site Design Regulations
9-10C-4: Height Regulations
9-10C-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-10C-6: Modifying Regulations
9-10C-7: Landscaping And Fencing Regulations
9-10C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the general commercial zone is to provide appropriate locations
for the development and operation of general commercial activities where a wide
range of retail and service activities may be established in locations intended
to serve a regional market. (Ord. 94-9, 4-13-1994)
9-10C-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following principal uses may be allowed in new or
existing structures which have received site development plan approval and have
obtained occupancy review and approval from the zoning administrator:
      Any permitted use listed in the AP, C-1 or C-2 zones.
      Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate to
an approved permitted use.
      Auction sales.
      Mail order houses, not to include warehousing.
      Manufacturing, processing, creating, repairing, renovating, painting,
cleaning or assembling of goods. Examples of such uses include, but are not
limited to, automobile repair shop, bottling works, lumberyard, transfer
agency, electronic instruments assembly, and vehicle sales and repair shop.
      Mobile food vendor.
      Any combination of the above uses which meets all other provisions of
this title.
   B.   The following uses are subject to the conditional use approval process
outlined in chapter 17 of this title:
      Any conditional use listed in the AP, C-1 or C-2 zones.
      Development of any parcel of land for any of the principal uses listed in
subsection A of this section, if said development exceeds five thousand square
feet of total building floor area, or of any parcel of land adjacent to Buena
Vista Boulevard, Telegraph Street, Washington Parkway, 300 East, Washington
Fields Road or George Washington Boulevard.
      Funeral Home with or without associated Crematorium (human only) which
meets all state and local regulations pertaining to crematoriums, and which
also has a crematorium unit system that is less than five years old at time of
application approval.
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, that are determined by the planning commission to be compatible and in
harmony with the intent of this zone, according to the designated and approved
development plan. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004; amd. Ord. 2014-18, 6-25-2014; Ord.
2015-19, 6-24-2015; Ord. 2023-10, 3-22-2023)
9-10C-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed conditional uses are subject to
review and recommendation by the planning commission and approval of the city
council, who shall apply the standards and provisions found in chapter 17 of
this title, as well as the following provisions:
   A.   Objectionable Factors: All uses shall be free from objectionable odor,
noise, dust, smoke, vibration or other such factors; and
   B.   Advertising Signs: All advertising signs shall comply with the
provisions of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004)
9-10C-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall be erected to a height greater than forty-five
feet (45'), unless otherwise approved by the city council. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-
2004; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 2-12-2020)
9-10C-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                             Yards In Feet
District Area In     Width   Front Side                 Rear
         Square Feet In Feet
                                   May be zero if       May be zero if approved
                                   approved by planning by planning commission
C-3      None        20      20    commission in        in conditional use
                                   conditional use      approval
                                   approval
 
(Ord. 2000-12B, 7-26-2000)
9-10C-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: A twenty foot (20') side yard shall be required where a
side yard abuts an agricultural or residential zone. Side yards abutting a
street require a twenty foot (20') side yard.
   B.   Rear Yards: A twenty foot (20') rear yard open and accessible for
emergency access will be required where a rear yard abuts a residential or
agricultural zone. (Ord. 2000-12B, 7-26-2000)
9-10C-7: LANDSCAPING AND FENCING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Landscaping: At least five percent (5%) of the private lot area shall
be improved and maintained with landscaping. At least half of that landscaped
area shall be in the form of live trees, shrubs or ground cover. A minimum ten
foot (10') wide landscaped strip within the private lot area shall be installed
and maintained along all street frontages. With the exception of the pedestrian
and vehicular access portions of buildings, landscaping shall be installed and
maintained along all building walls that face street frontages and parking
lots. Where those building walls are longer than sixty feet (60'), trees shall
be included in the landscaping with one tree every thirty feet (30'). The trees
shall be a minimum size of fifteen (15) gallons (at least 1 inch in diameter)
at planting. In addition to these requirements, the landscaping requirements
cited elsewhere in this title shall be met, including the requirements for
right of way and parking lot landscaping.
   B.   Fencing: Except in the front yard setback area, a six foot (6') high
solid decorative fence or wall shall be installed and maintained along the
boundary line of any agricultural or residential zone. Chainlink fencing with
slats is not considered a solid fence or wall for the purposes set forth in
this article. (Ord. 2004-19, 6-9-2004)
ARTICLE D. DOWNTOWN MIXED USE (DM) ZONE
SECTION:
9-10D-1: Purpose
9-10D-2: Use Regulations
9-10D-3: Site Design Regulations
9-10D-4: Height Regulations
9-10D-5: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-10D-6: Modifying Regulations
9-10D-7: Landscaping And Fencing Regulations
9-10D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the downtown mixed use zone is to provide appropriate locations
for the development and operation of a variety of uses in the downtown area
that will be pedestrian oriented by fronting buildings adjacent to the
sidewalks and providing parking at the rear of buildings. The design for new
development and the remodeling of existing development is to be of a
traditional nature by utilizing the ground level of buildings for predominantly
retail, restaurant and service businesses and utilizing the upper levels of
buildings for predominantly professional offices and residential units with
medium high densities. (Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009)
9-10D-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses: With the placement of predominantly retail, restaurant
and service businesses on the ground level of buildings that front Telegraph
Street, and the placement of predominantly professional offices and residential
units, but with the allowance of retail, restaurant and service businesses as
well, on the upper levels of buildings that front Telegraph Street, the
following principal uses may be allowed in new or existing structures, which
have received site development plan approval and have obtained occupancy review
and approval from the zoning administrator. For clarification and consistency
purposes, where "(PO)" is at the end of a stated use the use is classified as a
professional office, where "(SB)" is at the end of a stated use the use is
classified as a service business, and where "(PO/SB)" is at the end of a stated
use the use is classified as both a professional office and a service business
which may occupy multiple levels of a building but the most service business
function of the use is to be predominantly placed on the ground level of
buildings that front Telegraph Street. For buildings that front the streets
perpendicular to Telegraph Street, retail, restaurant and service businesses,
as well as professional offices, may occupy any level of a building.
Residential units are restricted to the upper levels of buildings that front
the streets perpendicular to Telegraph Street.
Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate to an
approved permitted use.
Administrative, executive, professional, medical and research offices (PO).
Auditoriums, conference rooms, museums, theaters, libraries and community
social centers (SB).
Banking and other financial institutions (PO/SB).
General research, not involving industrial or manufacturing processes (PO).
Home occupations in conjunction with residential units.
Household pets in conjunction with residential units.
Mobile food vendor.
Parking lots for approved principal uses with the parking located at the rear
of buildings.
Public buildings and offices (PO/SB).
Public parking lots and parking structures.
Public parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities.
Repairing, renovating, painting and cleaning of goods and merchandise where the
goods and merchandise are permitted herein, and where all operations are
conducted entirely within a fully enclosed building. Examples of such uses
include, but are not limited to, pet grooming shops, shoe repair shops, tailors
and watch repair shops. Examples of uses prohibited from this category include,
but are not limited to, automobile repairs and services, equipment repairs and
services and major appliance repairs and services (SB).
Residential units (apartments and condominiums) on the upper levels of
buildings and with a density of seven (7) to twelve (12) dwelling units per
acre.
Restaurants.
The retail operation of cleaning, laundry, cosmetic and repair services where
the retail operation of such services is permitted herein (SB).
The retail sale and/or rental of goods and merchandise conducted wholly within
an enclosed building. Examples of such uses include, but are not limited to,
art shops, barbershops, beauty shops, bookstores, clothing stores, drugstores,
florists, gift shops, jewelry shops, pet shops and variety stores (SB). (Ord.
2008-02, 1-9-2008; amd. Ord. 2015-19, 6-24-2015)
   B.   Conditional Uses: With the placement of predominantly retail,
restaurant and service businesses on the ground level of buildings that front
Telegraph Street, and the placement of predominantly professional offices and
residential units, but with the allowance of retail, restaurant and service
businesses as well, on the upper levels of buildings that front Telegraph
Street, the following uses are subject to the conditional use approval process
outlined in chapter 17 of this title. For clarification and consistency
purposes, where "(PO)" is at the end of a stated use the use is classified as a
professional office, where "(SB)" is at the end of a stated use the use is
classified as a service business, and where "(PO/SB)" is at the end of a stated
use the use is classified as both a professional office and a service business
which may occupy multiple levels of a building but the most service business
function of the use is to be predominantly placed on the ground level of
buildings that front Telegraph Street. For buildings that front the streets
perpendicular to Telegraph Street, retail, restaurant and service businesses,
as well as professional offices, may occupy any level of a building.
Residential units are restricted to the upper levels of buildings that front
the streets perpendicular to Telegraph Street.
Bed and breakfast inns, hotels and motels (SB).
Child daycare facilities and preschool centers which meet all state and local
regulations (SB).
Churches, temples and other places used exclusively for religious worship (SB).
Commercial recreation and entertainment facilities, not to include sexually
oriented businesses (SB).
Educational institutions (PO/SB).
Indoor pet daycare facilities, motels and/or resorts (SB).
Medical clinics (PO/SB).
Private business and technical schools (PO/SB).
Public utility facilities.
Reception centers and/or wedding chapels (SB).
Schools (PO/SB).
Any combination of the above uses which meets all other provisions of this
article.
   C.   Other: Other uses, not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, which are determined by the planning commission to be in harmony with
the character and intent of this zone. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-9-2008)
9-10D-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
   A.   Downtown Mixed Use Design Guidelines: The design of all new development
and the external expansion of existing development, not including the internal
expansion of existing uses, including nonconforming uses but only if allowed
under chapter 15 of this title, are subject to the Washington City downtown
mixed use design guidelines. To get a basic idea of what the design guidelines
entail, a very small sample of them are described below to help in the
development planning process:
      1.   Two-Story Appearance For Single-Story Building: Where a single-story
building is to be developed it shall be designed to have a two-story appearance
from all views. This will prevent three-story buildings from overpowering the
single-story buildings and will provide no more than one-story transition
between buildings.
      2.   Uses Assigned To Levels In A Building: Retail, restaurant and
service businesses are to be placed on the ground level of buildings that front
Telegraph Street, and professional offices and residential units are to be
placed on the upper levels of buildings that front Telegraph Street. For
buildings that front the streets perpendicular to Telegraph Street, retail,
restaurant and service businesses, as well as professional offices, may occupy
any level of a building. Residential units are restricted to the upper levels
of buildings that front the streets perpendicular to Telegraph Street.
      3.   Sidewalk In Front Yard Setback: In addition to the public right of
way sidewalk, a minimum five foot (5') wide sidewalk shall be installed within
the front yard setback adjacent to the public right of way.
      4.   Parking: All on site parking shall be at the rear of the building(s)
as viewed from the street upon which the building fronts, but in any event,
always as viewed from Telegraph Street. Parking areas shall be provided for
motorcycles and bicycles. Except for parking spaces reserved for the disabled,
parking spaces shall not be reserved nor be advertised as parking for a
particular building, business, tenant or use.
      5.   Reciprocal Access Drives: Reciprocal access drives are required to
link adjacent properties from the side streets perpendicular to Telegraph
Street. This will provide access to all properties within a block while
avoiding the need for driveways on Telegraph Street.
      6.   Prohibition Of Exterior Vending Machines And Newspaper Racks:
Exterior vending machines and newspaper racks are prohibited in the DM zone.
(Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009)
9-10D-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall be erected to a height greater than three (3)
stories or fifty feet (50') unless otherwise approved with a conditional use
permit. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-9-2008)
9-10D-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
                             Yard Setbacks In Feet
         Area In     Width         Interior Street Interior Side Adjacent
District Square Feet In Feet Front Side     Side   To An Agricultural     Rear
                                                   Or Residential Zone
DM       None        20      5     01       5      20                     452
 
Notes:
   1.    Although a 0 foot setback is allowed along interior side yards, any
easement, utility line or drainageway must be recognized and dealt with
accordingly, and building construction shall conform to the city's adopted
building codes.
   2.    Since all on site parking is to be at the rear of buildings, 45 feet
is the minimum distance required for 1 row of parking spaces and 1 drive aisle.
Additional rows of parking spaces and additional drive aisles may be required
due to the size of a building and its proposed uses.
(Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009)
9-10D-6: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Encroachments Into Front And Street Side Yard Setbacks: Awnings,
canopies and similar shade structures, and balconies on the upper levels of
buildings, may project over the entire front and street side yard setbacks and
over the public right of way a maximum of two feet (2'). Any proposed ground
support for such structures shall meet the required setbacks of five feet (5'),
they shall not interfere with any overhead infrastructure (utility lines and
poles, lights, etc.) and clearance under the structures shall be as approved by
the city. Tables and chairs in conjunction with restaurants may also encroach
into the front and street side yard setbacks up to the public right of way.
(Ord. 2008-02, 1-9-2008)
   B.   Outdoor Events And Display: Periodically the city may authorize outdoor
events and the outdoor display of merchandise in the DM zone. Outdoor events
may include vendors and event booths provided that the vendors and booths do
not encroach into the public right of way, do not interfere with pedestrian
access, and that the proper permits for the vendors and booths are issued by
the city. Any outdoor display of merchandise shall only be allowed during
periods of time authorized by the city, and shall not interfere with pedestrian
access. All merchandise shall be adjacent to the building wall that houses the
merchandise being displayed and the display area shall not exceed a distance of
four feet (4') from the building wall. (Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009)
   C.   On Site Parking Reduction Options: Options are available for a
reduction in on site parking spaces, provided that the number of parking spaces
required for the development is satisfied by utilizing the options. These
options are specified in section
9-16-13 of this title. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-9-2008)
9-10D-7: LANDSCAPING AND FENCING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Landscaping: Landscaping requirements are as cited in the downtown
mixed use design guidelines.
   B.   Walls: Except in the front or street side yard setback areas, a maximum
six foot (6') high decorative block wall shall be installed and maintained
along the boundary line of any residential zone. The intent is to construct a
wall as low as possible while still performing screening, noise attenuation and
security functions. Where sight distance is needed for exiting a site, the wall
shall be lowered to meet the sight distance requirement. The wall design and
landscaping in conjunction with the wall shall be as cited in the downtown
mixed use design guidelines. (Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009)
ARTICLE E. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL (PUD-C) ZONE
SECTION:
9-10E-1: Purpose
9-10E-2: Rezone Approval Process
9-10E-3: Permitted Uses
9-10E-4: General Requirements
9-10E-5: Content Of Written Text/Site Plan
9-10E-6: Commercial/Industrial Development Standards
9-10E-7: Commercial - Mixed Use Development Standards
9-10E-8: Other Requirements
9-10E-9: Amendments And Modifications
9-10E-10: Plan Review Conference
9-10E-1: PURPOSE:
Washington City's Planned Unit Development - Commercial/Industrial (PUD-C)
Zones have been established to encourage creative and efficient planning and
development of land within our community by providing greater flexibility in
the placement of buildings and structures on the land, the consolidation and
preservation of community-valued view corridors, and the clustering of
commercial units. Proposed developments should be designed to maximize the
integration of improvements into the natural and proposed landscape, thereby
minimizing the visual impact on both view corridors/viewsheds as well as from
property to property within the community. These PUD provisions are intended to
create more attractive and desirable environments within the commercial areas
of the City. (Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-2018)
9-10E-2: REZONE APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Application For Zone Change: Any person desiring to develop property
under the provisions of this article shall first file an application for a zone
change on the standard form provided by the City.
   B.   Conceptual Plan: The zone change application shall include a conceptual
plan, and supporting text materials which describe the proposed land uses,
density and the proposal’s relationship to the City general plan, as well as
elevations of proposed buildings within the development. Though the City
strongly encourages conceptual plans be approved at the time of zoning
approval, the applicant may request to defer the conceptual plan design
approval to a later date. Deferred conceptual plans will have a time limitation
of eighteen (18) months. Approval process for deferred conceptual plans will be
required to follow subsections C, D and E of this section.
   C.   Public Hearing By Planning Commission, With Review And Recommendation:
The Planning Commission shall review the conceptual plan, supporting text
materials and staff comments for compliance with applicable general plan
policies. The Planning Commission shall also make recommendations concerning
the zone change request which will be forwarded to the City Council.
   D.   Public Meeting by City Council: The City Council will receive the
recommendations of the Planning Commission and schedule and schedule a public
meeting to consider official action on the zone change request.
   E.   Decision Of City Council: The City Council may approve, modify and
approve, or deny the zone change request. (Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-2018; amd. Ord.
2022-55, 10-12-2022)
9-10E-3: PERMITTED USES:
Church.
General commercial business of a retail trade nature, including office and
professional use.
Industrial (as outlined in chapter 11 of this title).
Residential (in mixed use commercial developments).
Any combination of the above uses, or other uses that may be determined by the
Planning Commission to be compatible and in harmony with each other according
to the designated and approved development. (Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-2018)
9-10E-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application And Plan: The applicant will submit an application for a
zone change on the standard zone change application form of the City, along
with a site development plan, as outlined in section
9-10E-5 of this article, for a Planned Unit Development - Commercial/Industrial
Zone change.
   B.   Planning Staff Review: Prior to the review of the development plan and
text by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall pre-file the proposed
request with the planning staff for review. The planning staff shall contact
interested department personnel of the City or other agencies for review
purposes. The staff shall furnish to the applicant any comments regarding the
zone change request that may help the applicant in preparing the request for
submission. Staff shall hold such meetings with the applicant as are deemed
necessary for proper review.
   C.   Development Plan: All requests shall be accompanied by a colored site
development plan and written text for the entire property proposed to be
developed. For multiple commercial projects approved by the City Council, the
applicant shall proceed to prepare and submit a preliminary plat, followed by a
final plat as set forth in the Subdivision Ordinance, and all improvement
design standards set forth in the Subdivision Ordinance shall be followed,
where applicable, in submitting an application.
   D.   Ownership: A planned unit development shall be in single or corporate
ownership at the time of application, or the subject of an application filed
jointly by all owners of the property. (Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-2018)
9-10E-5: CONTENT OF WRITTEN TEXT/SITE PLAN:
   A.   Use Of Land: The applicant shall prepare a site plan and written text
that show and clearly explain the projected use of land including percentages
of land devoted to various types of land use, such as building coverage,
parking area, landscaped area, etc.
   B.   Buildings: The text shall indicate the type, character and proposed
height of all buildings. The plot plan, elevations and perspective drawings
shall be prepared by the applicant to help the Planning Commission and City
Council better understand the proposal.
   C.   Phasing Plan: A phasing plan, if the development is proposed to be
developed in phases, shall be submitted.
   D.   Topography: Topography at contour intervals of two feet (2') shall be
submitted unless waived by the planning staff.
   E.   Landscape Plan: A landscape plan showing the general location of lawn
area, shrubs, trees and fencing shall be submitted. (This may be part of the
site or plot plan.)
   F.   Utilities Underground: All utilities shall be underground unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Commission. Transformer equipment shall be
screened from the streets and from adjacent properties.
   G.   Refuse Storage Areas: Refuse storage areas shall be screened so that
materials stored within these areas shall not be visible from access streets,
freeways and adjacent properties. Storage or refuse areas shall not be located
within required building setbacks nor within utility easements.
   H.   Lighting Plan: The plans submitted shall include a general lighting
plan indicating location of lights to be installed on site.
   I.   Turning Spaces: Safe and convenient turning space shall be provided for
cars, sewer vehicles, refuse collection vehicles, fire-fighting equipment,
etc., at the end of private drives and dead end streets.
   J.   Traffic Conditions: The effect of the development on traffic conditions
on abutting streets shall be shown.
   K.   Layout: The layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions
of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives and walkways.
   L.   Truck Facilities: The location, arrangement and dimensions of truck
loading and unloading facilities.
   M.   Off Street Parking: The arrangement and adequacy of off street parking
facilities.
   N.   Surfacing, Lighting Of Parking Facilities: The surfacing and lighting
of off street parking facilities.
   O.   Circulation Patterns: The circulation patterns within the boundaries of
the development.
   P.   Planning Objectives: The text material shall set forth planning
objectives to be accomplished through the development of the project, and show
that the requested PUD zoning is in conformance with the City general plan and
complies with the requested zoning designation.
   Q.   Improvements: Location, grades, widths, and type of all improvements
proposed for all streets.
   R.   Line Locations: A plan showing the location of all water, sewer and
drainage lines in and through the project.
   S.   Deed Restrictions; Covenants: Copies of any deed restrictions,
restrictive covenants, bylaws, architectural controls or other requirements
that may be appurtenant to the proposed development.
   T.   Signage: The size, location, design and nature of signs, if any, and
the intensity and direction of area flood-lighting shall be detailed in the
text materials.
   U.   Grading And Drainage Plan: A grading and drainage plan shall be
submitted with the site development plan.
   V.   Geotechnical Report: A geotechnical report identifying any possible
flood, slope, faulting, soils or other related hazards on the site shall be
submitted with the application.
   W.   Necessity: The proposed use of the particular location shall be shown
as necessary or desirable and that such use will provide a service or facility
which will contribute to the general well being of the neighborhood and the
community.
   X.   Proposed Use Not Detrimental: It shall be shown that under the
circumstances of the particular case, the proposed use will not be detrimental
to the health, safety or general welfare of the persons residing in the
vicinity of the planned unit development. (Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-2018)
9-10E-6: COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Building Coverage: The land coverage by all buildings shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the net lot or parcel acreage.
   B.   Setbacks: The setbacks for all planned unit developments - commercial/
industrial will be as follows, unless an approved setback alternative plan is
granted by the Planning Commission and City Council:
      1.   Front Yard: Front yard setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty five
feet (25') for commercial developments or twenty feet (20') for industrial
developments. The street side of corner lots, shall be the same as the front
yard setback.
      2.   Side Yard: Interior side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of ten
feet (10') with the following exceptions:
         a.   No setback shall be required between a Planned Unit Development
Zone and adjacent Commercial or Industrial Zone, unless setbacks are
specifically required by the Planning Commission or Building Codes.
         b.   No setback is required between adjacent PUD commercial/industrial
buildings located in the Planned Unit Development Zone, unless required by the
Building Codes.
         c.   The interior side yard setback shall be increased to twenty feet
(20') for buildings adjacent to a Residential Zone.
         d.   The street side of corner lots, shall be the same as the front
yard setback.
      3.   Rear Yard: Ten feet (10') for commercial developments and zero feet
(0') for industrial developments, unless a different setback is required by the
Planning Commission or Building Codes. When a rear yard is adjacent to a
Residential Zone, the setback will be increased to twenty feet (20') in
Commercial Zones, and thirty feet (30') in an Industrial Zone.
   C.   Parking Requirements: The requirements of chapter 16 of this title
shall apply.
   D.   Signs And Advertising: The requirements of chapter 18 of this title
shall apply. The Planning Commission may approve an overall sign scheme for the
project which may exceed the restrictions contained in chapter 18 of this
title. Off premises signs shall not be allowed in a PUD.
   E.   Height Restrictions: No building shall be erected to a height greater
than thirty five feet (35') unless specifically approved as part of the zone
change approval.
   F.   Fences: The requirements of chapter 14 of this title shall apply.
   G.   Landscape Requirement:
      1.   For commercial developments, the entire area between the curb and
the setback line shall be landscaped. This may consist of any combination of
plant material along with necessary walks, ingress/egress drives and other
appurtenances necessary for the development of the property. Where it otherwise
creates a hardship, the City Council, upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may allow adjustments in the landscape setback area for driveway
lanes and uncovered parking spaces; provided, that any reduction in one area
shall be made up by additional landscaping provided in another area adjacent to
the road right- of-way, so there is no overall reduction in required landscaped
area. For commercial developments, there shall be a ten foot (10') wide
landscaped area on the private lot adjacent to all public streets.
      2.   Landscape plans shall make provisions for erosion control on all
graded sites which will remain vacant after construction is completed.
      3.   Landscape plans shall indicate methods of watering, plant types and
materials to be used.
   H.   Outside Storage: There shall be no outside storage of materials used in
sales or in business operations. All businesses shall be completely enclosed
within these zones.
   I.   Maintenance: All structures, permitted signs, parking area,
landscaping, etc., shall be maintained in a neat, clean and orderly manner. All
refuse shall be collected from outdoor areas on a regular basis to prevent said
materials from being blown onto adjacent property.
   J.   Uses Permitted: The City Council, upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may designate any Planned Unit Development Commercial Zone as
permitting certain of those uses allowed in the C-1, C-2 or C-3 Zones, and any
Planned Unit Development Industrial Zones as permitting certain of those uses
allowed in the I-1, I-2 or BP Zones, and only that specific type or types of
business are to be permitted in the zone.
   K.   Protection Of Residential Property: Where a planned unit development -
commercial/industrial development adjoins any lot or parcel of ground in any
Residential Zone, there shall be provided along the adjoining property line a
solid masonry wall six feet (6') minimum in height and a planting strip ten
feet (10') minimum in width. For buildings and structures over fifteen feet
(15') in height an additional setback shall have a one to one (1:1) ratio; in
other words, each additional foot in height requires an additional one foot
(1') setback from the property line. The landscape requirements shall be
determined by the City Planning Department to make sure the buffer area
adequately protects the adjoining residential property. (Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-
2018)
9-10E-7: COMMERCIAL - MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following provisions apply for projects which combine commercial and
residential uses within the same building. Projects which combine residential
and commercial uses within the same project but in distinct separate areas or
separate buildings are subject to the provisions in sections
9-8F-6,
9-8F-7 and
9-8F-8 of this title and section
9-10E-6 of this article as applicable.
   A.   Land Coverage: For mixed use projects, building coverage may exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the lot or parcel acreage provided that a minimum of
twenty five percent (25%) of the lot or parcel area is maintained in landscaped
area.
   B.   Density: Density shall conform to the limitations set forth in the
general plan land use map. Areas designated as commercial on the land use map
shall be considered as high density residential.
   C.   Building Setbacks: Buildings shall front the public street (or
principal street in the case of private streets) unless an exception to this
requirement is granted by the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
      1.   Front Yard: Front yard setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20'). The street side of corner lots, shall be the same as the front yard
setback.
      2.   Side And Rear Setbacks: Side and rear setbacks on interior lot lines
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') for all dwellings.
      3.   Group Dwellings: In group dwellings, no two (2) buildings may be
located closer together than ten feet (10') for one-story buildings, fifteen
feet (15') for two-story buildings, and twenty feet (20') for approved three-
story (or more) buildings.
      4.   Two-Story Buildings: For two-story (or more) buildings, the side and
rear setbacks shall be at least twenty five feet (25') along the boundary of a
Single-Family Zone, and twenty feet (20') along the boundary of other zones. An
additional ten feet (10') shall be added to the setback for each additional
story over two (2) stories.
   D.   Building Height: Building height for mixed use buildings shall not
exceed forty two feet (42') unless a greater height is approved as part of the
Planned Development Zone approval.
   E.   Landscape Requirements:
      1.   For commercial developments, the entire area between the curb and
the setback line shall be landscaped. This may consist of any combination of
plant material along with necessary walks, ingress/egress drives and other
appurtenances necessary for the development of the property. Where it otherwise
creates a hardship, the City Council, upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may allow adjustments in the landscape setback area for driveway
lanes and uncovered parking spaces; provided, that any reduction in one area
shall be made up by additional landscaping provided in another area adjacent to
the road right- of-way, so there is no overall reduction in required landscaped
area. For commercial developments, there shall be a ten foot (10') wide
landscaped area on the private lot adjacent to all public streets.
      2.   Landscape plans shall make provisions for erosion control on all
graded sites which will remain vacant after construction is completed.
      3.   Landscape plans shall indicate methods of watering, plant types and
materials to be used.
   F.   Ground Floor Uses: The ground floor uses shall consist of office,
retail, restaurant or a combination of such uses, as approved by the City
Council as part of the Planned Unit Development Zone approval.
   G.   Upper Floors: Floor area above the ground floor area shall be used for
residential dwellings, unless otherwise approved by the City Council after
considering the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
   H.   Mixed Use: Mixed use developments are not intended for small parcels
unless adjacent to an existing mixed use development. Therefore, the minimum
lot or parcel size for a mixed use development is five (5) acres. An exception
may be approved by the City Council where the Council determines that a
proposed mixed use development on less than five (5) acres is compatible with
and integrates into the surrounding area in a harmonious manner. Further, mixed
use developments combining both commercial and residential uses within the same
building are generally intended to be part of a larger commercial project.
(Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-2018)
9-10E-8: OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Public Meeting by City Council: Subsequent to review and recommendation
by the Planning Commission, the proposed Planned Unit Development Zone change
request shall be forwarded to the City Council for a public meeting to consider
official action on the zone change.
   B.   Recommendation Of Planning Commission: The Planning Commission shall
forward any recommendations for approval, disapproval or modification of the
planned unit development request as reviewed by them to the City Council to be
considered as a part of the zone change hearing.
   C.   Advertising And Procedure: The zone change request shall be advertised
and heard according to the same requirements as any other zone change request
submitted to the City Council.
   D.   Conditions Of Approval: The City Council may approve a Planned Unit
Development Zone change request only after finding that the requirements of
this title and any other ordinances or restrictions affecting the property have
been satisfied. In granting such approval, the City Council may impose and
enforce such specific conditions as to development, phasing and building
construction or maintenance and operation as it deems necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City.
   E.   Compliance With Approved Plan: All development within the Planned Unit
Development Zone shall comply with the development plan as approved and adopted
by the City Council.
   F.   Filing Of Plan And Materials: The development plan and supplementary
text materials, after adoption, shall be filed in the offices of the City, and
all development within the zone shall comply therewith, unless the development
plan and supplementary materials are amended as prescribed herein.
   G.   Final Subdivision Plat: A final subdivision plat as described in the
Subdivision Ordinance in effect at the time of application shall be submitted
for a recommendation of approval or disapproval to the Planning Commission, who
shall forward their recommendation to the City Council for final plat approval
as outlined elsewhere in this title.
   H.   Other Applicable Provisions: All other applicable provisions of this
title shall apply, i.e., mobile home or recreational vehicle requirements for
mobile or recreational vehicle developments, etc.
   I.   Time Limitations: Building permits for construction within Planned Unit
Development - Commercial/Industrial Zones must be obtained within eighteen (18)
months of the approval of a zone change to planned unit development -
commercial/industrial. If eighteen (18) months elapsed without the issuance of
building permits for the construction of the approved plans within the Planned
Unit Development Zone, all conceptual and preliminary plan approvals shall be
deemed null and void, unless an extension is granted. The applicant shall
request an extension on an approved development plan prior to the expiration of
the eighteen (18) month time limit. The Community Development Director may
approve a six (6) month extension on an approved development plan. In the case
that a second six (6) month extension is needed, the applicant shall request a
second extension on the approved development plan prior to the expiration of
the first six (6) month extension time limit. The City Council will approve or
deny the requested second extension on the development plan. In the case that
an approved development plan does expire, the zoning of the property shall
remain planned unit development, but no construction will be allowed on the
property until a new development plan is submitted and approved by the Planning
Commission and the City Council as outlined in section
9-8F-2 of this title. (Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-55, 10-12-2022)
9-10E-9: AMENDMENTS AND MODIFICATIONS:
Any amendments to the development plan shall be accomplished in the same manner
as any other amendment to this title. Revised text and/or plan shall be
submitted, along with a zone change request, to the Planning Commission and
shall be reviewed in the same manner as the initial zone change request. The
plan, as approved by the City Council, constitutes the zone, and any
significant change in the plan shall be processed as an amendment to the zone.
(Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-2018)
9-10E-10: PLAN REVIEW CONFERENCE:
   A.   Required: Following the approval of the Planned Unit Development -
Commercial/Industrial Zone change and upon request for issuance of any building
permit therein, the developer and contractor and the planning staff shall meet
together to review the requirements of the zone change and to make sure that
the developer and contractor are aware of the conditions under which the zone
change was granted.
   B.   Plans Stamped And Signed: At the plan review conferences, the plans
will be stamped and signed by the staff, developer and contractor as the
official set of construction plans from which the work will be performed.
   C.   Changes or Modifications: Any changes or modifications to the approved
plan for development during the period of construction shall first be re-
submitted to the planning staff for approval and if deemed significant and at
the discretion of the staff, returned to the Planning Commission for their
review and recommendations and to the City Council public meeting to consider
official action to amend the zone as provided for in section
9-10E-9 of this article. (Ord. 2018-03, 1-10-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-55, 10-12-
2022)
CHAPTER 11
INDUSTRIAL/BUSINESS PARK (I-1, I-2, BP) ZONES
SECTION:
9-11-1: Purpose
9-11-2: Use Regulations
9-11-3: Site Design Regulations
9-11-4: Height Regulations
9-11-5: Lot Area, Yard And Zone Area Regulations
9-11-6: Landscaping And Building Elevation Regulations
9-11-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   I-1 Zone: The objective in establishing the light industrial (I-1) zone
is to provide appropriate space for the development and operation of
warehousing, light manufacturing, fabrication of goods, wholesaling, service
and other similar commercial establishments, which are necessary and beneficial
to the area economy, in locations where uses are compatible with one another.
The intent is that these activities may be established and operate without
creating smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration or lighting to any degree
which would be offensive to residents of the city or surrounding areas.
   B.   I-2 Zone: The objective in establishing the heavy industrial (I-2) zone
is to provide appropriate space for the development and operation of
warehousing, light and heavy manufacturing, fabrication of goods, wholesaling,
service and other similar commercial establishments, which are necessary and
beneficial to the area economy, in locations where uses are compatible with one
another. The intent is that these activities may be established and operate
with the minimal creation of smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration or
lighting, and due to their location would not be significantly offensive to
residents of the city or surrounding areas.
   C.   BP Zone: The objective in establishing the business park (BP) zone is
to provide appropriate space for the development and operation of research and
development, light manufacturing, and the fabrication of goods in a controlled
and aesthetically desirable environment. The intent is that these activities
may be established and operate without creating smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound,
vibration or lighting to any degree which would be offensive to residents of
the city or surrounding areas. The zone is characterized by attractively
designed buildings, landscape areas and parking lots in a campuslike setting.
(Ord. 2007-05, 2-28-2007)
9-11-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Principal uses that are designated as permitted uses
may be allowed in new or existing structures and associated outside areas which
have received site development plan approval and have obtained occupancy
approval from the zoning administrator.
   B.   Conditional Uses: Uses that are designated as conditional uses are
subject to the conditional use approval process outlined in chapter 17 of this
title governing conditional uses.
   C.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses shall be excluded from the city:
animal byproduct plants; blast furnaces; garbage; offal and animal reduction;
incineration or processing refuse dumps; commercial hog farms; manufacturing,
compounding or processing of chlorine gas, acid, cement, lime, gypsum, plaster
of paris, creosote, fertilizer from animal byproducts, pyroxylin products;
rubber reduction; processing or treatment of fish; smelters and ore reduction;
and similar uses which give rise to excessive or offensive odor, noise, fumes,
dust, radiation or danger of explosion. (Ord. 2007-05, 2-28-2007)
   D.   List Of Uses: In the following list of possible uses, those designated
in any zone as "P" will be a permitted use. Uses designated with the letter "C"
are allowed on a conditional use basis. Uses designated as "N" will not be
permitted in that zone.
 I-1 I-2 BP
                                                                     I-1 I-2 BP
Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate C   C   C
to an approved conditional use
Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate P   P   P
to an approved permitted use
Appliance, electric, and electronic equipment maintenance and repair P   P   N
Assembly and fabrication of goods (bookbinding, electronic appliance
and/or electronic instrument assembly, printing, engraving and       P   P   P
similar type uses)
Automobile fuel stations with or without convenience stores and/or   C   P   C
automobile wash facilities
Batching and mixing plants (concrete and asphalt)                    N   C   N
Building material sales                                              P   C   N
Bulk plants (class 1 and 2 flammable liquids and gases)              C   C   N
Cabinet, laminating and woodworking shops                            C   P   N
Caretakers’ quarters, incidental to the use of the land            C   C   C
Child daycare or preschool facilities which meet all state and local C   N   C
regulations pertaining to such facilities
Construction and farm equipment rental yards and/or repair           P   P   N
Construction and farm equipment sales                                P   N   N
Contractors’ shops and storage yards                               P   P   N
Crematoriums, independent animal or human, which meet all state and  C   C   N
local regulations pertaining to crematoriums
Dry cleaning plants                                                  C   P   N
Farm supply sales                                                    P   N   N
Fertilizer and soil conditioner manufacturing, processing and sales  C   C   N
(non animal products)
Food processing, wholesale (excluding mills, the processing of fat,  P   P   N
vinegar and yeast, and the slaughter of animals)
Foundries, lightweight casting and nonferrous, without causing       C   C   N
noxious fumes or odors
Furniture upholstery                                                 P   P   N
Government/public buildings and offices (not otherwise listed)       P   P   P
Government/public maintenance and service facilities                 P   P   N
Honey extraction and processing                                      P   P   N
Hospitals, animal                                                    P   N   N
Hospitals, human                                                     N   N   C
Ice manufacturing and storage                                        P   P   N
Insulation sales and service                                         P   P   N
Laboratories                                                         P   P   P
Laundry and linen service facilities                                 C   P   N
Livestock feed processing and storage without causing odors          N   C   N
Machine shops and storage yards                                      P   P   N
Maintenance and repair of goods not otherwise listed                 C   P   N
Manufacturing, Light: An establishment engaged in the manufacture,
predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished
products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly,      P   P   N
treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage,
sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic
industrial processing
Manufacturing, Heavy: The converting of raw or partially processed
materials into a product used for further processing or
distribution. Examples of heavy manufacturing include lumber and
paper mills, truss plants, sewage treatment plants, stone, clay,     N   P   N
glass product manufacturing, and similar operations. These uses may
be conducted partially or wholly outdoors and usually create noxious
byproducts such as dust, fumes, hazardous waste products, noise,
vibration and glare
Medical cannabis cultivation or processing, Utah licensed - at least
1,000 feet from a community location and 600 feet from a primarily   P   P   N
residential zone
Medical cannabis pharmacy, Utah licensed - at least 200 feet from a  P   P   P
community location and 600 feet from a primarily residential zone
Mills (cereal, feed, flour, knitting, planing, etc.)                 N   C   N
Mobile food vendor                                                   P   P   P
Motor vehicle (automobile, recreational and truck) impound yards
which meet all state and local regulations pertaining to impound     N   C   N
yards
Motor vehicle(automobile, recreational and truck) salvage and
storage yards for dismantled (completely or partially) or wrecked    N   C   N
vehicles which meet all state and local regulations pertaining to
such yards
Motor vehicle (automobile, recreational and truck) storage           P   P   N
facilities (indoor or outdoor) for operable vehicles
Motor vehicle (automobile, recreational and truck) wash facilities   P   P   N
Motor vehicle (automobile, recreational and truck) repair (body,     P   P   N
maintenance, paint, rebuild, tire, upholstery, etc.)
Motor vehicle truck repair (body, maintenance, paint, tire,          C   P   N
upholstery)
Other uses not listed as permitted or conditional uses in other
zones, determined by the planning commission to be compatible and in *   *   *
harmony with the character and intent of these zones, according to
their designated and approved development plans
Packaging, processing and treating of goods not otherwise listed     C   C   C
Pest control and extermination establishments                        C   P   N
Portable restroom rental establishments                              N   C   N
Public parks                                                         P   N   P
Public utility maintenance and service facilities                    C   P   N
Recreational/athletic enterprises, indoor only (go-cart track,
climbing walls, ice skating rink, roller skating rink, soccer, and   P   P   P
other recreational sport/entertainment type activities, but not
including spectator oriented arenas)
Research and development facilities, including manufacturing         C   C   C
processes
Restaurants                                                          N   N   C
Sandblasting facilities                                              C   P   N
Schools, business                                                    N   N   P
Schools, colleges and universities                                   N   N   C
Schools, medical                                                     N   N   C
Schools, technical                                                   C   C   C
Septic tank cleaning/pumping establishments                          N   C   N
Sexually oriented businesses which meet all state and local          P   P   N
regulations pertaining to such businesses
Sheet metal shops (including retinning)                              C   P   N
Sign shops (manufacturing, maintenance, paint, etc.)                 C   P   N
Solid waste service providers (including dumpster rentals)           N   C   N
Storage units                                                        C   P   N
Telemarketing centers                                                N   N   C
Tire recapping or retreading facilities                              C   P   N
Truck fuel stations (with or without convenience stores)             C   C   N
Truck terminals                                                      C   P   N
Welding shops                                                        C   P   N
Wholesale distributing and warehousing                               C   P   N
 
    * - Request for these uses will be by application, through the public
hearing process and request will be considered at a regularly scheduled
planning commission meeting. The planning commission may add conditions as part
of the approval process.
(Ord. 2012-12, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 2014-10, 2-26-2014; Ord. 2015-19, 6-24-
2015; Ord. 2020-07, 3-11-2020)
9-11-3: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All uses are subject to the following site design regulations and the chapters
of this code governing land use supplementary and qualifying regulations, off
street parking requirements, and any affected overlay zone:
   A.   Distance To Specific Zone Boundary: Notwithstanding the setback
requirements of section
9-11-5 of this chapter, no building or buildings which house processing or
assembly activities that are fully contained within said buildings shall be
located less than fifty feet (50') from any residential or agricultural zone
boundary.
   B.   Storage; Fencing: In the I-1 and I-2 zones, all storage, except
passenger vehicles in running order, shall be stored within an enclosed
building or within an enclosure surrounded by a solid decorative fence or wall
(chainlink fencing with slats is not considered a solid fence or wall for the
purposes set forth in this chapter) of not less than six feet (6') in height
when adjacent to an agricultural or residential zone boundary. The materials
and colors of the fence or wall shall be compatible with their associated
buildings. Under conditional use permit review, the city shall determine if a
solid fence or wall is required when adjacent to any other zone boundary. Also,
no material or merchandise shall be stored at a height to exceed eighteen feet
(18') unless approved by the city with a conditional use permit. All uses which
will maintain outdoor storage of any materials shall keep such materials in an
orderly manner and said products shall not project above the fence or wall
within twenty feet (20') from any residential or agricultural zone boundary. In
order to protect public safety, if there are any other codes, ordinances, laws
or other applicable regulations requiring greater separation of stored
materials or processes from adjoining uses, the greater distance of required
setback shall prevail. If products stored exceed six feet (6') in height, those
products shall be set back from an agricultural or residential zone boundary
according to the following chart:
   I-1 Zone And I-2 Zone Storage Setback Requirements
   When Adjacent To Agricultural Or Residential Zone Boundaries
   C.   Outdoor Activities: In the I-1 and I-2 zones, notwithstanding the
setback requirements of section
9-11-5 of this chapter, no outdoor assembly, construction, repair or
manufacturing activities shall be located less than fifty feet (50') from any
agricultural or residential zone boundary.
   D.   Storage And Activities In BP Zone: In the BP zone, storage, assembly,
construction, repair or manufacturing activities must take place within an
enclosed building. Outdoor storage and activities of this nature are
prohibited.
   E.   Fence Required When: Where any I-1, I-2 or BP zone adjoins any
agricultural or residential zone boundary, there shall be provided and
maintained along such property line a solid decorative fence or wall of not
less than six feet (6') in height. The materials and colors of the fence or
wall shall be compatible with their associated buildings.
   F.   Parking Area Lighting: All outside parking areas shall be lighted
during evening business hours. All lights shall be designed to direct light
away from adjacent properties.
   G.   Screening: Except for the I-2 zone, loading dock areas shall be
screened from public view with a solid decorative fence or wall of sufficient
height to provide the required screening. In the I-1, I-2 and BP zones, refuse
collection areas shall be screened from public view with a solid decorative
fence or wall of sufficient height to provide the required screening. The
materials and colors of the fence or wall shall be compatible with their
associated buildings. (Ord. 2007-05, 2-28-2007)
9-11-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall be erected to a height greater than forty-five
feet (45'), unless otherwise approved by the city council. (Ord. 2007-05, 2-28-
2007; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 2-12-2020)
9-11-5: LOT AREA, YARD AND ZONE AREA REGULATIONS:
The setback requirements when adjacent to agricultural or residential zone
boundaries shall be as shown in section
9-11-3 of this chapter. Otherwise the minimum lot area, setbacks and zone area
requirements shall be as follows:
  I-1 I-2 BP
                  I-1     I-2     BP
Minimum lot area  None    None    None
Minimum setbacks:                
 Front           20 feet 20 feet 30 feet
 Side1           10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
 Street side     20 feet 20 feet 30 feet
 Rear1           10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Minimum zone area 3 acres 3 acres 5 acres
 
Note:
    1.   When not adjacent to an agricultural or residential zone boundary, and
if approved by the city with a conditional use permit, the interior side yard
and rear yard setbacks may be reduced or eliminated.
(Ord. 2007-05, 2-28-2007)
9-11-6: LANDSCAPING AND BUILDING ELEVATION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Plans shall include provisions for the installation and maintenance of
landscaping as cited in this section and in the chapters of this code governing
land use supplementary and qualifying regulations, off street parking
requirements, and any affected overlay zone. In the I-1 and I-2 zones, a
minimum ten foot (10') wide landscape strip shall be installed along all street
frontages. Where a wall is installed along a street frontage, the landscape
strip shall be increased to a minimum of thirty feet (30'). In the BP zone, a
minimum thirty foot (30') wide landscape strip shall be installed along all
street frontages.
   B.   Additional landscaping shall be required, in types and quantities to be
determined by the city, if said landscaping is determined necessary to
adequately screen and protect adjoining residential property from industrial
uses identified in the development plan.
   C.   Roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened on all sides. The
materials and colors of the screening surfaces shall be compatible with their
associated buildings.
   D.   When visible from an adjacent public street, the building elevations
shall include recessed or articulated surfaces (beyond the wall material
itself), columns and beams to help visually segment the walls. A variation in
materials, colors, textures and rooflines that convey a sense of order is
encouraged. Narrow parapet sections that extend beyond the main roofline and
the adjoining parapet sections for the purpose of focusing on an entrance or
other portion of a building shall be topped with a roof section that extends
back over the main roof of the building. (Ord. 2007-05, 2-28-2007)
CHAPTER 12
OVERLAY ZONES
ARTICLE A. HILLSIDE PROTECTION OVERLAY (HP) ZONE
SECTION:
9-12A-1: Purpose And Intent
9-12A-2: Applicability
9-12A-3: Application Procedure
9-12A-4: Development Standards
9-12A-5: Hillside Review Board
9-12A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the hillside protection overlay (HP) zone is to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents while
protecting and preserving significant scenic resources for the long term
benefit of Washington City as a whole. This is facilitated by establishing a
hillside review board (HRB) as a recommending body to staff, the planning
commission and the city council. The HRB will review proposed projects in the
HP zone based on this article. Additionally, the purpose of this HP zone is to
further the goals and policies of the general plan in relation to land use,
densities, open space and community image.
   B.   Intent: The standards set forth herein are intended to achieve the
following objectives:
      1.   Minimize adverse soil and slope instability; decrease the potential
for erosion; and prohibit activities and uses which would result in the
degradation of fragile soils and steep slopes.
      2.   Protect and preserve the visual resources which are of significant
value to the community. Such resources include, but are not limited to, major
hillsides, hilltops, ridges and ridgelines, knolls, mesas, cuestas and
escarpments, boulder outcroppings and large boulders, canyons and natural
drainage areas, and other areas of historical or visual significance. Retain
the integrity of significant on site and off site views to or from these
resources.
      3.   Minimize the adverse effects of grading and cut and fill operations;
avoid highly visible scarring of hillsides; and protect natural vegetation,
sensitive hydrologic features, and visually prominent landforms.
      4.   Discourage mass grading and terracing of large pads but permit
flexibility for reasonable development practices as appropriate.
      5.   Establish a hillside development process that requires applicants to
select suitable development sites on their property through the use of slope
calculations, maximum land holding capacity, or development agreements to
determine the appropriate density, intensity, design and location of structures
and improvements.
      6.   Provide hillside development standards that maximize the positive
impacts of site sensitive design, grading, landscape architecture and building
architecture that will protect the inherent scenic value in the proposed
projects subject to this article.
      7.   Permit the flexibility to modify or remove relatively small
topographic features which have slopes distinctly different from surrounding
property in order to facilitate reasonably efficient development in a
particular area. The exclusion of such features or areas shall not be contrary
to the overall purpose of this article.
      8.   Encourage the appropriate location, design and development of
proposed projects which provide enhanced human enjoyment, while protecting
people and property from hazardous conditions, including rockfalls, rolling
boulders, unstable slopes, landslides, mudslides, and erosion.
      9.   Minimize the impacts of development to the surrounding natural
environment by controlling the location, intensity, pattern, design,
construction techniques, and materials of development. (Ord. 2008-23, 6-11-
2008)
9-12A-2: APPLICABILITY:
The standards and procedures established by this article shall apply to all
lands lying within the HP zone as delineated in exhibit A attached to the
ordinance codified herein. In addition, all properties seeking annexation or
preapproval of projects pending annexation to the city will be evaluated
according to the standards and procedures outlined in this article.
   A.   Hillside Protection Overlay (HP) Zone: The HP zone is delineated in the
hillside protection overlay (HP) zone exhibit A attached to the ordinance
codified herein. The HP zone established by this article shall overlay the
existing zoning classifications listed in this title. Except for the clustering
provisions that are a part of this article, in cases of conflict between the
provisions of this article and other established regulations, the most
restrictive provisions shall apply. The exact location of the HP zone boundary
may be refined jointly by the city and the applicant as detailed topographical
information is closely examined at the time of application review and
processing. The precise location of the HP zone boundary shall remain
consistent with the intent of this article, especially in regard to the
protection of key natural features and edge conditions.
   B.   Exemptions From HP Zone Requirements: The following actions and
activities are exempt from the application procedure of this article. However,
while these actions are exempt from specific requirements, the development
standards necessary to accomplish the purpose and intent of this article shall
be met (e.g., the mitigation of disturbed areas that are not planned for
development in the foreseeable future).
      1.   Construction or minor excavation that does not require a grading
permit or a building permit. However, development plans shall be submitted to
the community development department for city review to determine possible
mitigation requirements prior to any actions or activities taking place.
      2.   The construction and installation (trenching, utility construction
and backfilling) of underground utility systems.
      3.   The regrading of existing lots for landscape installation provided
such regraded area is within the buildable area of the development.
      4.   Pool/spa construction that does not involve the construction of any
retaining walls over four feet (4') in height, whether or not such retaining
walls are part of the pool structure.
      5.   Additions to existing structures and/or construction of accessory
structures within the buildable area of a lot unless a grading permit for
establishment of same is required.
      6.   Any project that has received final city approval prior to the
effective date of this article, provided that such permit or approval has not
expired, is not otherwise revoked, and is in compliance with the HP zone
requirements that this article supersedes.
      7.   The construction of a public street identified in the Washington
City general plan and/or transportation master plan that is not part of any
overall development project (e.g., a street proposed primarily for improved
circulation within the city and not to provide access to any particular parcel
or development).
   C.   Hillside Classification Standards: Each slope category range delineates
the relative suitability of land for development.
      1.   Categories: The slope categories are described as follows:
         a.   0 percent to 20 percent; flat to gently rolling land: Development
with grading is permitted in this slope category. Padded building sites are
permitted; however, on slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%), techniques
such as contour grading, split level architectural prototypes where feasible,
or grading for the structure pad only, shall be used to reduce cut and fill.
         b.   20.01 percent to 25 percent; moderate hillside: Special hillside
architectural and design techniques that minimize grading and harmonize with
the built and natural environments are required in this slope category.
Architectural prototypes and infrastructure elements are expected to complement
the natural landform by using techniques required herein. Impact of streets and
trails is to be minimized by following natural contours where practicable.
         c.   25.01 percent to 30 percent; hillside: Development within this
slope category shall be limited to slopes where it can be demonstrated that
safety, environmental, and aesthetic impacts can be minimized. The use of
planning and design techniques such as larger lots, variable setbacks, and
appropriate building structural techniques (e.g., stepped slabs, pole
foundations, etc.) are expected. Structures shall blend with the natural
environment through their shape, materials, and colors. Impact of streets and
trails are to be minimized by following natural contours where practicable.
         d.   30.01 percent to 40 percent; steep hillside: This is a sensitive
slope condition and development is prohibited unless a specific exception is
allowed by the city as outlined in this article.
         e.   Greater than 40 percent; mountainous: This is a severe slope
condition and development is prohibited unless a specific exception is allowed
by the city as outlined in this article.
      2.   Restrictions And Incentives: Both restrictions on and incentives for
potential development apply to the HP zone in order to preserve the character
of the natural terrain as much as possible. The following provisions shall be
applied to development within the HP zone:
   SLOPE, MAXIMUM DENSITY, AND REQUIRED OPEN SPACE
 
Slope Category   Residential Zones                              Nonresiden-tial
(Percent Natural                                                Zones
Slope)           Maximum Dwelling Density Credits Required Open Required Open
                 Units Allowed1,2 Available3      Space4        Space4
                    Underlying
0% - 20%            zoning     n/a             n/a           n/a
                 applies
20.01% - 25%     3 du/acre        n/a             n/a           n/a
25.01% - 30%     2 du/acre        n/a             70%           70%
30.01% - 40%5    0                1 du/acre       100%          100%
40.01% plus5     0                n/a             100%          100%
 
Notes:
1.   While the maximum number of dwelling units allowed may be less than
allowed by the underlying zoning designation, the number of dwelling units
allowed in each slope category shall not exceed the maximum number of dwelling
units allowed by the underlying zone. (See notes 3 and 4 of this table for
exceptions.)
2.   Allowed dwelling units transferred to a lower slope category are entitled
to a steep slope protection bonus (see subsection D of this section).
3.   Density credits are equivalent to dwelling units and are valid only when
transferred to an area within a slope category of 30 percent or less.
Transferred density credits may also be entitled to a steep slope protection
bonus (see subsection D of this section). Transferred density credits are
permitted in addition to the maximum number of allowed dwelling units in the
receiving slope category.
4.   A percentage of the total land area in some slope categories as indicated
shall be dedicated as permanent undisturbed open space, and the allowed
development and dwelling units (if any) shall be clustered on the remaining
land area (unless a specific exception is allowed by the city as outlined in
this article). The percentage of open space area required is based on the
overall development area rather than per lot. Any previously disturbed areas
that are to be classified as permanent open space shall be reclaimed to blend
with the surrounding terrain and native vegetation.
5.   Except for the reclamation of previously disturbed hillsides, hillside
slopes calculated to be greater than 30 percent shall not be disturbed (unless
a specific exception is allowed by the city as outlined in this article) and
shall be designated on site plans and subdivision plats as permanent
undisturbed open space. Areas with slopes greater than 40 percent shall not be
included in the calculations for determining open space for a zoning district
that has an open space requirement; however, dedicated open space areas with
slopes of 40 percent or less may be counted toward the open space requirement.
      3.   Exceptions To Slope Category Limitations: Large contiguous land
areas of 30.01 percent plus slopes that comprise prominent landforms and
ridgeline features that express the significant or unique character of a
property shall not be disturbed. However, other land areas of 30.01 percent
plus slopes may be disturbed or significantly altered if the applicant
demonstrates to the city general compliance with the purpose and intent of this
article regarding the preservation of prominent hillside and ridgeline
features. This compliance shall be demonstrated in a slope analysis exhibit and
through other supporting images or data provided by the applicant (see
subsection 9-12A-3D of this article). Examples of such landforms may include,
but are not limited to, existing manmade slopes, singular or isolated
topographic features, the side slopes of small washes, and minor rock
outcroppings that are not a part of prominent hilltops or ridgelines.
   D.   Clustering And Steep Slope Protection Bonus For Residential Zones: Each
allowed dwelling unit that is transferred from a higher slope category to a
location within a lower slope category land area (based on the slope analysis
exhibit outlined in this article) is entitled to a steep slope protection
dwelling unit bonus. This encourages the clustering of dwelling units, the
preservation of open space and the protection of steep slopes and prominent
ridgelines. The density transfer shall be indicated on a preliminary plat.
Transferred density credits are also entitled to any steep slope protection
bonus as outlined below. The steep slope protection bonus is as follows:
   STEEP SLOPE PROTECTION BONUS DWELLING UNITS
Slope Category To Slope Bonus Dwelling Unit Per   Total Dwelling Unit Including
Category Transfer       Dwelling Unit Transferred Each Dwelling Unit
                                                  Transferred
Slope Category To Slope     Bonus Dwelling Unit Per   Total Dwelling Unit
Category Transfer           Dwelling Unit Transferred Including Each Dwelling
                                                      Unit Transferred
From 20.01% - 25% to 0% -   0.25                      1.25
20%
From 25.01% - 30% to 20.01% 0.25                      1.25
- 25%
From 25.01% - 30% to 0% -   0.5                       1.5
20%
From 30.01% - 40% to 25.01% 0                         1
- 30%
From 30.01% - 40% to 20.01% 0.25                      1.25
- 25%
From 30.01% - 40% to 0% -   0.5                       1.5
20%
From 40%+ to 30.01% - 40%   0                         0
From 40%+ to 25.01% - 30%   0                         0
From 40%+ to 20.01% - 25%   0                         0
From 40%+ to 0% - 20%       0                         0
 
      1.   Density transfers may occur without a zone change to the receiving
parcel even though the resulting lot sizes or density may exceed the limits of
the underlying zone, provided that the use in the receiving parcel is
consistent with the receiving parcel's zoning.
      2.   Development standards such as minimum lot size, lot width and
setbacks for structures in the receiving parcel's underlying zone may allow
flexibility for the clustering of units in the HP zone. The guiding principle
for allowing such development standards to be less than the minimum
requirements in the receiving parcel's underlying zone is that the overall
development is designed to leave as much of the natural terrain in its
undisturbed condition as possible. However, in some cases and certain locations
development standards for structures may need to be greater than the minimum
standards in order to uphold safety and general welfare standards or to
preserve a prominent or unique feature of the natural terrain. The use of unit
clustering and the flexibility of these standards are to be shown on the
conceptual plan, and setbacks and maximum disturbance areas shall be listed and
shown on the approved site plans and subdivision plats.
      3.   For developments that use the steep slope protection bonus and
clustering provisions outlined herein, a development agreement between the city
and the developer shall be executed outlining the provisions upon which the
development was approved, including the responsibility for maintaining
permanent open space. (Ord. 2008-23, 6-11-2008)
9-12A-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Applicable Provisions: The application procedure described in chapter 2
of this title for permitted uses, chapter 17 of this title for conditional
uses, chapter 8, article F of this title for planned unit developments, and the
subdivision ordinance for subdivision plats shall be adhered to as described in
the underlying zoning district.
   B.   Permits Required: No person shall grade or construct upon property
defined in the HP zone without first obtaining proper permits issued by
Washington City. This includes an HP zone permit, which shall be issued by the
individual or body designated to grant approval upon completion of an HP zone
plan review and approval by the planning commission or the city council.
Development plans in the HP zone may be approved subject to conditions. The
individual or body designated to recommend or grant approval shall evaluate
each plan and recommend or require, as the case may be, corrections and
conditions. Plans shall demonstrate compliance with adopted building and
grading codes in addition to this code.
   C.   Application And Cost Recovery: Application shall be made for HP zone
plan review upon the forms provided by the city. The application shall be
accompanied by the required reports described below. Costs for city staff
review and approval of required documents under this section shall be recovered
through a fee established by resolution of the city council.
   D.   Required Documents: The following documents are required to be
submitted to the individual or body designated to grant approval. Conditions of
approval may be established based on the findings of such documents. These
conditions shall become a part of the record and be considered binding upon the
applicant as part of the approved plan. The HRB shall review the submittal and
provide a recommendation of denial, approval or conditional approval to city
staff, the planning commission, or the city council, as the case may be.
      1.   Slope Analysis Exhibit: A detailed slope analysis exhibit shall be
prepared for all parcels containing areas determined to be within the HP zone
as defined herein.
         a.   For the slope analysis, the applicant shall use a base
topographical map of the subject site, prepared and signed by a Utah licensed
civil engineer or land surveyor. This base topographical map shall include all
adjoining properties within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the site
boundaries to portray the site's context.
         b.   The slope analysis calculations shall be prepared by a Utah
licensed professional who is proficient in creating the exhibits with the use
of computer software designed for preparing said exhibits. This slope analysis
shall be prepared using CAD based or GIS based software specifically designed
for such purpose. Contours on the exhibits shall be prepared using no greater
than two foot (2') contour intervals at a scale of not less than one inch
equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'). The slope analysis exhibit shall delineate
slope bands, with contrasting colors, for the following slope ranges: Zero
percent (0%) to twenty percent (20%), 20.01 percent to twenty five percent
(25%), 25.01 percent to thirty percent (30%), 30.01 percent to forty percent
(40%), and 40.01 percent or greater.
         c.   The slope analysis exhibit shall include a tabulation chart
indicating the land area in acres within each slope category as identified
herein.
         d.   Also included in the slope analysis exhibit shall be a sufficient
number of slope cross sections to clearly illustrate the extent of the proposed
grading. The slope cross sections shall:
            (1)   Be drawn at the same scale and indexed, or keyed, to the
existing topography, grading plan, and project site map. Both vertical and
horizontal scales shall be indicated and be of the same scale. The slope cross
sections shall extend at least one hundred fifty feet (150') outside the
project site boundaries to clearly show impact on adjacent property. Slopes
shall be calculated in intervals no greater than forty feet (40') along the
cross sections.
            (2)   At a minimum, be drawn along those locations of the project
site where:
               (A)   The greatest alteration of existing topography is
proposed.
               (B)   The most intense or massive development is proposed.
               (C)   The site is most visible from surrounding land uses.
               (D)   Grading will impact natural drainage conditions.
            (3)   At least two (2) of the cross sections shall be roughly
parallel to each other and roughly perpendicular to existing contour lines.
            (4)   The slope cross sections shall be stamped and signed by a
Utah licensed professional proficient in creating such cross sections
indicating the datum, source, and scale of topographic data used in the cross
sections. The signer shall attest to the fact that the cross sections have been
accurately calculated and identified.
            (5)   The slope cross sections shall show existing and proposed
topography, structures, and roadways. Proposed topography and features shall be
drawn with a dashed line. Existing topography and features shall be drawn with
a solid line.
      2.   Concept Plan: The concept plan shall be reviewed by the individual
or body designated to recommend or grant approval. Any application for a use in
the HP zone shall include a conceptual plan of the proposed development which
includes the following:
         a.   General Information:
            (1)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
            (2)   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the persons
responsible for the preparation of any required reports.
            (3)   Date of application.
            (4)   Signatures of the owners of the site or of an authorized
representative.
         b.   Vicinity Map: A vicinity map showing the location of the site in
relationship to the surrounding area, watercourses, hillsides, prominent
geographic features, roads and other significant features and structures.
         c.   Plan: A plan of the proposed development at a scale of not less
than one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') illustrating:
            (1)   Boundary Lines: Boundary lines of the site and development to
be made thereon.
            (2)   Preservation Areas: Any identified preservation areas within
which development shall be prohibited.
            (3)   Improvements: All existing and proposed improvements.
            (4)   Zone Limits: The limits of the HP zone if only a portion of
the property is within the HP zone.
         d.   Development Type: The type and nature of the development.
         e.   Goals: The goals and objectives of the developer.
         f.   Compatibility With City Plans: The development's relationship to
and compatibility with the general plan and other city master plans.
         g.   Existing Conditions Photographs: Digital photographs of the site
as it exists at time of application. The photographs shall include the number
of views adequate to depict the visual character of the entire site and any
special features, especially prominent ridgelines or landforms and any
topographical areas with steep slopes and/or unique topographical features
planned for disturbance. A minimum of three (3) views of the area of the
proposed development as seen from surrounding properties shall be included.
      3.   Technical Reports:
         a.   Grading Plan: A grading plan, at a scale of not less than one
inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'), shall show the existing and proposed
contours and cross sections, and proposed areas of cut and fill. A legend with
appropriate symbols which shall include, but not be limited to, the following
items: top of wall, top of curb, high point, low point, elevation of
significant trees, spot elevations, and pad and finished floor elevations.
Accurate contours, at no greater than two foot (2') contour intervals, showing
the topography of the existing ground extending at least one hundred fifty feet
(150') outside all boundary lines of the site, or more if needed to
sufficiently show on and off site drainage, shall also be included. The grading
plan shall include a description of the import and export methods to be
employed in acquisition or disposal of soil and other material, including the
location of the disposal site. A schedule shall be included showing when each
stage of the project will be completed, including the estimated starting and
completion dates.
         b.   Drainage Report And Plan: A drainage control plan and report
shall be prepared by a Utah licensed professional civil engineer, and must be
consistent with all other reports required in this section or other reports
required in applicable sections of the building code.
            (1)   The drainage plan and report shall show all surface and
subsurface natural drainage systems and facilities, walls, curbing or other
erosion protection devices to be constructed in connection with or as part of
the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and estimated
runoff of the area to be served by any drainage systems or facilities.
            (2)   Each lot or parcel shall be designed in such a manner that
stormwater or nuisance water shall not adversely impact other properties in the
area. Property development shall not unnecessarily cause a natural drainage
channel to be filled in, obstructed or diverted. When modification to a natural
drainage channel is proposed within the development, such changes will be
addressed in the drainage study and shown on the improvement plans, and the
developer may be required to dedicate rights of way or record drainage
easements for structures and/or improvements needed to carry storm runoff in
the event approval is given for the proposed modifications.
            (3)   All drainage systems shall be separate and independent from
the sanitary sewer system.
            (4)   Drainage and flood control shall be designed in conformance
with applicable city and state drainage, flood control and engineering
standards, and shall comply with the city's stormwater master plan. Detention
or retention features shall be designed on site to limit conveyance of the
stormwater from a 100-year frequency storm event onto streets or stormwater
drainage easements without creating flood hazards to dwellings.
            (5)   If an underground pipe system is required, it shall be
designed to carry a 10-year storm at a minimum. Major hydraulic structures
shall be designed to carry a 25-year storm at a minimum. The minimum storm
drain size shall be ten inches (10").
            (6)   Detention or retention shall be required where it is suitable
as confirmed by all required reports. Detention basins shall be used for the
purpose of eliminating the effects of the peak runoff of storms and releasing
water flow at the preproject or approved rate.
         c.   Improvements Plan: This plan shall show any existing and proposed
buildings or structures and cross sections of the areas where they are or will
be located, and all proposed roads, utilities, easements and drainage channels
on the property where the work is to be performed. Also, the location of any
buildings or structures on adjacent property which may be affected by grading
operations shall be shown.
         d.   Geotechnical Report: The "Geologic Hazard And Adverse Conditions,
St. George - Hurricane Metropolitan Area" document and maps prepared by the
Utah geological survey in 2007, shall be reviewed when considering a site for
development. A Utah licensed professional engineering geologist or a Utah
licensed professional engineer who is trained and experienced in the practice
of geotechnical engineering shall prepare the geotechnical report. The
geotechnical report shall include the following:
            (1)   A general description of the topography, drainage conditions,
surface vegetation, and surface features such as rock outcroppings, existing
structures, debris, and unstable or wet conditions.
            (2)   A location map showing the footprints of the planned
improvements and the exploration locations with elevations.
            (3)   An evaluation of the subsurface conditions, including a
complete record of the explorations, laboratory test results, and the elevation
of the water table, if encountered.
            (4)   Identification of potential geotechnical constraints on the
project site (such as expansive rock and soil, collapsible soil, shallow
bedrock and caliche, gypsiferous rock and soil, potentially unstable rock or
soil units, shallow ground water, and windblown sand), and recommendations for
their mitigation.
            (5)   The locations of any springs and seeps on the project site,
and recommendations concerning the effects of the springs and seeps on the
proposed development.
            (6)   Specific geotechnical recommendations for the design and
construction of the proposed project, which shall include the following:
               (A)   A general assessment of the requirements needing to be met
to develop the proposed site.
               (B)   Site preparation and grading, and the suitability of the
on site soils for use as structural fill.
               (C)   Stable cut and fill slopes, including recommendations
concerning the effects of material removal and the introduction of water, both
on and off site.
               (D)   Recommendations for foundation type and design criteria,
including, but not limited to, bearing capacity of natural or compacted soils,
provisions to mitigate the effects of expansive, compressible or collapsible
soils, differential settlement and varying soil strength, and the effects of
adjacent loads.
               (E)   Anticipated total and differential settlement.
               (F)   Special design and construction considerations, as
necessary, such as the excavation and replacement of unsuitable materials,
excavation difficulties, stabilization, or special foundation provisions for
problem soil conditions.
               (G)   Design criteria for restrained and unrestrained retaining
walls.
               (H)   Soil corrosion.
               (I)   Moisture protection and surface drainage.
            (7)   Detailed design recommendations for any planned rockery
walls, mechanically stabilized earth (MSE) walls, and/or reinforced fill
slopes.
            (8)   A detailed slope stability analysis may be required if
potentially unstable rock or soil units or slope creep have been identified on
the site. The analysis shall include, but not be limited to, a determination of
residual shear strength, soil saturation and treatment methods required to
provide a minimum safety factor of 1.5 for any identified slope within the
project boundary.
         e.   Geology Report: The "Geologic Hazard And Adverse Conditions, St.
George - Hurricane Metropolitan Area" document and maps prepared by the Utah
geological survey in 2007, shall be reviewed when considering a site for
development. A Utah licensed professional engineering geologist or a Utah
licensed professional engineer who is trained and experienced in the practice
of geotechnical engineering shall prepare the geology report. The geology
report may be included in the geotechnical report, and shall include the
following:
            (1)   The location and boundaries of the project site and its
general geologic setting.
            (2)   A description of the specific geologic conditions at the
site.
            (3)   Identification of potential geologic hazards (such as faults,
landslides, rockfall, flooding and liquefaction).
            (4)   Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effects of the
geologic conditions and any potential hazards on the proposed development, and
recommendations to minimize any hazard to life or property, or any adverse
impact on the natural environment.
         f.   Landscape Plan: A landscape plan and report shall be prepared by
a Utah licensed professional landscape architect. The report shall include a
description of existing vegetation, a plan of any proposed revegetation of the
site or modifications to existing vegetation, and a plan for the preservation
of existing vegetation during construction activities.
         g.   Other Reports: Other reports deemed necessary by the individual
or body designated to recommend or grant approval to assure the health, safety
and welfare of the project residents or general public may be requested from
the applicant by written specification. These may include phase I or phase II
environmental hazardous materials studies, biological resources reports, or
other reports. Such reports shall be submitted with other application
materials.
         h.   Grading Limit Monuments: Permanent monuments shall be installed
to permit monitoring and enforcement of the grading limits during and after
construction activities. The monuments shall be installed at locations
determined by the individual or body designated to recommend or grant approval
in accordance with the specifications included in the latest edition of the
"Washington City Construction Design Standards". Monuments shall be installed
and preserved during construction at the sole expense of the applicant.
      4.   Additional Exhibits Or Reports: The individual or body designated to
recommend or grant approval may require additional visual analysis exhibits or
other reports to adequately address unique circumstances and comprehend the
full impact of any proposed development in the HP zone.
         a.   The city may, at its discretion, require additional information
such as line of sight/view analysis for particular features or analysis of
views to/from specific locations. City staff shall determine the number of any
additional exhibits required and their locations and perspectives by visiting
the site with the developer's representative.
         b.   Furthermore, in some cases the city may require the preparation
of computer generated three-dimensional imaging or photo embedded visual
simulations to adequately depict the postdevelopment conditions and their
impact on the visual character of the site. Included shall be depictions of any
topographical areas with steep slopes and/or unique topographical features
planned for disturbance, illustrated at a distance and perspective that will
adequately illustrate postdevelopment conditions along with the proposed
mitigation for development. In tandem with these exhibits, predevelopment
digital photographs of the site, showing identical views utilized in the
postdevelopment computer generated three-dimensional imaging exhibits or photo
embedded visual simulations, shall be included for comparison. City staff shall
determine the number of computer generated exhibits and their locations and
perspective by visiting the site with the developer's representative.
   E.   Approval Required Before Excavation: It shall be unlawful to excavate
or grade any area within the HP zone prior to final approval of the site plan
for permitted uses and conditional uses and approval of the preliminary plat or
minor subdivision plat for subdivisions by the planning commission and city
council, and prior to final approval of the required construction drawings for
said site plans and subdivisions by city staff, and prior to the installation
of the grading limit monuments as required.
   F.   Bonding: The individual or body designated to grant approval shall
require the applicant to post a bond to ensure completion of revegetation
projects, the stabilization of a grading site, cuts and fills, the construction
of stormwater drainage facilities, and other hazard mitigation measures
required in the approval of an application. Such bonds shall comply with the
provisions outlined in section
10-5-4 of this code.
   G.   Appeals: In the event of a disagreement with the requirements imposed
by city staff or the planning commission designated to grant approval in
connection with this article, or the determined lack of completeness of the
required submittals of this article, an applicant may appeal the matter to the
board of adjustment. The board of adjustment may uphold, modify or rescind any
requirements imposed by city staff or the planning commission, but must ensure
that the purpose and intent of this article are met. In the event the applicant
is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council pertaining to a hillside
development permit request, the applicant may appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction as permitted by Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-704.
   H.   Subdivisions Of Record: The requirements of this article shall not
apply to developments or subdivisions which were approved prior to the
enactment of this article. Projects which have received preliminary plat
approval from the planning commission or city council, as applicable, shall be
considered approved for the purposes of this article. Projects approved prior
to adoption of this article shall be governed by the statutes under the
previous hillside protection overlay (HP) zone ordinance.
   I.   Plan Certification: The individual or body designated to grant approval
shall certify the concept plan and issue a hillside development permit
following approval by the planning commission and city council. The following
technical reports and plans shall be certified as described prior to final plat
approval, certification of the concept plan and issuance of a hillside
development permit or building permit.
      1.   Grading Plan Certification: Upon completion of rough grading work
and prior to any excavation for foundations or structures, an as graded plan
prepared and certified by the Utah licensed civil engineer who prepared the
approved grading plans shall be submitted to the community development and
public works departments for review and approval. The as graded plans shall
include original ground surface elevations, as graded surface elevations and
all other features that were a part of the approved grading plan. The engineer
shall provide certification on the as graded plan that the work was done in
accordance with the approved grading plan and the city's grading requirements.
      2.   Landscape Plan Certification: Landscape and irrigation plans shall
be prepared by a licensed landscape architect and shall be submitted to and
approved by the community development department. A Utah licensed landscape
architect shall certify that the plans comply with the city's water
conservation and landscape requirements.
      3.   Drainage Plan Certification: The drainage plan shall be approved by
the city engineer. The plan shall be prepared in conformance with guidelines
available in the city engineer's office. The point of location where the
natural drainage channel enters and leaves the property may not be changed
without approval of the city engineer.
      4.   Construction Drawings And Improvements Plan Certification: The
construction drawings and improvements plan shall be reviewed and approved by
the city engineer. The city engineer shall verify that any existing buildings
or structures, and all roads, easements and drainage channels on the property
where the work is to be performed or on adjacent properties is accurately
illustrated and described.
      5.   Other Certification: Other reports deemed necessary by the
individual or body designated to grant approval may require certification. If
necessary, any requirements for approval will be described at the time of the
initial written request for additional technical reports, and certification
will depend on the procedure, conditions, or terms described therein.
   J.   Verification Of Compliance: For developments on a development parcel
applicable to this code, as defined in section
9-12A-2 of this article, certification by a Utah licensed engineer that the
development has been completed in compliance with the approved hillside
development permit, including satisfaction of any conditions contained in the
permit, shall be required. Restoration bonds shall not be released, and
certificates of occupancy shall be withheld for such a development, until such
certification has been received by the city engineer.
   K.   Penalties: In addition to the penalties outlined in section
9-2-9 of this title, a city officer from the community development or public
works departments shall have the right to order a halt to construction of any
improvements within an HP zone where, in the officer's discretion, there exists
a condition which violates, or threatens to violate, any provisions of this
article. Such suspension of construction activities shall continue until the
city officer is satisfied that measures have been implemented for substantial
compliance with this article. The developer may appeal to the board of
adjustment. The city may enter legal proceedings to require any person who
violates this article to fund and return a site to the condition found prior to
any disturbance, with a city official to determine when this natural state has
been achieved, or to set specific requirements necessary to achieve the natural
and restored state. Legal proceedings may also seek to impose and collect a
fine in order to recover staff costs incurred through addressing any violation
of this section. (Ord. 2008-23, 6-11-2008)
9-12A-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All proposed development and improvements within the HP zone are subject to the
following required development standards. These standards are intended to
provide a framework for development that is sensitive to the unique
characteristics of hillside properties. Their purpose is not to discourage
proposals for innovative or alternative methods of design in a hillside area;
innovation is encouraged as long as the end result is one which respects
significant landform features and is consistent with the purposes expressed in
this article and in the goals and objectives of the Washington City general
plan.
   A.   Disturbance Limitations: The following criteria shall be applied in
establishing the limits of disturbance for a site:
      1.   Adverse visual impacts shall be minimized as much as possible. The
screening of cuts and fills, and the visual protection of prominent ridgelines,
rock outcroppings, scenic views, and as much of the natural terrain as
practicable is required.
      2.   Disturbed slopes shall be treated to minimize erosion, and natural
drainageways shall be protected as much as possible.
      3.   The clearing of trees, shrubs and other native vegetation shall be
limited to: the approved locations for streets, driveways and easements; the
approved locations for building pads for structures, main buildings and
accessory structures; and the minimum distance between structures and
surrounding vegetation for established fire prevention and safety standards or
recommendations.
      4.   Significant trees, shrubs and other native vegetation shall be
preserved in the design of the development. Significant vegetation is to be
identified on a map with the application submittals and city staff will review
the submittals and visit the site to determine the significance of existing
vegetation.
      5.   The limits of disturbance may be noncontiguous as long as the
significant features of the natural terrain are being preserved.
      6.   All topsoil from any disturbed portion of the site shall be
preserved and utilized in revegetation areas. The soil in the upper portion of
fill areas shall be of a sufficient quality to support native plant growth.
      7.   The surface coverage of all main and accessory structures shall not
exceed sixty percent (60%) of the gross lot or parcel area for detached
dwellings and seventy percent (70%) of the gross lot or parcel area for
attached dwellings.
      8.   The maximum limits of disturbance shall be identified on each lot or
parcel of the approved site plans and subdivision plats and shall include all
graded, excavated, and filled areas, the areas occupied by main and accessory
structures, hard surface areas that include driveways, walkways, patios and
parking areas, and all other areas of disturbance or nonnative vegetation.
   B.   Grading Design: Grading for all developments shall be designed to blend
with the contours of the adjacent natural terrain.
      1.   Limits Of Grading: No grading, cutting, filling, excavating,
benching or terracing of any proposed lot or parcel shall go beyond the maximum
limits of disturbance for each lot or parcel as provided herein.
      2.   Cuts And Fills: All cuts and fills shall be minimized as much as
practicable and shall be included within the maximum limits of disturbance for
each lot or parcel. All cut and fill areas shall be recontoured to the natural,
varied contours of the surrounding terrain with a maximum slope transition back
to the natural grade no greater than two to one (2:1). Slope ratios greater
than two to one (2:1) are prohibited except for approved cuts into solid rock
only. Any such proposed cut into rock shall be reviewed by the HRB for
appropriateness, suitability, and visual impact in order to grant approval if
warranted. For approved cuts into solid rock, the slope may be as steep as one-
half to one (1/2:1) if recommended by a Utah licensed professional engineer who
is trained and experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering and if
the visual impact of the cut can be adequately mitigated. All areas of cut and
fill shall be protected from erosion during the period of construction and
shall be permanently planted or otherwise protected from erosion within twenty
(20) days of the completion of grading and excavation as identified by the
approved landscape plan.
Where cut or fill conditions are created, slopes shall be varied where feasible
rather than left at a constant angle which may be unstable or create an
unnatural, rigid, engineered appearance.
      3.   Cuts And Fills Visual Mitigation: The visual impact of cuts and
fills shall be mitigated by methods approved by the city. This mitigation may
include, but is not limited to, the placement of buildings in front of the cuts
and/or the placement of retaining walls designed to blend with the surrounding
terrain to stabilize the cut. Mitigation shall predominantly be contour grading
along with plantings as identified on the approved landscape plan that will
stabilize the cut or fill slope and blend with the surrounding vegetation. The
use of retaining walls is to be as limited in scope and height as feasible to
ensure the visual predominance of vegetation. Contour grading techniques shall
be used to provide a natural appearing variety of slope transitions, slope
percentage and slope direction in a three-dimensional, undulating pattern
similar to existing, adjacent terrain.
         a.   Hard edges left by cut and fill operations shall be given a
rounded appearance that closely resembles the natural contours of the land.
         b.   Manmade slopes adjacent to roadways shall be softened where
feasible by sufficient berms, contour grading, and/or landscaping to create
visually interesting and pleasing streetscapes.
      4.   Street And Driveway Alignment: Street alignments shall run generally
parallel along the contours of the natural terrain as much as practicable.
Short sections of streets that run perpendicular to natural contours and serve
the purpose of connecting main parallel sections of streets are permitted and
shall follow the natural curves of drainageways where practicable. Streets
shall not greatly alter the physical and visual character of a hillside by
creating large notches in ridgelines or by defining wide straight alignments.
Contour grading techniques shall be employed on all streets and associated cut
and fill areas to minimize any adverse impacts. Reduced width road sections,
split road sections, and split parking bays are potential design techniques to
employ in the layout of hillside streets to reduce grading.
The portions of driveways that run perpendicular to natural contours and serve
the purpose of accessing building lots and parcels shall be as short as
practicable. Driveways that serve more than one parcel are permitted as a
method of reducing unnecessary grading, paving and site disturbance. If lots
and parcels will be sharing driveways, cross use easements shall be recorded
with the subdivision.
      5.   Open Space Trails: Where permitted, trails through open space shall
be located such that cuts and fills are minimized and visual character is
preserved. Where cuts and fills are required, cut conditions uphill from the
trail typically have less of an overall visual impact than an exposed downhill
fill area.
      6.   Structure Location: Design of building sites shall be sensitive to
the natural terrain. Structures shall be located in such a way as to minimize
grading and to preserve natural features. Careful consideration shall be given
to the general orientation of the slope when locating structures.
      7.   Building Sites: On each building site, careful consideration shall
be given to the cut and fill conditions such that a balance is achieved where
feasible and consistent with the intent of this article to minimize the visual
impact of grading. Different slope conditions call for corresponding typical
cut and fill solutions such that the structure fits well into the topography as
illustrated below. Impacts to natural drainageways shall be avoided where
possible.
   C.   Viewshed Protection: To minimize the adverse visual impacts that
development may potentially have on prominent ridgelines, mesas, and other site
features, the following setbacks shall apply:
      1.   Prominent Ridgeline And Natural Feature Edge Condition: The minimum
setback from the edge or top of slope of a prominent ridgeline, plateau or mesa
is fifty feet (50') for one story structures and sight obscuring privacy fences
and walls unless a greater setback is recommended in the geotechnical report.
The minimum setback from the edge or top of slope of a prominent ridgeline,
plateau or mesa is one hundred feet (100') for structures or parts of
structures with one and one-half (11/2) or more stories unless a greater
setback is recommended in the geotechnical report. A greater setback may also
be required by the underlying zoning district.
      2.   Cuestas: The minimum setback from a prominent ridgeline of a cuesta
is the distance necessary to prevent the elevation of the extreme tops of all
structures on the cuesta from exceeding the elevation of the ridgeline or crest
of the cuesta, unless a greater setback is recommended in the geotechnical
report. A greater setback may also be required by the underlying zoning
district.
      3.   Manmade Slopes: The minimum setback from the edge or top of slope of
a manmade slope (which may include a retaining wall) twenty feet (20') or more
in height is fifteen feet (15') for one story structures and sight obscuring
privacy fences and walls unless a greater setback is recommended in the
geotechnical report. The minimum setback from the edge or top of slope of a
manmade slope (which may include a retaining wall) twenty feet (20') or more in
height is twenty five feet (25') for structures or parts of structures with one
and one-half (11/2) or more stories unless a greater setback is recommended in
the geotechnical report. A greater setback may also be required by the
underlying zoning district.
   D.   Architectural Standards: The purpose of establishing architectural
design standards in the HP zone is to ensure quality development that blends
with the hillside environment and to create neighborhoods that display
harmonious and complementary architectural styles. To achieve hillside
compatible development, the city recognizes the importance of having
architectural design that incorporates rooflines and other building elements
that reflect the naturally occurring ridgeline silhouettes and topographical
variations.
      1.   Building Orientation: A variety of building and lot orientations
shall be provided in order to encourage development suitable with the hillside
character of the site.
         a.   Structures shall be designed so the slope angle of the roof pitch
is generally less than or equal to the angle of the natural hillside or manmade
slope.
         b.   Site planning shall emphasize the preservation of views to
prominent visual features such as ridgelines. This includes building
orientation to allow view opportunities and lot development on the least
sensitive portions of the site to preserve landforms, vegetation and
topographical features.
         c.   Hillside adaptive architecture shall be terraced to follow the
contours of the slope. Exterior structural supports and undersides of floors
and decks not enclosed by walls are discouraged but may be permitted with fire
safety and architectural considerations adequately addressed to the
satisfaction of the city individual or body designated to grant approval.
      2.   Building Style: The use of hillside adaptive architecture as needed
shall be incorporated into the design of individual lots in areas within the HP
zone. Step building foundations may be required to minimize grading.
         a.   Architectural styles shall be compatible with the hillside
character, topography, and theme of the community.
         b.   A variety of roof orientations and types which emphasize roof
pitches reflecting the overall slope of the hillside shall be incorporated into
the design of the development.
         c.   Enhanced architectural elevations where the front, rear or side
of units face public view is required. The architecture of hilltop units will
be restricted to avoid massive walls and monotonous patterns of building
silhouettes.
         d.   The dimensions of a building, measured in the direction of the
slope, shall be minimized in order to limit the amount of cut and fill and to
better incorporate the structure to the natural terrain.
         e.   Terraced decks shall not be built on slopes which are a part of a
project's common area controlled by a homeowners' or property owners'
association or landscape maintenance district.
         f.   Buildings may be clustered to respect and adapt to the existing
topography. Flexible site techniques including varying the position of the
structures and varying the sizes of lots shall be used as necessary to preserve
the character of the hillside setting.
      3.   Architectural Treatments: Architectural treatments on all exterior
walls of any building shall be designed to avoid monotonous or continuous
facades. One continuous vertical or horizontal plane on the front and rear
facade of any building is not permitted. Architectural features and details
shall be incorporated in all exterior walls of the building, including the rear
and sides of the building. Buildings shall utilize wall articulation (i.e.,
insets, pop outs, etc.) and roof orientation as a means to break up the
massing.
         a.   The form, mass and profile of the individual buildings and
architectural features shall be designed to blend with the natural terrain and
preserve the character of the natural slope. The use of large gable ends on
downhill elevations shall be avoided. The predominant roof slope shall be
oriented in the same general direction as the natural slope.
         b.   Large roof overhangs and cantilevers on downhill elevations shall
be avoided to reduce the massive appearance from below.
      4.   Finish Materials, Color, And Reflectivity: Building materials and
colors shall be compatible with the natural setting. The color, material and
texture palette shall be reinforced with compatible landscaping. The light
reflective value (LRV) of materials used on all exterior walls and roof areas
shall be similar to the LRV of the surrounding terrain. This typically shall be
between 7 (darkest value of shaded vegetation) and 38 (approximate value of the
red sandstone in the area). Generally, the more visible the structure, the
lower its LRV shall typically be. The building material colors and their LRVs
shall be submitted with the final application.
      5.   Fencing And Privacy Walls: All fences and privacy walls adjacent to
or clearly visible from public roads or parks shall be constructed of
decorative masonry or other approved materials which have a natural appearance
and shall be a color that blends with the surrounding environment and is
complementary to the landscape. The applicant shall present illustrations and
descriptions of fencing and wall materials as required by this section.
All walls and fences which are adjacent to or visible from public roads shall
be set back from the right of way a minimum of six feet (6') (or greater where
cited elsewhere in this code) and landscaped on the street side of the wall or
fence. Additionally, walls and fences not exceeding six feet (6') in height are
permitted adjacent to structures in order to provide a private outdoor area. A
minimum flat area from top or toe of slope of three feet (3') or more as
required by the adopted building codes of the city shall be maintained to face
of wall on common area maintenance slopes with slope heights of thirty feet
(30') or greater.
   E.   Landscape Design Standards:
      1.   Landscape materials and stabilization of graded slopes shall be
designed to be compatible with surrounding natural vegetation.
         a.   Plant Material: Plant material shall be selected according to
compatible climatic, soil and ecological characteristics of the region.
         b.   Slope And Landscape Maintenance: Homeowners' or property owners'
associations and assessment districts or other acceptable legal entities are
required to maintain common open space. All landscaped slopes not included
within a landscape maintenance district (LMD) shall be maintained by a
homeowners' association (HOA) or a property owners' association (POA) for the
permanent maintenance of landscaped slopes and other areas. An HOA/POA shall be
required to establish a maintenance district with responsibility for slope and
landscape maintenance should the HOA/POA disband.
      2.   All cut and fill slopes shall be planted and irrigated with an
automatic irrigation system as appropriate for selected plant material to blend
with the natural environment. The HOA/POA shall be responsible for monitoring
the irrigation to ensure the absence of irrigation caused erosion or areas of
overspray. All cut or fill slopes exceeding five feet (5') vertical height
shall be planted with adequate plant material to protect the slope against
erosion. Plants shall be planted in a quantity and distribution pattern
sufficient to replicate a healthy and vigorous desert landscape. All plants
shall be drought resistant or low water use in natural areas and shrubs shall
be a minimum one gallon size. All trees shall be a minimum five (5) gallon size
except street trees within rights of way where larger trees are required per
this code.
   F.   Retaining Walls: The purpose and intent of establishing development
standards for retaining walls is to ensure that the application of retaining
walls are aesthetically pleasing elements within the subject property and
limited in quantity throughout a development. The location of all retaining
walls, privacy walls and fences shall be identified along with their proposed
heights, materials and colors, and shown on the grading plan and concept plan.
All retaining walls, privacy walls and fences shall be located within the
maximum limits of disturbance for each lot or parcel.
      1.   General Standards:
         a.   The maximum length of any continuous retaining wall shall not be
more than two hundred (200) linear feet.
         b.   Retaining walls shall be used for the purpose of containing fill
material or for minimizing cut or fill slopes. The retaining wall may only
extend six inches (6") above the material it is retaining.
         c.   A retaining wall shall not be constructed in such a manner so as
to block or restrict vehicular access to a dedicated or implied dedicated
alley, accessway, pedestrian access, trail, sidewalk, easement, or right of
way.
         d.   All retaining walls and all privacy walls and fences surrounding
a development's perimeter shall be faced with stone or earth colored materials
complementary to the surrounding natural landscape.
         e.   Retaining walls shall follow the natural contours of the slope
where feasible. Curved walls that follow the natural contours are recommended
but not required.
         f.   All retaining walls as well as all freestanding walls and fences
shall comply with the adopted building codes of the city.
      2.   Height Standards:
         a.   No retaining wall for a cut or fill area shall exceed ten feet
(10') in height as measured from the immediately adjacent lowest natural or
finished grade to the top of wall unless it can be demonstrated in the overall
mitigation plan for cuts and fills that taller walls will not detract from the
surrounding terrain and there is a predominance of vegetation in the fill areas
as outlined above. Retaining walls shall not be stacked or terraced in any
manner that increases their combined height beyond ten feet (10'). If desired,
two (2) subwalls may be stacked or terraced to a maximum combined height of ten
feet (10'). A minimum separation of six feet (6') is required between subwalls
as measured from face of wall. The separation area between the sets of subwalls
shall be planted with low water use/low maintenance shrubs or other vegetation
as approved in the landscape plan. Trees are not to be planted in the zone
between subwalls unless separation is at least twenty feet (20'). This
vegetation will help reduce the apparent visual height of the wall or walls.
         b.   For purposes of this subsection, retaining walls are not
considered stacked or terraced if there is a minimum horizontal separation of
ten feet (10') between sets of retaining walls. With the minimum ten foot (10')
separation, each retaining wall set may be constructed to the maximum allowed
height; either the ten foot (10') height or the taller height demonstrated that
would not detract from the surrounding terrain. The separation area between the
sets of retaining walls shall be planted with low water use/low maintenance
shrubs or other vegetation as approved in the landscape plan. Trees are not to
be planted in the zone between terraced walls unless the distance between walls
is a minimum of twenty feet (20'). This vegetation will help reduce the
apparent visual height of the wall or walls.
         c.   Retaining walls may be constructed to varying heights throughout
a development.
            (1)   Retaining walls constructed in the side yard area of a lot
shall maintain a maximum retaining wall height of four feet (4'); provided that
such wall does not extend into a required front yard adjacent to a street.
            (2)   Retaining walls constructed in the rear yard area of a lot
shall maintain a maximum retaining wall height of eight feet (8').
            (3)   All planting areas between and adjacent to retaining walls
shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system suitable for low water
use vegetation. Such irrigation system shall be approved and inspected prior to
the construction of any wall.
            (4)   Where a retaining wall contains fill above the natural grade
and is located within a required setback yard, the height of the retaining wall
shall be considered as contributing to the permissible height of a fence or
wall at that location. A nonview obscuring fence up to three and one-half feet
(3.5') in height may be erected at the top of the retaining wall for safety.
         d.   Retaining walls not exceeding six feet (6') in height are
permitted adjacent to structures in order to provide a private outdoor area.
   G.   Corrective Work: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the individual
or body designated to grant approval from authorizing grading deemed necessary
to correct previously disturbed natural areas or existing hazardous conditions
that are on site but not a part of the proposed development area and that are
brought to the city's attention. In such case, the applicant will investigate
possible alternatives with subsequent review by the individual or body
designated to grant approval. (Ord. 2008-23, 6-11-2008)
9-12A-5: HILLSIDE REVIEW BOARD:
   A.   Established: There is hereby established a hillside review board (HRB)
for the city.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The HRB shall have the following responsibilities:
      1.   Review developments proposed within the HP zone as defined in
section
9-12A-2 of this article and make a recommendation for approval, conditional
approval, or denial to city staff, the planning commission and the city
council.
      2.   Provide advice and support as needed to city staff, the planning
commission and the city council in connection with reviewing requests for
zoning changes or other development applications within the HP zone.
   C.   Membership, Appointment: The HRB shall consist of seven (7) members as
follows:
      1.   Five (5) persons who are experts in any of the following fields:
geotechnical engineering, civil engineering, geology, architecture, landscape
architecture, land planning, or similar applicable areas of expertise; and two
(2) citizens of the city representing the public at large. If it is determined
to not be feasible to fill the member positions of those with the identified
fields of expertise, these positions shall be assumed by citizens at large. In
addition to the seven (7) members mentioned above, one alternate member may be
appointed to serve when a quorum is not otherwise present. The alternate member
may be any citizen of Washington City.
      2.   All members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
city council. The board shall select a chair and vice chair and determine the
dates and times to schedule meetings as the need arises when applications are
submitted for proposed developments within the HP zone.
   D.   Membership, Terms, Vacancies: The members of the HRB, appointed as
provided above, shall serve for two (2) years on overlapping terms. Vacancies
shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term.
   E.   Quorum; Vote Required: A quorum of the HRB shall be four (4) members,
and a majority vote of a quorum shall be required for a decision of any matter
before the board, but the minimum number of yes votes required for a decision
shall never be less than four (4). If a quorum is not present, no meeting shall
be held, and any items of business shall be continued to the next meeting of
the board. (Ord. 2008-23, 6-11-2008)
ARTICLE B. INTERSTATE CORRIDOR OVERLAY (IC) ZONE
SECTION:
9-12B-1: Purpose And Intent
9-12B-2: Overlay Zone
9-12B-3: Interstate Corridor Defined
9-12B-4: Application Procedure
9-12B-5: Use Regulations
9-12B-6: Site Design Regulations
9-12B-7: Height Regulations
9-12B-8: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-12B-9: Modifying Regulations
9-12B-10: Required Project Findings
9-12B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the interstate corridor overlay zone is to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the city, and the aesthetics of
the city, by establishing procedures for the development of land use districts
adjacent to Interstate 15 which may not fit with the underlying zoning district
standards. The standards set forth herein are intended to: a) provide
guidelines for appropriate landscaping, screening and other site design
provisions necessary to preserve a pleasing appearance along the corridor; and
b) allow the planning commission and city council more latitude in determining
the land use mix by the desired impact of development in contrast to
traditional regulations which establish minimum standards or prescribe what
shall not be done. (Ord. 2004-10, 5-12-2004)
9-12B-2: OVERLAY ZONE:
The interstate corridor overlay zone established by this article shall overlay
the existing zoning classifications listed in this title. In cases of conflict
between the provisions of this article, other zoning classifications, the
building codes adopted by the city, or the subdivision ordinance, the most
restrictive provisions shall apply. (Ord. 2004-10, 5-12-2004)
9-12B-3: INTERSTATE CORRIDOR DEFINED:
The "interstate corridor" is defined as property located within three hundred
feet (300') of both sides of the I-15 right of way through the city limits.
(Ord. 2004-10, 5-12-2004)
9-12B-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
The application procedure described in chapter 2 of this title for permitted
uses, chapter 17 of this title for conditional uses, chapter 8, article F of
this title for planned unit developments, chapter 13, article A of this title
for planned community developments, and the subdivision ordinance for
subdivision plats shall be adhered to as described in the underlying zoning
district. (Ord. 2004-10, 5-12-2004)
9-12B-5: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses: All uses listed in the underlying zoning district shall
continue in effect. The approval process for such permitted uses will remain
the same.
   B.   Conditional Uses: All uses listed in the underlying zoning district
shall continue in effect. The conditional use approval process shall be adhered
to in approving such uses. (Ord. 2004-10, 5-12-2004)
9-12B-6: SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS:
All site design elements for the above listed permitted and conditional uses,
except for single-family and two-family dwellings outside a mobile home -
recreational vehicle (MH) zone, are subject to review and approval of the
planning commission and city council, who shall apply the standards and
provisions found in chapters 2 and 17 of this title, as applicable, as well as
the following provisions:
   A.   Objectionable Factors: All uses shall be free from objectionable odor,
noise, dust, smoke, vibration or other such factors.
   B.   Advertising Signs: All advertising signs shall comply with the
provisions of chapter 18 of this title.
   C.   Landscaping Requirements:
      1.   A ten foot (10') landscape setback buffer is required along all
freeway frontages. The buffer shall contain, as a minimum, one 24-inch box
tree, with a minimum caliper of two inches (2") for every thirty feet (30') of
adjacent lot line. The trees may be clustered. The trees shall be a mix of both
deciduous and evergreen (evergreen to be 50 percent of total). Minimum tree
height shall be five feet (5') for conifers and seven feet (7') for deciduous.
      2.   Landscaping shall be used to help focus on entrances to buildings,
soften parking lots and loading areas, define edges of various land uses,
provide transitions between neighboring properties (buffering), and provide
screening for outdoor storage, loading and equipment areas.
      3.   Landscaping around the entire base of buildings is required to
soften the edge between parking lots and structures. This shall be accented at
entrances to provide focus.
      4.   Trees shall be located throughout parking lots and not simply at the
ends of parking aisles. In order to be considered within parking lots, trees
shall be located in planters that are bounded on at least three (3) sides by
parking area paving. Parking areas shall include one tree for every five (5)
parking spaces and shall be uniformly dispersed to provide shade. Trees shall
be a minimum size of fifteen (15) gallons (at least 1 inch in diameter) at
planting, and shall be of a species which shall reach a thirty foot (30') to
fifty foot (50') crown within fifteen (15) years.
      5.   Landscaping shall be protected from vehicular and pedestrian
encroachment by raised planting surfaces, depressed walls or the use of curbs.
      6.   Buildings shall not be located where their office portions directly
abut paved parking areas. A minimum five foot (5') landscape strip shall be
provided between parking areas and the office portions of buildings.
   D.   Building Setback: The minimum building setback from the freeway right
of way line shall not be less than the setback required by the underlying zone,
and in no case be less than ten feet (10').
   E.   Service Areas: Service areas, including storage, special equipment,
maintenance and loading areas, shall be screened with landscaping and
architectural elements. The purpose is to hide those areas from the freeway.
Loading docks and service areas shall be located on interior side yards and
concealed from public "freeway" view (side yard opposite the direction of
traffic). Utility equipment and communication devices located on the ground
shall be screened so that the site will appear free of such devices. Utility
lines for water, gas, sewage, electrical and communication shall be installed
underground.
   F.   Refuse Collection Areas: Refuse collection areas shall be visibly
screened with a solid perimeter wall using materials and colors compatible with
those of the adjacent structures. Refuse collection areas are to be located on
an interior building side yard and shall be roofed if the contents of the area
are visible from the freeway.
   G.   Facades:
      1.   Facades shall be designed to convey a sense of order through the
interplay of lights, shadow and texture. Facade articulation shall reinforce a
sense of quality and integrity.
      2.   Facades shall reflect the quality and the sense of order of the
underlying structure in a clear and consistent manner. Window panels shall be
differentiated and the percentage of window glass that is visible from the
freeway shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of a wall surface. Highly
reflective glass which could possibly impede a driver's visibility from the
freeway shall be prohibited unless properly screened.
   H.   Building Walls: The site development plan shall be prepared so that the
building walls viewed from I-15 are similar in design to the front of the
building. The front of the building, regardless of orientation toward I-15,
shall meet the design regulations cited elsewhere in this section.
   I.   Building Proportion And Elevation: A refinement of the building
proportions and building elevation details shall be carefully conceived to
achieve desired goals.
   J.   Recessed Wall Surfaces: Recessed or articulated wall surfaces, columns
and beams shall be used to help visually segment an otherwise massive exterior
wall surface.
   K.   Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Roof mounted mechanical equipment
shall be screened on all sides. Any devices located on the structure shall be
properly screened to minimize visual impact. The color of these devices shall
be the same as the building color. (Ord. 2004-10, 5-12-2004)
9-12B-7: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Refer to applicable sections of the underlying zoning classification and the
supplementary and qualifying regulations of this title (chapter 14 of this
title). (Ord. 2004-10, 5-12-2004)
9-12B-8: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
With the exception of the ten foot (10') landscape buffer requirements, the
area, width and yard regulations shall be dependent upon the underlying zoning
classification. (Ord. 2004-10, 5-12-2004)
9-12B-9: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
Refer to the underlying zoning classification. (Ord. 2004-10, 5-12-2004)
9-12B-10: REQUIRED PROJECT FINDINGS:
   A.   Is the project proposed consistent with the goals and policies of the
general plan?
   B.   Would the proposed project be detrimental to the public interest,
health, safety, convenience, aesthetics or welfare of the city?
   C.   Is the subject site physically suitable for the type and intensity of
the land use proposed?
   D.   Would the proposed development be harmonious with existing and future
developments within the land use district and general area? (Ord. 2004-10, 5-
12-2004)
ARTICLE C. EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRIES OVERLAY (EI) ZONE
SECTION:
9-12C-1: Purpose And Intent
9-12C-2: Use Regulations
9-12C-3: Site Development Plan Requirements
9-12C-4: Reclamation Plan Requirements
9-12C-5: Reclamation Financial Guarantee
9-12C-6: Progress Report
9-12C-7: Standards
9-12C-8: Exempted Activities
9-12C-9: Excavation Permit
9-12C-10: Approval Process
9-12C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the extractive industries overlay (EI) zone is to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city by establishing
procedures for the development, location and reclamation of extraction sites.
This district will provide for the excavation of clay, soil, granite,
flagstone, slate, shale, limestone, sand or gravel from the earth by
excavating, stripping, leveling or any other process; together with all other
types of mining operations where material is removed from the earth. (Ord. 97-
13, 3-12-1997)
9-12C-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted uses:
Agricultural activities.
Gravel and similar natural resource extraction, mining and quarry activities.
Open space.
   B.   Conditional uses:
Accessory uses and buildings, customarily incidental and subordinate to an
approved conditional use.
Golf course.
Public and quasi-public uses.
Recreational facilities and activities.
Any combination of the above uses, or other uses that are determined by the
planning commission to be compatible and in harmony with the intent of this
zone, according to the designated and approved development plan. (Ord. 97-13,
3-12-1997)
9-12C-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
All requests shall be accompanied by a site development plan and written text
for the entire property proposed to be developed. The development plan shall
address the following:
   A.   Projected Use: The projected use of the land, including the percentage
of property coverage by buildings, parking areas, landscaping and streets.
   B.   Topography Map: Provide a map of the planned excavation area. This plan
should be reflected on a topographic map, at a scale of one inch equals fifty
feet (1" = 50') to a maximum contour interval of two feet (2'). This map should
reflect an area at least five hundred feet (500') beyond the proposed
excavation, showing the location of the operations. This map should reflect the
phases of the excavation process, the planned depth of excavation and the
estimated quantity of material to be removed. Reflect the location of
stockpiles, mine tailings, milling and processing systems. The text supporting
the excavation plan should also reflect the expected operational life of the
project.
   C.   Compliance: The plan text should discuss the project's compliance with
the general plan and the zoning and subdivision ordinances.
   D.   Circulation Plan: A circulation plan which shall address the
anticipated impact on existing streets, reflecting the trip generation rate,
along with the planned development of new streets. Detail should be provided on
the type and number of heavy equipment to be used and their individual gross
vehicular weight.
   E.   Existing Facilities Plan: An existing facilities plan reflecting the
location of all utility lines, including, but not limited to, water, sewer,
power, cable television, natural gas, telephone and drainage within the
project. This plan shall indicate the point of connection with municipal
service lines. Additionally, disclose the anticipated rate of water
consumption, wastewater discharge, drainage volumes, source and disposal of
water to be used in the operation.
   F.   Mitigation Plan: A mitigation plan for the control and limitation of
dust, noise, vibration, smoke and odor from the site and any related
activities. This plan should reflect the requirement that all access and
haulage roads on the site shall be maintained in a dust free condition by
surfacing or other treatment approved by the city.
   G.   Grading Plan: A grading plan shall show the existing and proposed
contours and cross sections, sufficient to show on and off site drainage and to
prevent the development of ponds and water filled areas.
   H.   Drainage Plan: A drainage plan shall show all surface and subsurface
drainage systems and the plans to provide erosion protection to the site. This
plan shall include provisions for the mitigation of erosion damage on site and
within five hundred feet (500') of the project boundary.
   I.   Soils Report: A soils report shall be prepared by an engineering
geologist and/or geotechnical engineer. The report shall include at least the
following:
      1.   Slope Stability Analysis: Conclusions and recommendations concerning
the effects of material removal, introduction of water, ground shaking and
erosion on slope stability;
      2.   Springs And Seepage Sites: The location and yield of springs and
seepage sites within the project; and
      3.   Soils Profile: The development of a complete soils profile.
   J.   Reclamation Plan: Provide a summary of the reclamation plan and its
provisions during the active use of the site.
   K.   Other Reports: Other reports deemed necessary by the officer or body
charged with the approval of a requested use to assure the health, safety and
welfare of the project, residents or general public, may be requested from the
applicant by written specification. (Ord. 97-13, 3-12-1997)
9-12C-4: RECLAMATION PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
All applications for extractive use sites must submit a reclamation plan to the
planning commission, indicating how the site will be reclaimed upon completion
of mining activities to allow for the productive and compatible reuse of the
site, as well as the time frame in which reclamation activities will occur. The
plan will be designed to eliminate waste heaps, prevent shallow stagnant small
bodies of water, small unusable remnants of land, eroding and barren slopes
normally associated with open pit operations. This may be modified by the
planning commission when remaining pits are to be used to provide storm water
detention facilities, in accordance with approved storm water retention plans.
   A.   Concurrent Reclamation: The reclamation or rehabilitation of excavation
sites with a projected life of more than one year shall be carried out
simultaneously with the excavation of the mineral resource. Excavation shall be
planned so as to progressively develop the proposed final land forms by grading
and stockpiling overburden materials in areas designated for future land forms
within the approved reclamation plan. Such areas are to be seeded and planted
immediately after grading is completed or within appropriate planting seasons,
but in any case, the grading and planting shall be completed within one year.
   B.   Topographic Map: Topographic map of the proposed site reflecting the
phases of reclamation and the final site reclamation, including the final
finished grade of the site and all slopes. The map will be prepared on a scale
of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'), with a maximum contour interval of
two feet (2'). This map should represent the site and all property within five
hundred feet (500') of the project boundary.
   C.   Grading Plan: Shall be drawn and stamped by a licensed professional
engineer indicating the areas to be reclaimed and the proposed finished grades.
The method by which the rehabilitation is to be accomplished.
   D.   Revegetation Plan: Landscape specifications, including the plant type,
size, quantities, locations, installation of topsoil, specifications for plant
applications, mulching and type of irrigation to be used.
   E.   Drainage/Hydrology Plan: Indicating the hydrological characteristics of
the site after reclamation, including the creation or modification of
floodplains, erosion characteristics, drainage patterns and wetlands.
   F.   Proposed Use: A site plan shall be developed representing the proposed
use or uses for the site following reclamation, including the proposed zoning
for the site, building locations, roads, streets, topography, parking and
landscaping.
   G.   Cross Sections: Cross sections of the excavation site in areas of
greatest material displacement. The number of required cross sections shall be
dependent upon the size and topography of the excavation site.
   H.   Restoration Material: All material used in the final grading of the
site shall be free from refuse or toxic contaminants and shall be compacted as
much as is practicable. The original topsoil removed from the site shall be
stockpiled and used in the final grading of the site. Final soil depths and
types shall be appropriate for the future use.
   I.   Building And Equipment Removal: Following the completion of excavation
and processing activities, all buildings, equipment and utilities used in the
administration and management of the operations shall be removed. This removal
shall be completed within the first thirty (30) days following the completion
of mining operations.
   J.   Financial Analysis: A financial analysis shall be prepared detailing
all the costs of the reclamation plan. The applicant shall provide to the city
a form of financial security (acceptable to the city), that will assure the
implementation of the reclamation plan.
   K.   Plan Modification: Plan modifications may be submitted any time during
the reclamation process. The modifications must be submitted to the planning
commission with adequate documentation supporting the request. If the planning
commission approves the modification, then the amended reclamation plan will
govern the final process. (Ord. 97-13, 3-12-1997)
9-12C-5: RECLAMATION FINANCIAL GUARANTEE:
   A.   Included Requirements: Before issuing or renewing a permit for
excavation, the city shall receive from the permittee a bond in a form
acceptable to the city. The bond shall guarantee that the requirements of the
permittee's reclamation plan shall be met. The bond shall be forfeited to the
city if the permittee does not carry out the requirements of the reclamation
plan. The bond agreement shall include, as a minimum, the following items:
      1.   Incorporate by reference the reclamation plan, approved by the
planning commission and used by the city to compute the cost of the
improvements. The amount of the bond shall be sufficient to cover the cost of
the reclamation as estimated for the phase or area in which reclamation is
anticipated. The amount of the bond may be adjusted annually prior to the
renewal of the operator's business license and excavation permit, to reflect
any change in the estimated cost of reclamation.
      2.   Completion of the improvements within the period of time specified
in the reclamation plan, following the conclusion of excavation activities in
any given section of the project.
      3.   The city shall have exclusive control over the bond proceeds, and
the proceeds may be released only upon the written approval of the city manager
with written notification to the city council.
      4.   The permittee may apply, in writing, for the release of the bond
pertaining to an area that has been excavated and reclaimed, pursuant to the
approved reclamation plan. The permittee may also request the release of the
bond for areas in which excavation is no longer anticipated. The permittee must
first submit and receive approval of a revised excavation plan with maps
reflecting the amendments. No modifications to the bond agreement will be
authorized until the city has inspected the improvements and found them to be
in compliance with city standards and the provisions of the approved
reclamation plan. No modifications to or reductions in the bond agreement will
be made without the written authorization of the city manager. Modifications or
reductions granted will not alter the permittee's responsibility and liability
for the final reclamation of the site in accordance with the approved
reclamation plan.
      5.   Since the permittee retains the ultimate responsibility for the
reclamation of the site, if the bond proceeds are inadequate to pay the cost of
the reclamation improvements, the permittee shall be responsible for any and
all deficiencies.
      6.   A full bond release will be permitted following the completion of
all requirements specified in the approved reclamation plan and upon the city's
acceptance of the project as complete. The city's acceptance shall be
conditioned upon a final inspection of the site improvements, to ensure their
compliance with the approved reclamation plan. Bond release will require the
written authorization of the city manager.
      7.   Bond proceeds shall be transferred to the city within thirty (30)
days of the city manager's written demand. If the funds are not transferred as
required, all costs incurred by the city in obtaining the funds shall be the
responsibility of the permittee. The city may deduct an amount equal to its
costs from the bond proceeds.
      8.   Following the receipt of the bond proceeds, the project costs shall
include the reimbursement of costs incurred by the city for the administration
and inspection of project improvements.
      9.   The permittee shall agree to hold the city harmless from any and all
liability which may arise as a result of the improvements made in accordance
with the approved reclamation plan.
   B.   Instruments Acceptable: The bond agreement shall reflect one of the
following financial security instruments, as approved by the city:
      1.   Bond with a surety company licensed to do business in the state;
      2.   Cashier's check or a money market certificate made payable only to
the city;
      3.   Trust or escrow account with a financial institution federally or
state insured. (Ord. 97-13, 3-12-1997)
9-12C-6: PROGRESS REPORT:
The permittee conducting excavation operations shall file an operations and
progress report with the city at the end of each calendar year. This report
shall summarize the activities taken in fulfillment of the requirement of
simultaneous excavation and reclamation in compliance with the approved
reclamation plan. This progress report shall include a site plan indicating the
current extent of operations, reclamation completed and updates on significant
issues raised either by the permittee or the city. The progress report shall
include calculations by a licensed land surveyor indicating the volume of
material excavated during the calendar year. (Ord. 97-13, 3-12-1997)
9-12C-7: STANDARDS:
   A.   Setbacks:
      1.   No part of an excavation operation or access road, parking area,
office building or crushing, screening, washing, mixing or other type of
processing operation shall be permitted closer than three hundred feet (300')
to a residential zone boundary or a subdivision; or within one hundred feet
(100') of a public highway right of way, except for accessory access roads.
      2.   The planning commission shall be authorized to consider
modifications to the setback minimums contained in subsection A1 of this
section, when the character of the terrain, the ownership of land, location of
surrounding development or other special conditions would justify such
modification. However, in no case shall the required distances for any
excavation or accessory structure be less than one hundred feet (100') from a
residential zone.
   B.   Fencing:
      1.   Areas of excavation with serious or hazardous conditions shall be
reasonably fenced. Fences shall not be placed closer than ten feet (10') from
the edge of any exterior cut slope. The planning commission may consider the
use of topsoil berms as a screening device.
      2.   Topsoil berms, when authorized as a screening device, shall be
landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan approved by the planning
commission.
   C.   Grading:
      1.   All grading shall comply with standard engineering specifications
for slope stabilization in accordance with the latest approved reclamation
plans. Slopes shall be maintained in a manner that will prevent erosion damage
on adjacent properties.
      2.   Grading shall be consistent with approved grading plans for the
excavation and reclamation activities.
   D.   Ground Water Contamination:
      1.   Extractive operations, drainage, materials storage and use, site
access, fueling procedures, restoration activities and postrestoration uses
shall be strictly controlled so as to minimize any possible contamination of
the ground water.
      2.   Standards adopted by the city, in ground water protection
ordinances, the Southwest Utah district health department and the state shall
be used to determine the specific controls, programs, safeguards, restrictions
and monitoring required for a specific site.
   E.   Hours Of Operation:
      1.   Excavation operations shall not begin before seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and shall not continue after the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. No
operations shall take place on Sunday or legal holidays.
      2.   Operations that are isolated from other nonobjecting property owners
and have access to major transportation routes with little disturbance to
residential neighborhoods, shall have hours of operation as determined by the
planning commission.
   F.   Landscaping:
      1.   Approved landscape plans shall be prepared to screen the uses
compatible with resource extraction activities from public streets and abutting
properties.
      2.   All planting shall conform with the approved landscape plan and
specifications and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition.
Landscape berms and other barriers are intended to overcome the impacts
associated with mining operations.
      3.   Landscaping should be situated at the perimeters of the site
adjacent to uses determined by the planning commission to be incompatible with
the excavation operation.
   G.   Nuisance Abatement:
      1.   All equipment on and off site, utilized in the extraction and/or
processing operations shall be operated and maintained so as to minimize the
creation and dissemination of noise and vibration from the site.
      2.   Access and haulage roads on the site shall be maintained in a dust
free condition by surfacing or other treatment (approved by the city).
      3.   Soil berms, landscaping and other techniques should be used to
accomplish the objective of reducing the impact of nuisances created by the
project on adjacent property. The permittee shall employ all reasonable means
to reduce and mitigate the creation of nuisances such as dust, noise, smoke,
lights and odor.
   H.   Modifying Standards:
      1.   Lot Size: No minimum is specified; however, the lot shall be of
sufficient size to assure compliance with the provisions of this and all other
applicable city ordinances.
      2.   Building Height: No building shall exceed a height of thirty five
feet (35') from finished grade to the peak of the roof line. The planning
commission may consider requests for additional height to a maximum height of
fifty six feet (56').
      3.   Yard Requirements:
         a.   Front yard, fifty feet (50').
         b.   Side yard, thirty feet (30').
         c.   Rear yard, thirty feet (30').
   I.   Related Manufacturing Operations: The manufacture of concrete building
blocks or other similar blocks, the production or manufacture of lime products,
the production of ready mixed concrete, the production of asphalt mixes and any
similar production or manufacturing processes that might be related to the
excavation operation shall not be permitted, except as otherwise provided for
in this title.
   J.   Washing Wastewater: The washing of sand and gravel shall be done so as
to prevent the discharge of wastewater directly into adjacent natural
watercourses or onto any public or private roads or any private property
without the consent of the property owner.
   K.   NPDES Permits: Copies of federal or state NPDES permits will be
provided to the city. (Ord. 97-13, 3-12-1997)
9-12C-8: EXEMPTED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Removal Of Sod: The provisions of this article shall not apply to the
removal of sod.
   B.   Removal Of Topsoil: The provisions of this article shall not apply to
the removal of topsoil, providing the operation is not closer than ten feet
(10') to any property line or to a depth in excess of eighteen inches (18"), or
such as to adversely affect the drainage of the area. (Ord. 97-13, 3-12-1997)
9-12C-9: EXCAVATION PERMIT:
An excavation permit is required for any extractive or mining operation which
involves the extraction of more than five hundred (500) cubic yards of material
or affects land equivalent in area to one-half (1/2) acre or more during any
twelve (12) month period. The permit is issued to the owner and operator of the
property by the planning commission. The permit shall delineate the land area
to which it is applicable. The permit shall also make specific reference to the
requirements and specifications of the approved site development plan and the
reclamation plan. This permit will be renewed on an annual basis following the
submission and review of the annual progress report by the planning commission.
City staff will conduct all necessary inspections to assist the planning
commission with its annual review and evaluation process. (Ord. 97-13, 3-12-
1997)
9-12C-10: APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Development Plan: The applicant for an excavation permit shall prepare
a site development plan in accordance with the provisions of this article. In
addition to the specified provisions, the applicant shall provide the following
information:
      1.   Name and address of the property owner (applicant);
      2.   Legal description of the property to be subject to the permit;
      3.   Current land use and applicable zoning;
      4.   Company name and address of the firm retained to undertake the
extraction operation, if different from the property owner (applicant); and
      5.   Business references for the company identified in subsection A4 of
this section.
   B.   Submission; Time Limit: The applicant shall submit the application
along with the site development plan at least twenty (20) working days prior to
the regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. The applicant shall submit
seven (7) copies of the application material.
   C.   Review By Planning Staff: The planning staff shall contact interested
department personnel of the city and other public agencies for review purposes.
The planning staff shall furnish, to the applicant, any comments regarding the
site development plan which may assist the applicant in their preparation of
the project presentation for the planning commission. If any department or
agency reviewing the project, requests additional time to complete their
review, the planning staff may postpone the deliberation of the project for one
planning commission meeting. The application cannot be postponed for more than
two (2) planning commission meetings after the application has been submitted.
   D.   Decision Of Planning Commission: The planning commission may approve,
modify or deny any application for an excavation permit. In authorizing any
excavation permit, the planning commission shall impose such requirements and
conditions as required by law and any additional conditions as may be necessary
for the protection of adjacent properties and the public welfare.
   E.   Requirements For Approval: The planning commission shall not authorize
an excavation permit unless evidence is presented showing:
      1.   The proposed use, at the particular location, is necessary or
desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general
well being of the community or the local economy; and
      2.   Such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case,
be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements in the
vicinity; and
      3.   The proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions
specified in this article for such use; and
      4.   The proposed use will conform to the intent of the general plan.
(Ord. 97-13, 3-12-1997)
ARTICLE D. AGRI-TOURISM/BUSINESS OVERLAY (ATB) ZONE
SECTION:
9-12D-1: Purpose And Intent
9-12D-2: Overlay Zone
9-12D-3: Application Procedure
9-12D-4: Use Regulations
9-12D-5: Site Development Regulations
9-12D-6: Height Regulations
9-12D-7: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
9-12D-8: Modifying Regulations
9-12D-9: Approval Process
9-12D-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of the Agri-tourism/business overlay zone is to protect
the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city by
establishing procedures for the development and locations for agricultural
based tourism and business sites. This overlay zone will provide alternatives
to local farm owners who are devoted to their land and are committed to
providing agriculturally related products and experiences to the public. It is
intended to allow farmers the ability to generate supplementary income while
still promoting the preservation of agriculture properties throughout the city.
(Ord. 2012-21, 10-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2025-11, 3-26-2025)
9-12D-2: OVERLAY ZONE:
The agri-tourism/business overlay zone established by this article may be
applied to any of the existing agricultural zoning districts listed in this
title. In cases of conflict between the provisions of this article, other
zoning classifications, the building codes adopted by the city, or the
subdivision ordinance, the restrictive provisions shall apply. (Ord. 2012-21,
10-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2025-11, 3-26-2025)
9-12D-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
The application procedure described in chapter 2 of this title for permitted
uses, and the subdivision ordinance for subdivision plats shall be adhered to
as described in the underlying zoning district. (Ord. 2012-21, 10-10-2012; amd.
Ord. 2025-11, 3-26-2025)
9-12D-4: USE REGULATIONS:
A.   List Of Uses: The following chart is a list of possible uses, those
designated in any zone with the letter "P" may be permitted uses, while those
uses designated with the letter "N" will not be permitted in that zone.
Use Description A-5 A-10 A-20 40 ac.(+)
Use Description                                        A-5 A-10 A-20 40 ac.(+)
1.   Bakery / Cafe (farm products)                  P   P    P    P
2.   Barn Dances                                    N   P    P    P
3.   Bed and Breakfast Dwelling (2 rooms max.)      P   P    P    P
4.   Bed and Breakfast Dwelling (6 rooms max.)      N   P    P    P
5.   Bed and Breakfast Hotel (20 rooms max.)        N   N    P    P
6.   Carriage House / Wedding Venue                 N   P    P    P
7.   Community Garden (rent-a-row)                  P   P    P    P
8.   Community Supported Agriculture                P   P    P    P
9.   Conference / Educational Center                N   N    P    P
10.   Corn Maze                                     N   N    P    P
11.   Educational Classes                           P   P    P    P
12.   Farmers Market (open air)                     N   P    P    P
13.   Farmers Market (indoor)                       N   P    P    P
14.   Farm Museum                                   P   P    P    P
15.   Farm Tours                                    N   P    P    P
16.   Food Concession Stands                        P   P    P    P
17.   Gift Shop                                     P   P    P    P
18.   Haunted House                                 N   P    P    P
19.   Hay Rides                                     N   N    P    P
20.   Health Farm                                   N   N    P    P
21.   Miniature Market                              P   P    P    P
22.   Nursery                                       P   P    P    P
23.   On-Farm Store / Retail Market                 P   P    P    P
24.   Petting Zoo                                   N   P    P    P
25.   Play Areas                                    P   P    P    P
26.   Recreational Activities / Agricultural Family N   P    P    P
Activities
27.   Restaurant                                    N   P    P    P
28.   Special Events *                              P   P    P    P
29.   U-Pick Operation                              N   P    P    P
30.   Value Added Product Processing                N   P    P    P
* May be allowed when approved through the "Special Event Permit" process of
the city.
 
(Ord. 2025-11, 3-26-2025)
9-12D-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
All site development elements for the above listed permitted uses are subject
to review and approval of the planning commission and city council, who shall
apply the standards and provisions found in chapter 2 of this title, as
applicable, as well as the following provisions:
   A.   Primary Use: Agricultural is the primary use in agricultural zoned
parcels, and shall remain such. Thus, all agri-tourism/business uses and
activities shall clearly be incidental and accessory to the primary
agricultural use(s).
   B.   Written Text: The applicant shall prepare a written text that clearly
and thoroughly explains the proposed use of the land. The text should include,
but not be limited to, such things as: agriculturally related and non-
agriculturally related products and uses or activities; agriculturally related
and non-agriculturally related types of facilities and equipment; days and
times of normal operation; anticipated number of daily patrons; and number of
possible employees.
   C.   Allowable Area: The existing acreage shall be maintained in a manner
that is consistent with the farm's main agriculturally productive use(s) and
historic condition.
   D.   Site Development Plan: The applicant for an agri-tourism/business
overlay zone approval shall prepare a site development plan which shall meet
the following criteria:
      1.   Name and address of applicant and property owner;
      2.   The locations, dimensions and setbacks of all existing and proposed
uses/activities, buildings, fences and/or walls, and other structures to be
included in the development and any proposed development;
      3.   The proposed signage and lighting plan;
      4.   The locations and dimensions of existing and proposed roads, parking
areas and loading areas, traffic circulation patterns, and roads and driveways
adjoining and across from the development and proposed development;
      5.   The locations and dimensions of existing and proposed drainage
facilities, utilities, easements and where applicable, fire hydrants;
      6.   The lot dimensions, existing and proposed elevations contours, and
north arrow;
      7.   Necessary explanatory notes where applicable; and
      8.   Any other development plans and/or required studies shall be
submitted with the application for an agri-tourism/business overlay zone
request.
   E.    Ownership: An agri-tourism/business operation may consist of multiple
properties; however, all properties shall have identical and common ownership.
   F.   Production: An agri-tourism/business operation shall (unless in the
winter season) actively and continuously produce an agricultural product for
sale and purchase. In the event that the agricultural productivity ceases or
becomes improperly maintained, the right to operate an agri-tourism/business
under an overlay zone approval may be revoked. (Ord. 2012-21, 10-10-2012; amd.
Ord. 2025-11, 3-26-2025)
9-12D-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Refer to applicable sections of the underlying zoning classification and
chapter 14, supplementary and qualifying regulations, of this title. (Ord.
2012-21, 10-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2025-11, 3-26-2025)
9-12D-7: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD SETBACKS:
The area, width and yard regulations shall be dependent upon the underlying
zoning classification. (Ord. 2012-21, 10-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2025-11, 3-26-2025)
9-12D-8: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
Refer to the underlying zoning classification. (Ord. 2012-21, 10-10-2012; amd.
Ord. 2025-11, 3-26-2025)
9-12D-9: APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.    The city council may (after receiving a recommendation from the
planning commission) approve, modify and approve, or deny any application for
an Agri-Tourism/Business Overlay zone that is to be located within any
Agricultural zoning district in which the particular overlay zone is permitted
by the use regulations of this title. In approving any Agri-Tourism/Business
Overlay zone, the city council shall impose such requirements and conditions as
required by law and any additional conditions as may be necessary for the
protection of adjacent properties and the public health, safety, welfare and
aesthetics of the city.
   B.    Such conditions of approval may include, but shall not be limited to,
specifications concerning: structures (existing and proposed); landscaping;
density; ingress and egress; fencing; parking; or lighting.
   C.   The planning commission and city council shall not authorize an agri-
tourism/business overlay zone approval unless evidence is presented showing:
      1.   The proposed development is consistent with the goals and policies
of the general plan; and
      2.   The proposed development will not be detrimental to the public
interest, health, safety, convenience, aesthetics, or welfare of the city; and
      3.   The proposed development is physically suitable for the type and
intensity of the land use proposed; and
      4.   The proposed development will be harmonious with existing and future
developments within the land use district and general area. (Ord. 2012-21, 10-
10-2012; amd. Ord. 2025-11, 3-26-2025)
ARTICLE E. RESIDENTIAL RENTALS, SHORT TERM
SECTION:
9-12E-1: Purpose And Intent
9-12E-2: Applicability
9-12E-3: Application Procedure
9-12E-4: Use Regulations
9-12E-5: Site Development Regulations
9-12E-6: Height Regulations
9-12E-7: Area, Width And Yard Setbacks
9-12E-8: Modifying Regulations
9-12E-9: Approval Process
9-12E-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of the residential rentals, short term overlay zone is
to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city.
This overlay zone establishes procedures for designating subdivisions within
the city where the rental of residential units on an overnight or short term
basis is desirable and in the best interest of the community, and to aid the
development of housing, particularly by owners who reside elsewhere and wish to
rent their units when not in use. This article is intended to fully exclude
such overnight and short term rental practices in residential areas not within
the recreational housing overlay zone, or in accordance with section
9-14-25 of this title. "Short term" shall be defined to mean a period of twenty
seven (27) days or less. (Ord. 2015-02, 1-28-2015)
9-12E-2: APPLICABILITY:
The residential rentals, short term overlay zone shall be applied only to
projects that consist of five (5) dwelling units or more, and cover an area of
at least five (5) acres or more. (Ord. 2015-02, 1-28-2015)
9-12E-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
The application procedure described in chapter 2 of this title for permitted
uses, and the subdivision ordinance for subdivision plats shall be adhered to
as described in the underlying zoning district. (Ord. 2015-02, 1-28-2015)
9-12E-4: USE REGULATIONS:
Short term residential rentals for any single- and multiple- family residential
dwelling units, including condominiums and townhomes. Owners may reside in the
dwelling units or offer them for rent or lease. (Ord. 2015-02, 1-28-2015)
9-12E-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
All site development elements for the above mentioned permitted uses are
subject to review and approval of the planning commission and city council, who
shall apply the standards and provisions found in chapter 2 of this title, as
applicable, as well as the following provisions:
   A.   Primary Use: Single- and multiple-family residential is the primary use
in residential zoned parcels, and shall remain such.
   B.   Written Text: The applicant shall prepare a written text that clearly
and thoroughly explains the proposed use of the land including those areas
devoted to short term residential rental housing uses and activities.
   C.   Site Development Plan: The applicant for a residential rental, short
term housing overlay zone approval shall prepare a site development plan which
shall meet the following criteria:
      1.   Name and address of applicant and property owner;
      2.   The locations, dimensions and setbacks of all existing and proposed
uses/activities, buildings, fences and/or walls, and other structures to be
included in the proposed development;
      3.   The proposed signage and lighting plan (where applicable);
      4.   The locations and dimensions of existing and proposed roads, parking
areas and traffic circulation patterns, and roads and driveways adjoining and
across from the development;
      5.   The locations and dimensions of existing and proposed drainage
facilities, utilities, easements and fire hydrants;
      6.   The proposed area dimensions, existing and proposed elevation
contours, and north arrow;
      7.   Necessary explanatory notes where applicable; and
      8.   Any other development plans and/or required studies shall be
submitted with the application for a residential rental, short term overlay
zone request.
   D.   Ownership: A residential rental, short term overlay area may consist of
multiple properties; however, all properties shall have consent of the property
owner(s) as presented in the application. (Ord. 2015-02, 1-28-2015)
9-12E-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Refer to applicable sections of the underlying zoning classification and
chapter 14, "Supplementary And Qualifying Regulations", of this title. (Ord.
2015-02, 1-28-2015)
9-12E-7: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD SETBACKS:
The area, width and yard regulations shall be dependent upon the underlying
zoning classification. (Ord. 2015-02, 1-28-2015)
9-12E-8: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
Refer to the underlying zoning classification. (Ord. 2015-02, 1-28-2015)
9-12E-9: APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   The city council may (after receiving a recommendation from the
planning commission) approve, modify and approve, or deny any application for a
residential rental, short term overlay zone that is to be located within any
residential zoning district in which the particular overlay zone is permitted
by the use regulations of this title. In approving any residential rental,
short term overlay zone, the city council shall impose such requirements and
conditions as required by law and any additional conditions as may be necessary
for the protection of adjacent properties and the public health, safety and
general welfare and aesthetics of the city.
   B.   Such conditions of approval may include, but shall not be limited to,
specifications concerning: structures (existing and proposed); landscaping,
density; ingress; egress; fencing; parking; lighting; or other possible
nuisances.
   C.   The planning commission and city council shall not authorize a
residential rental, short term overlay zone approval unless evidence is
presented showing:
      1.   The proposed use, at this particular location, is necessary or
desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general
well being of the neighborhood and community; and
      2.   That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular
case, be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvement in
the vicinity; and
      3.   The proposed use will comply with regulations and conditions
specified in this title for such use; and
      4.   The proposed use will conform to the intent of the general plan.
(Ord. 2015-02, 1-28-2015)
ARTICLE F. AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
9-12F-1: Purpose
9-12F-2: Airport Overlay Zone Boundaries And Avigation Easement
9-12F-3: Height Limitations
9-12F-4: Use Restrictions
9-12F-1: PURPOSE:
The Airport Overlay Zone is established to notify property owners within the
Airport Influence Area of the St. George City Regional Airport regarding the
impacts associated with aircraft operation and to institute general safety
requirements. The St. George City Regional Airport provides a regional
transportation link that is vital to the economic welfare of the region.
Therefore, it has been determined that an Airport Overlay Zone should be
established, which recognizes the impacts present outside of the Airport
boundaries. Obstructions that affect the landing, take off, and maneuvering of
aircraft impair the utility of airports and the public use thereof. Therefore,
it is necessary in the interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of
the public that an Airport Overlay Zone be established to prevent hazards, to
the extent possible. (Ord. 2024-26, 11-13-2024)
9-12F-2: AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE BOUNDARIES AND AVIGATION EASEMENT:
There is defined in Utah Code 72-10-401(3) an "Airport Influence Area", which
in the case for Washington City regards the St. George City Regional Airport
traffic that traverses through a portion of Washington City. This Airport
Influence Area, as defined by the Utah Code, shall constitute the same boundary
and area description as the Airport Overlay Zone established by this Article F,
and shall be specifically defined as lands within the Washington City corporate
boundaries that are located within a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet
from the St. George City Regional Airport runway.
Prior to obtaining a building permit, any new construction (except remodeling)
shall grant or sell, at appraised fair market value, an avigation easement to
the St. George City Regional Airport that notifies current and subsequent
property owners that their property is located within the Airport Influence
Area and may be subject to impacts generated by aircraft. The terms of the
avigation easement granted or sold to the St. George City Regional Airport may
grant perpetual rights to the St. George City Regional Airport for the airspace
above the land, for the free and unrestricted passage of aircraft, to the
extent that aircraft using the St. George City Regional Airport facilities do
not exceed current federal guidelines, including any amendments, for Airport
noise. (Ord. 2024-26, 11-13-2024)
9-12F-3: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
No Structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained within the Airport
Overlay Zone to a height in excess of the height limitations specified in
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Part 77, "Objects Affecting Navigable
Airspace." Those structures exceeding three hundred fifty (350) feet in height
may be affected. (Ord. 2024-26, 11-13-2024)
9-12F-4: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Within the Airport Overlay Zone, no land use activity shall create any
electrical interference with navigational signals for radio communications
between the Airport and the aircraft, making it difficult for pilots to
distinguish Airport lights and signals, causing glare in the eyes of pilots
using the Airport, impairing visibility in the vicinity of the Airport, or
otherwise in any way creating a hazard or endangering the landing, take off, or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the Airport. (Ord. 2024-26, 11-13-
2024)
CHAPTER 13
DEVELOPMENTS
ARTICLE A. PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
9-13A-1: Purpose
9-13A-2: Interpretation
9-13A-3: Definitions
9-13A-4: Considerations
9-13A-5: Responsibilities
9-13A-6: Application
9-13A-7: Schematic Plan Review
9-13A-8: Project Plan
9-13A-9: Staff Review
9-13A-10: Planning Commission Review
9-13A-11: City Council Review
9-13A-12: Construction Limitations/Subsequent Approvals
9-13A-13: Development Agreements
9-13A-14: Appeal Of Final Decisions
9-13A-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this article, and any rules, regulations, specifications
and procedures hereafter adopted, is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare through provisions designed to establish a planned community
development zoning district which will:
      1.   Provide for the harmonious and coordinated development of the city
by allowing for the systematic implementation of large residential or mixed use
development proposals;
      2.   Facilitate large scale, mixed use developments incorporating various
types of residential, commercial and industrial uses and zoning concepts which
may create significant impacts on the city, while maximizing the public benefit
from such developments, and minimizing any adverse impacts of such
developments;
      3.   Provide a streamlined review procedure for such development
proposals designed to accommodate a multiple phased approach to design and
construction of large residential or mixed use developments;
      4.   Prevent the waste of public and private resources and the escalation
in the cost of development associated with duplicative land development, review
and approval procedures, regulations and amendments thereto;
      5.   Encourage continuity in design and planning of large residential or
mixed use projects;
      6.   Ensure adequate open space for traffic, recreation, light and air;
and
      7.   Facilitate the conservation and production of integrated municipal
streets, transportation, water, sanitation and other related utility systems.
   B.   This article is designed to inform applicants and the public of the
requirements and conditions necessary to obtain approval of planned community
developments (PCD), as defined in section
9-13A-3 of this article. To this end, all requirements, where possible, are
expressly delineated in this article or other applicable ordinances. However,
since it is impossible to cover every contingency and there are some aspects
which do not lend themselves to be easily articulated, this article allows the
planning commission to recommend and city council to impose reasonable
conditions upon an applicant in addition to those expressly required, so long
as such conditions do not conflict with any requirements set forth in this
article or other applicable ordinances.
   C.   This article shall provide a consolidated framework for the processing
of preliminary and final PCD project plans and development agreements, as
defined under this article, and other applicable provisions of city ordinances.
   D.   The application of the PCD concepts created under this article is
intended to ensure substantial compliance with the intent of the zoning
district regulations and other provisions of this title, and at the same time
provide flexibility in order to secure the advantages of large scale site
planning and development for residential, commercial and industrial
developments, or combinations thereof under the PCD zone designation. (Ord. 93-
14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-2: INTERPRETATION:
The express provisions contained in this article are intended to provide
procedures for large residential or mixed use development applications and to
outline necessary review procedures. Upon final adoption by the city council of
the "PCD project plan" and/or "development agreement", as defined under this
article, the adopted project plan and/or development agreement will be
considered the legal basis for the physical development of the land identified
in the project plan and/or development agreement. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-3: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever any word or phrase used in this article is not defined herein, but is
defined in related sections of Utah Code Annotated, or in other city
ordinances, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall apply as if they
were set forth herein in full, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary
intention. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural, the term
"shall" is always mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. The following
terms as used in this article shall have the respective meanings as set forth:
DESIGN GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS: Those specific design criteria for physical
improvements to the land covered by a PCD application which are proposed by an
applicant and approved by the city council.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A binding contract between the city and a planned
community development applicant wherein the detailed terms and conditions upon
which a planned community development will proceed are agreed upon. The
development agreement specifies any vested rights granted to the applicant or
its successors or assigns.
PCD PROJECT PLAN: A planning document outlining the development of property
located in a specific geographic area of the city. The plan should establish
the general type, land use, density and character of the proposed development.
The PCD project plan is to include the supplementary information and reports
required by section
9-13A-8 of this article.
PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (PCD): A proposed development, featuring
integrated design for development and construction of residential, commercial
or industrial uses, or combinations of such uses, which, because of the nature
of the proposed use and/or size of the proposed development, will substantially
impact the entire city, therefore requiring special review. Planned community
developments may include, without limitation, the following characteristics:
   A.   Residential developments, with an accumulative project size of not less
than two hundred (200) acres for all phases of the proposed development, and
not less than six hundred (600) dwelling units;
   B.   Nonresidential developments of accumulative project size of not less
than two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet, excluding parking and loading
areas, and not less than two hundred (200) acres;
   C.   Hospitals which have a design capacity of more than one hundred (100)
beds, or whose application for certificate shows in the statement of purpose
and need that such hospital is designed to serve the citizens of more than one
city or county;
   D.   Mining operations. Any proposed solid mineral mining operation which
annually requires the removal or disturbance of solid minerals or overburden in
an area, whether or not contiguous, greater than five (5) acres. In computing
the acreage for this purpose, a removal or disturbance of solid materials or
overburden shall be considered part of the same operation if it is all located
within a circle, the radius of which is one mile and the center of which is
located in an area of removal of disturbed solid minerals or overburden;
1. The term "overburden" means the natural covering of a solid mineral sought
to be mined, including, but not limited to, soils, sands, rocks, gravel,
limestone, water or peat.
2. The term "solid mineral" includes, but is not limited to, clay, sand,
gravel, phosphate rock, lime, stone, and any rare earths contained in the soils
or waters of this state, which have heretofore been discovered or may be
hereafter discovered.
3. This definition does not include crushing, extraction, refining or smelting
operations. Such operations are not permitted in a planned community
development.
   E.   Airports. Any new commercial service or general aviation airport with a
paved runway.
   F.   Attractions. Any sport, entertainment, amusement or recreation
facility, including, but not limited to, sports arena, stadium, racetrack or
amusement park, the construction and/or expansion of which: 1) provides parking
spaces for more than two hundred (200) cars; or 2) provides more than two
thousand (2,000) permanent seats for spectators. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-4: CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   Plan Intent: The PCD project plan and any development agreement
approved and adopted by the city council pursuant to this article is intended
to be utilized as a master plan in relation to the zoning, regulation and
development of properties designated therein. The design guidelines and
standards approved and adopted by the city council pursuant to its adoption of
the PCD project plan and/or development agreement shall control and regulate
the development and construction within the project.
   B.   Design: The PCD shall be designed so as to: 1) preserve existing trees,
native land cover, natural watercourses and topography; 2) prevent excessive
grading and scarring of the landscape; and 3) interface with existing street
plans and/or subdivisions contiguous to the proposed PCD. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-
1993)
9-13A-5: RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Applicant: The applicant shall prepare a PCD project plan consistent
with the requirements and standards contained in this article and shall pay for
the design and inspection of the public improvements required by city
specifications or PCD design standards, as applicable. The city shall process
the required PCD project plan and/or development agreements in accordance with
the regulations set forth herein. The applicant shall not alter the terrain or
remove any vegetation from the proposed PCD site or engage in any site
development until he/she has obtained the necessary approvals as outlined
herein or required by any other applicable ordinance.
   B.   City Staff: The city staff shall review the PCD project plan for
design, conformity to this article and other applicable ordinances, and shall
process the PCD project plan and application as provided under this article.
   C.   Planning Commission: The planning commission shall act as an advisory
commission to the city council. It is charged with making investigations,
reports and recommendations on proposed PCDs as to their conformance to this
article and other pertinent ordinances and statutes. The planning commission
shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the
proposed PCD, and/or the PCD project plan.
   D.   City Attorney: The city attorney shall review the form of any
development agreement provided herein and/or final PCD project plan to
determine: 1) if it is correct and acceptable pursuant to this article and that
all other applicable ordinances are complied with; 2) that the individual
dedicating land for use of the public is the owner of record; and 3) that the
land dedicated for the use of the public is free and clear of unacceptable
encumbrances according to the title report, which shall be submitted by the
applicant.
   E.   City Manager: The city manager shall act as a liaison between the
planning commission, city staff, city attorney and city council. Upon review
and final recommendation by the planning commission, the PCD application and
PCD project plan shall be forwarded to the city manager for presentation to the
city council for final action. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-6: APPLICATION:
An application for approval of any PCD shall be filed with the city staff by a
person having an interest in the property for which the PCD is requested at
least sixty (60) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the
application will be considered. The application shall be made on a form
provided by the city and must include written consent by the owner/owners of
all property to be included in the PCD. The PCD application shall include:
   A.   A map of existing sites;
   B.   A preliminary schematic plan (as defined under section
9-13A-7 of this article);
   C.   A written statement of intent and objectives;
   D.   A completed application form, which is supplied by the city; and
   E.   Payment of required fees. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-7: SCHEMATIC PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Plan Required: A schematic plan shall be required of all applicants.
This provides the applicant with an opportunity to consult with and receive
assistance from the city regarding the regulations and design requirements
applicable under this article and/or pursuant to the development agreement.
   B.   Included Information: A schematic plan shall include:
      1.   An accurate map showing boundaries, topography, important physical
features, adjacent properties, and a sketch of the proposed PCD land uses,
major roadways and other items the applicant determines may clarify the intent
of the project; and
      2.   A general statement of intent and long range planning goals and
objectives.
   C.   Submission: The schematic plan shall be submitted to the city staff for
preliminary review. After submittal, the staff shall present the schematic plan
to the planning commission at a regularly scheduled planning commission meeting
for their information and preliminary comments.
   D.   Applicability: The schematic plan requirement is designed to provide
the applicant with helpful information and suggestions before he/she incurs the
expense and time involved in preparing a detailed PCD project plan. However,
only the city council may bind the city and only the city manager and planning
commission can make official recommendations to the city council. The city
employees, planning staff and individual planning commissioners may make
recommendations, suggestions and dispense information regarding applicable
ordinances, but such comments or suggestions shall in no way be binding upon
the city. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-8: PROJECT PLAN:
After completion of the schematic review by the city staff and planning
commission, the applicant shall submit a PCD project plan, which shall include
the following:
   A.   Map Of Existing Site: The map of the existing site as required under
section
9-13A-6 of this article shall show the following information for the site prior
to the demolition of any existing improvement or alternations to natural
vegetation and terrain:
      1.   Vicinity map (scale to be determined by planning staff during plan
review);
      2.   Scale and north arrows;
      3.   Site boundaries, dimensions and acreage;
      4.   Typography with contours at not greater than ten foot (10')
intervals;
      5.   Existing vegetation, location and types;
      6.   Existing structures and designation of their current uses;
      7.   Existing roads and other improvements;
      8.   Location of existing public utilities and utility easements;
      9.   Such other data as may be required as a result of unique conditions
or circumstances associated with the proposed PCD; and
      10.   Description and location of existing public utilities and services,
including fire and police stations, schools, hospitals and their proximity to
the PCD.
   B.   Specific Site Plan: The specific site plan shall consist of a plan
showing the major details of the proposed PCD project, together with supporting
information as required hereunder. The plan will be prepared at a scale
determined by the city staff at the schematic plan review stage. The specific
plan guides the creation of the PCD and ensures that the completed development
will meet the standards envisioned at the time of approval. The design
guidelines and standards that are established within the specific plan shall
function as the primary land use regulatory tool establishing the land use
controls, standards and procedures applicable to development and construction
of the PCD. The specific site plan shall contain the following information:
      1.   Proposed name of the PCD;
      2.   Scale and north arrow;
      3.   Name and address of applicant, owner and the preparer of the plan;
      4.   All proposed land uses, densities and proposed units within the PCD,
including a land use summary and population projections for the proposed units.
This section shall also include a comparison of proposed densities with the
densities permitted in similar city zoning districts;
      5.   Designation of major roads and highways both within the proposed PCD
and those that interface or adjoin the proposed PCD;
      6.   Topography with contours no greater than ten foot (10') intervals;
and
      7.   Public and civic facilities, both currently existing and proposed,
including, without limitation, schools, churches, fire stations, police
stations, hospitals and existing utility service locations.
   C.   Design Guidelines And Standards: Design guidelines and standards, which
will show in detail the internal land use standards and regulations to be
applied to the PCD, including all proposed land use regulations, procedures and
specifications, as well as specific building and architectural standards and
criteria as applicable.
   D.   Grading Concept Plan: Grading concept plan.
   E.   Utilities Plan: This plan designates the location of main lines for
water, sewer, gas, electric and phone services.
   F.   General Landscape Plan: A general landscape plan designates: 1)
proposed open spaces; and 2) general landscaping criteria, including a list of
plants and materials to be used. These criteria will be followed by a detailed
landscape plan which will be submitted with the application for final plat
approval on each phase.
   G.   Preliminary Geology And Soils Reports: A more detailed geology and
soils report will be provided with a final plat application on each phase.
   H.   Cultural Resource Study: A cultural resource study is intended to
identify any potential historical or prehistorical resources on the project
site.
   I.   Site Drainage Plan: The site drainage plan includes designation of
existing natural drainage patterns, together with any proposed modifications or
construction of additional drainage and/or retention facilities.
   J.   Traffic Study: Traffic study and analysis.
   K.   Noise Impact: Noise impact report.
   L.   Project Phasing Plan: A project phasing plan outlines approximate time
frames for the beginning and completion of each phase of proposed development
and construction.
   M.   Adjoining Owner Identification: The names and addresses of all
adjoining property owners.
   N.   Construction, Maintenance Responsibilities: Construction and
maintenance responsibilities.
   O.   Miscellaneous Studies: The applicant shall provide such additional
studies as may be pertinent to the specific site, context and characteristics
of the proposed PCD, as may be required under state or federal law, including,
without limitation, biology studies, environmental studies, wetland analysis
and EPA assessments.
   P.   Written Statement: The written statement to be submitted with the PCD
application shall contain the following information:
      1.   A statement of purpose and intent; and long range planning goals and
objectives, including design intent, general architectural themes and
guidelines.
      2.   A statement of the ownership, proposed tenancy and legal description
of the land included in the PCD project plan, together with a preliminary title
report.
      3.   A statement of any internal land use standards and regulations which
will be applied to properties and uses within the proposed PCD. (Ord. 93-14, 5-
26-1993)
9-13A-9: STAFF REVIEW:
The city staff shall receive and check the PCD project plan for general
compliance with this article and required submissions. If the PCD project plan
is not complete, or not in general compliance, the city staff shall notify the
applicant in writing and specify the respects in which it is deficient. If the
submission is complete and in general compliance, the applicant shall transmit
the requested number of copies of the complete PCD plan, together will all
accompanying data, to those public agencies and utilities as may be concerned,
as designated by the city staff. Each of the public agencies and utilities may,
within fifteen (15) working days, forward to the city staff a written report of
its findings and recommendations. These agencies shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, improvement districts; Southwest Utah district
health department; school district; public works department; fire department;
and telephone, gas and power companies. The staff will also provide the city
manager with one full set of the PCD project plans for comment and review.
(Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-10: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
Within a reasonable time, but not less than sixty (60) days after filing of the
PCD project plan and accompanying data for a staff review, the city manager
shall forward the application and PCD project plan to the planning commission
for review and action thereon. The planning commission shall base its findings
upon the review standards set forth below. If the planning commission shall
find that the proposed PCD project plan complies with the requirements of this
article and that it is satisfied with the proposed PCD project plan, it shall
recommend approval, or approval with conditions, of the PCD project plan. If
the planning commission finds that the proposed PCD project plan does not meet
the requirements of this article or other applicable ordinances, it shall
recommend disapproval of the PCD project plan and shall include with its
recommendations written findings as to the deficiencies and basis for its
recommendation.
   A.   Review Standards: The planning commission shall review the PCD project
plan for substantial compliance with this article. In addition, the planning
commission shall consider the following matters when reviewing the PCD project
plan:
      1.   Consideration relating to traffic safety and traffic flow patterns,
including, without limitation, the effect of the PCD project plan on traffic
conditions on adjoining streets and circulation patterns within the boundary of
the proposed PCD.
      2.   General signage proposals, including design standards, tentative
locations and lighting of signage.
      3.   General landscaping plans, including proposed materials, landscaping
guidelines and proposed dedicated open spaces, parks, etc.
      4.   Considerations relating to the presence of hazards on the site,
including, without limitation: a) the location of any floodplains or channels;
b) the location of any unstable soil formations or geologic formations,
including known earthquake faults; and c) the location of critical public
facilities, such as schools, churches, utilities or transportation corridors.
      5.   Considerations relating to the overall consistency of planning
design and objectives.
   B.   Notice Of Final Action: The city manager shall provide notice to the
applicant, in writing, of the final action taken by the planning commission and
shall submit to the city council written recommendations of approval or denial
of the PCD project plan, together with accompanying data, and minutes of the
planning commission meeting, and shall schedule the application for a public
hearing and review before the city council. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-11: CITY COUNCIL REVIEW:
   A.   Public Hearing: Within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days
of receipt of the recommendation from the planning commission, and after giving
public notice in a manner prescribed in section
9-2-7 of this title, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the PCD
project plan. Members of the public may submit written comments to be part of
the public hearing record, or may present oral comments at the hearing.
   B.   Recommendations Not Binding: The city council shall not be bound by the
recommendation of the planning commission, the city manager or city
departments, and may set its own conditions and requirements consistent with
this article.
   C.   Final Action; Time Limit; Extension: Within a reasonable time, not to
exceed thirty (30) days following the public hearing, the city council shall
take final action on the PCD project plan. In the event of unforeseen
circumstances which may not allow the city council to take final action within
thirty (30) days, the city council and applicant may enter into an extension
agreement which specifies when final action will take place. If the city
council determines that the PCD project plan is in conformity with the
requirements of this article, other applicable ordinances, and any conditions
as recommended by the city departments, planning commission, city manager, or
on its own initiative, and that it is satisfied with the PCD project plan, it
shall approve the plan and shall include with its approval written findings as
to the basis for its approval. The city council may also find that the PCD
project plan is not in conformance with the requirements of this article other
applicable ordinances, and any conditions as recommended by the city
departments, planning commission, city manager, or on its own initiative, and
may deny the plan and shall include with its disapproval written findings as to
the basis for its denial. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-12: CONSTRUCTION LIMITATIONS/SUBSEQUENT APPROVALS:
   A.   Phasing Plan Approvals: Upon approval of the PCD project plan, the
applicant shall then apply for final plan approval for the specific phases of
the PCD as outlined under the PCD project plan. Review and approval of final
plat applications shall be governed by section
10-3-4 of this code. All detailed plans and specifications as required under
section
10-3-4 of this code shall comply with and proceed only in accordance with the
design guidelines and standards adopted by the city and/or established and
approved under the PCD project plan and/or development agreement.
   B.   Further City Review: So long as the specific phases of development and
construction comply with the provisions of the approved PCD project plan and/or
development agreement, further review and approval of subsequent phases
contemplated under the PCD project plan shall not require additional planning
commission or city council review and approvals beyond finding that each phase
is in conformance with the approved project plan and/or development agreement,
and that all platting requirements are met.
   C.   Amendments: Amendments to the approved PCD project plans or to any
conditions attached by the city council with its final approval shall be
obtained only by following the procedures herein outlined governing the
original approval.
   D.   Permit Issuance: The city staff shall not issue any permit for any
grading proposed building, structure or use within any approved PCD, unless
such building, structure or use is in accordance with the approved PCD project
plan and with any conditions imposed by the city council with its final
approval.
   E.   Assignment Of Rights: Approvals and specific plan design standards
established within the approved PCD project plan and/or development agreement
shall be assignable and transferable with the property. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-13: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
   A.   General Provisions: When a PCD project plan is approved by the city
council, the city council may choose to enter into a development agreement with
the applicant. Such agreement shall constitute a binding contract between the
applicant and the city (the parties) and shall be construed together with the
provisions of the PCD project plan and any conditions attached thereto, to
accomplish and give effect to the purposes set forth in this article. The city
council, by and through the mayor, shall be authorized to sign the development
agreement on behalf of the city.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of the development agreement shall be to specify
the detailed terms and conditions upon which the parties will cooperate in
completing development of the subject property under the PCD project plan. The
development agreement shall create a vested right in applicant or its
successors or assigns to develop and construct the project as set forth in the
PCD project plan. The agreement may also specify the terms and conditions
relating to annexation of the subject property, if applicable.
   C.   Amendments: Any development agreement may be amended by mutual written
consent of the parties.
   D.   Mandatory Contents: A development agreement entered into pursuant to
this article shall contain provisions that:
      1.   Specify the duration of the agreement;
      2.   Specify the permitted uses of the property;
      3.   Specify the permitted density of use or development;
      4.   Specify the maximum height and dimensions of the proposed
structures;
      5.   Set forth the provisions for the reservation or dedication of lands
for public purposes, including, without limitation, parks, roadways and utility
easements, as applicable;
      6.   Provide that construction shall be commenced within a specified time
and that the project or any phase thereof shall be completed within a specified
time which shall be consistent with the expected build out of the phase. The
development agreement may also include a provision which allows the parties to
amend the expected build out calculations approved in the original development
agreement;
      7.   Provide for periodic review of the status of performance under the
development agreement.
   E.   Permissive Contents: Development agreement between the parties pursuant
to this article may:
      1.   Include conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for
subsequent discretionary action; provided, that the subsequent discretionary
action shall not prevent development of the land pursuant to the PCD project
plan;
      2.   Include terms and conditions relating to the applicant's financing
of required public improvements, facilities and infrastructure related to the
project, including, without limitation, the applicant's participation in
benefit assessment proceedings.
   F.   Execution And Recording:
      1.   The parties shall not execute any development agreements prior to
the final approval by the city council of any PCD project plan as provided
under this article.
      2.   An executed development agreement under this article shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder within ten (10) days after it is
executed by the parties. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
9-13A-14: APPEAL OF FINAL DECISIONS:
   A.   Authority; Time Limit: Any person adversely affected may file a
petition for review of the decision of the city council to the district court.
Such petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the final decision
is rendered.
   B.   Scope Of Recommendations: Recommendations made by the planning
commission or city staff under this article shall be advisory only and not
considered final or subject to judicial appeal. (Ord. 93-14, 5-26-1993)
ARTICLE B. MOBILE HOME OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK AND SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-13B-1: Purpose And Intent
9-13B-2: Mobile Home Or Recreational Vehicle Parks
9-13B-3: Mobile Home Or Recreational Vehicle Subdivisions
9-13B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of this article is to provide for mobile home and
recreational vehicle developments which are suitably developed for the
placement and occupancy of mobile homes or recreational vehicles for
recreational purposes on approved spaces. The intent of this article is to
encourage the development of a unified project with adequate open space and
other factors which preserve the residential character of the area and to
prohibit uses that are incompatible with surrounding areas and developments.
   B.   A park is intended to provide a harmonious environment for small
families with relatively few children on rented or leased spaces for long term
or temporary use. In contrast, a subdivision is intended to accommodate
individually owned spaces. Both types of development will include necessary
accessory uses and amenities. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-13B-2: MOBILE HOME OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
   A.   Location: A mobile home or recreational vehicle park may be established
in the mobile home - recreational vehicle (MH) zone, after the planning
commission has reviewed the proposed park for compliance with the requirements
of this article and approved the park.
   B.   Approval Procedure: All mobile home or recreational vehicle parks are
conditional uses, which require planning commission review and approval. All
applicants for mobile home or recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the
conditional use permit approval process as outlined in chapter 17 of this
title.
   C.   Mobile Home Park Design And Development Requirements: All approved
mobile home parks shall meet the following minimum standards:
      1.   Management Staff: Each mobile home park owner shall provide for a
local management staff which is responsible to handle the daily enforcement and
property management for the park owner. The park owner shall be responsible to
ensure that the park remains in compliance with the requirements of this
article;
      2.   Size: A minimum total park size of ten (10) acres;
      3.   Density: A maximum density of eight (8) mobile home spaces per gross
acre;
      4.   Ingress And Egress: Ingress and egress from an arterial or collector
street;
      5.   Area, Width And Yard: Area, width and yard standards as follows:
         a.   Four thousand (4,000) square foot minimum mobile home space size;
         b.   Forty foot (40') minimum space width at the building setback
line;
         c.   Sixty foot (60') minimum space depth;
         d.   Five foot (5') minimum setback from the mobile home, room
additions or awnings to the front and side space lines;
         e.   Ten foot (10') minimum setback from the mobile home, room
additions or awnings to the rear space line and/or any exterior park boundary;
      6.   Masonry Wall:
         a.   A masonry wall six feet (6') in height shall be required along
all exterior property lines unless the planning commission determines that
topographic or other land related conditions make such wall unnecessary. The
masonry wall, when adjacent to a public street, shall be set back ten feet
(10') from the property line, and a ten foot (10') wide landscaped strip shall
be installed between the wall and property line. Other exterior walls may abut
the property line;
         b.   The developer/owner shall maintain all landscaping between the
wall and the street. Additional landscaped strips along other exterior property
lines may be provided by the developer or required by the planning commission
to ensure compatibility between the park and adjacent land uses;
      7.   Access To Spaces: Access to all mobile home spaces shall be from the
interior private streets of the park. There shall be no public streets within
the park, except as required and determined to be necessary by the planning
commission. There shall be no individual access to any mobile home space from
any public right of way;
      8.   Recreational Open Space And/Or Facilities: A minimum of one hundred
(100) square feet of recreational open space and/or recreational facilities
shall be provided for each mobile home space in the park. Public or private
streets, vehicle storage areas and exterior boundary landscaping areas shall
not be included in calculating recreational open space. A minimum of ten
percent (10%) of the required recreation square footage shall be enclosed
within a recreation hall or building. All such facilities shall be constructed
in the first phase of any phased project;
      9.   Private Streets: Private streets inside the park shall have a
minimum width of thirty two feet (32') from edge of pavement to edge of
pavement. Private streets shall be constructed of a minimum of two inches (2")
of asphalt over six inches (6") of ABC;
      10.   Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be installed in
compliance with the subdivision ordinance and shall be designed so as to
provide adequate drainage and as an edging on both sides of private streets;
      11.   Off Street Parking: A minimum of two (2) off street automobile
parking spaces shall be provided on each mobile home space. These parking
spaces may be of tandem design, but may not project within the required front
yard setback area. All required parking spaces must be paved with either two
inches (2") of asphalt or four inches (4") of concrete;
      12.   Visitor Off Street Parking: A minimum of one visitor off street
parking space shall be provided for each five (5) mobile home spaces. These
visitor parking spaces shall be located as approved by the planning commission;
      13.   Refuse Collection Facilities: All canister type refuse collection
facilities shall be surrounded on three (3) sides by visually opaque screening
fences or walls;
      14.   Entrances: Each mobile home park shall be provided with a minimum
of two (2) separate vehicular entrances. The entrances shall be located no less
than twenty five feet (25') apart. One of the entrances may be designed and
constructed for use by emergency vehicles only;
      15.   Storage Buildings: Storage buildings not exceeding one hundred
fifty (150) square feet are permitted on each mobile home space. All storage
buildings shall be located in the rear half of the space and shall be
accessible only through an exterior door;
      16.   Additions, Awnings Or Covers: All room additions, awnings or covers
shall be regulated by the adopted building code in effect at the time of
construction. All room additions shall be structurally independent of the
mobile home itself, but may be attached to the mobile home by weather
stripping;
      17.   Fixtures To Comply: All electrical and plumbing fixtures, hookups
and improvements in mobile home parks shall be in compliance with all
applicable city ordinances in effect at the time of construction;
      18.   Waste Disposal Systems: All sewage and other liquid waste disposal
systems in mobile home parks shall be required to make connection with public
sewer facilities where available. If no public sewer facilities are available,
the planning commission may approve a sewage disposal system which has been
reviewed and approved by the Southwest Utah district health department;
      19.   Water And Electrical: Each mobile home space shall be provided with
an approved public water supply and electrical connection;
      20.   Underground Utilities: All utilities shall be installed
underground; and
      21.   Enclosed Storage Area: Each mobile home park shall be provided with
an enclosed area for the storage of tenants' boats, recreational vehicles and
other similar property. The size and location of the storage area shall be
approved by the planning commission at the time of conditional use permit
approval.
   D.   Recreational Vehicle Park Design And Development Requirements: All
approved mobile home parks shall meet the following minimum standards:
      1.   Local Management: Each recreational vehicle park owner shall provide
for a local management staff which is responsible to handle the daily
enforcement and property management for the park owner. The park owner shall be
responsible to ensure that the park remains in compliance with the requirements
of this article;
      2.   Size: A minimum total park size of ten (10) acres;
      3.   Density: A maximum density of fifteen (15) recreational vehicle
spaces per gross acre;
      4.   Ingress And Egress: Ingress and egress from an arterial or collector
street;
      5.   Area, Width And Yard: Area, width and yard standards as follows:
         a.   One thousand two hundred (1,200) square foot minimum recreational
vehicle space size;
         b.   Twenty eight foot (28') minimum space width at the building
setback line;
         c.   Forty foot (40') minimum space depth;
         d.   Five foot (5') minimum setback from any portion of the
recreational vehicle, other than the trailer tongue, to the front space line,
and a minimum setback of three feet (3') from any portion of the recreational
vehicle or awning to any side or rear space line;
         e.   Ten foot (10') minimum setback from the mobile home, room
additions or awnings to any exterior park boundary;
      6.   Masonry Wall:
         a.   A masonry wall six feet (6') in height shall be required along
all exterior property lines unless the planning commission determines that
topographic or other land related conditions make such wall unnecessary. The
masonry wall, when adjacent to a public street, shall be set back ten feet
(10') from the property line, and a ten foot (10') wide landscaped strip shall
be installed between the wall and property line. Other exterior walls may abut
the property line;
         b.   The developer/owner shall maintain all landscaping between the
wall and the street. Additional landscaped strips along other exterior property
lines may be provided by the developer or required by the planning commission
to ensure compatibility between the park and adjacent land uses;
      7.   Access To Spaces: Access to all recreational vehicle spaces shall be
from the interior private streets of the park. There shall be no public streets
within the park, except as required and determined to be necessary by the
planning commission. There shall be no individual access to any recreational
vehicle space from any public right of way;
      8.   Recreational Open Space And/Or Facilities: A minimum of one hundred
(100) square feet of recreational open space and/or recreational facilities
shall be provided for each recreational vehicle space in the park. Public or
private streets, vehicle storage areas and exterior boundary landscaping areas
shall not be included in calculating recreational open space. A minimum of ten
percent (10%) of the required recreation square footage shall be enclosed
within a recreation hall or building. All such facilities shall be constructed
in the first phase of any phased project;
      9.   Private Streets: Private streets inside the park shall have a
minimum width of thirty two feet (32') from edge of pavement to edge of
pavement. Private streets shall be constructed of a minimum of two inches (2")
of asphalt over six inches (6") of ABC;
      10.   Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be installed in
compliance with the subdivision ordinance and shall be designed so as to
provide adequate drainage and as an edging on both sides of private streets;
      11.   Off Street Parking: A minimum of one off street automobile parking
space shall be provided on each recreational vehicle space. All required
parking spaces must be paved with either two inches (2") of asphalt or four
inches (4") of concrete;
      12.   Visitor Off Street Parking: A minimum of one visitor off street
parking space shall be provided for each five (5) recreational vehicle spaces.
These visitor parking spaces shall be located as approved by the planning
commission;
      13.   Refuse Collection Facilities: All canister type refuse collection
facilities shall be surrounded on three (3) sides by visually opaque screening
fences or walls;
      14.   Entrances: Each recreational vehicle park shall be provided with a
minimum of two (2) separate vehicular entrances. The entrances shall be located
no less than twenty five feet (25') apart. One of the entrances may be designed
and constructed for use by emergency vehicles only;
      15.   Fixtures To Comply: All electrical and plumbing fixtures, hookups
and improvements in recreational vehicle parks shall be in compliance with all
applicable city ordinances in effect at the time of construction;
      16.   Waste Disposal Systems: All sewage and other liquid waste disposal
systems in recreational vehicle parks shall be required to make connection with
public sewer facilities where available. If no public sewer facilities are
available, the planning commission may approve a sewage disposal system which
has been reviewed and approved by the Southwest Utah district health
department;
      17.   Water And Electrical: Each recreational vehicle space shall be
provided with an approved public water supply and electrical connection;
      18.   Utilities Underground: All utilities shall be installed
underground;
      19.   Enclosed Storage Area: Each mobile home park shall be provided with
an enclosed area for the storage of tenants' boats, recreational vehicles and
other similar property. The size and location of the storage area shall be
approved by the planning commission at the time of conditional use permit
approval; and
      20.   Sanitary Facilities: Sanitary facilities shall comply with the
recreational vehicle park sanitation regulations adopted by the Utah state
board of health in effect at the time of application. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-13B-3: MOBILE HOME OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Location: A mobile home or recreational vehicle subdivision may be
established in the mobile home - recreational vehicle (MH) zone, after the
planning commission has reviewed the proposed subdivision for compliance with
the requirements of this article and approved the subdivision.
   B.   Approval Procedure: All mobile home or recreational vehicle
subdivisions are conditional uses, which require planning commission review and
approval. All applicants for mobile home or recreational vehicle subdivisions
shall comply with the conditional use permit approval process as outlined in
chapter 17 of this title.
   C.   Recreational Vehicle Subdivision Design And Development Requirements:
All approved recreational vehicle subdivisions shall meet the following minimum
standards:
      1.   Property Owners' Association; Local Management: Each recreational
vehicle subdivision owner shall provide for a property owners' association with
a board of directors who shall administer and enforce the required covenants,
conditions and restrictions. The board of directors shall provide for a local
management staff which is responsible to handle the daily enforcement and
property management for the subdivision owner. The subdivision owner shall be
responsible to ensure that the park remains in compliance with the requirements
of this article;
      2.   Size: A minimum total subdivision size of ten (10) acres;
      3.   Density: A maximum density of fifteen (15) mobile home spaces per
gross acre;
      4.   Ingress And Egress: Ingress and egress from an arterial or collector
street;
      5.   Area, Width And Yard: Area, width and yard standards as follows:
         a.   One thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750) square foot minimum
recreational vehicle lot size, with an average lot size of at least two
thousand (2,000) square feet;
         b.   Thirty five foot (35') minimum space width at the building
setback line;
         c.   Fifty foot (50') minimum space depth;
         d.   Seven foot (7') minimum setback from any portion of the
recreational vehicle, other than the trailer tongue, to the front lot line. A
front side shall be designated on every lot which has access from more than one
street;
         e.   Five foot (5') minimum setback from any portion of the
recreational vehicle or awning to any side or rear lot line;
         f.   Ten foot (10') minimum setback from the recreational vehicle or
related awnings to any exterior park boundary;
      6.   Masonry Wall:
         a.   A masonry wall six feet (6') in height shall be required along
all exterior property lines unless the planning commission determines that
topographic or other land related conditions make such wall unnecessary. The
masonry wall, when adjacent to a public street, shall be set back ten feet
(10') from the property line, and a ten foot (10') wide landscaped strip shall
be installed between the wall and property line. Other exterior walls may abut
the property line.
         b.   The developer/owner shall maintain all landscaping between the
wall and the street. Additional landscaped strips along other exterior property
lines may be provided by the developer or required by the planning commission
to ensure compatibility between the park and adjacent land uses;
      7.   Access To Lots: Access to all recreational vehicle lots shall be
from the interior private streets of the subdivision. There shall be no public
streets within the subdivision, except as required and determined to be
necessary by the planning commission. There shall be no individual access to
any recreational vehicle lot from any public right of way;
      8.   Recreational Open Space And/Or Facilities: A minimum of one hundred
(100) square feet of recreational open space and/or recreational facilities
shall be provided for each recreational vehicle lot in the subdivision. Public
or private streets, vehicle storage areas and exterior boundary landscaping
areas shall not be included in calculating recreational open space. A minimum
of ten percent (10%) of the required recreation square footage shall be
enclosed within a recreational hall or building. All such facilities shall be
constructed in the first phase of any phased project;
      9.   Private Streets: Private streets inside the subdivision shall have a
minimum width of thirty two feet (32') from edge of pavement to edge of
pavement. Private streets shall be constructed of a minimum of two inches (2")
of asphalt over six inches (6") of ABC;
      10.   Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be installed in
compliance with the subdivision ordinance and shall be designed so as to
provide adequate drainage and as an edging on both sides of private streets;
      11.   Parking: A minimum of one automobile parking space shall be
provided on each recreational vehicle lot. All required parking spaces must be
paved with either two inches (2") of asphalt or four inches (4") of concrete;
      12.   Visitor Off Street Parking: A minimum of one visitor off street
parking space shall be provided for each five (5) recreational vehicle lots.
These visitor parking spaces shall be located as approved by the planning
commission;
      13.   Refuse Collection Facilities: All canister type refuse collection
facilities shall be surrounded on three (3) sides by visually opaque screening
fences or walls;
      14.   Entrances: Each recreational vehicle subdivision shall be provided
with a minimum of two (2) separate vehicular entrances. The entrances shall be
located no less than twenty five feet (25') apart. One of the entrances may be
designed and constructed for use by emergency vehicles only; (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-
1989)
      15.   Storage Building: One detached storage building not exceeding one
hundred fifty (150) square feet and located on the rear one-fourth (1/4) of the
lot, or one attached storage room, not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square
feet and built in conjunction with a recreational home or park model is
permitted on each lot. Said storage room shall have entrance into it by an
exterior door or doors only; (Ord. 90-15, 12-13-1990)
      16.   Fixtures To Comply: All electrical and plumbing fixtures, hookups
and improvements in mobile home parks shall be in compliance with all
applicable city ordinances in effect at the time of construction;
      17.   Waste Disposal Systems: All sewage and other liquid waste disposal
systems in recreational vehicle subdivisions shall be required to make
connection with public sewer facilities where available. If no public sewer
facilities are available, the planning commission may approve a sewage disposal
system which has been reviewed and approved by the Southwest Utah district
health department;
      18.   Water And Electrical: Each recreational vehicle lot shall be
provided with an approved public water supply and electrical connection;
      19.   Utilities Underground: All utilities shall be installed
underground; and
      20.   Enclosed Storage Area: Each recreational vehicle subdivision shall
be provided with an enclosed area for the storage of tenants' boats,
recreational vehicles and other similar property. The size and location of the
storage area shall be approved by the planning commission at the time of
conditional use permit approval.
   D.   Mobile Home Subdivision Design And Development Requirements: All
approved mobile home subdivisions shall meet the following minimum standards:
      1.   Property Owners' Association; Local Management: Each mobile home
subdivision owner shall provide for a property owners' association with a board
of directors who shall administer and enforce the required covenants,
conditions and restrictions. The board of directors shall provide for a local
management staff which is responsible to handle the daily enforcement and
property management for the subdivision owner. The subdivision owner shall be
responsible to ensure that the park remains in compliance with the requirements
of this article;
      2.   Size: A minimum total subdivision size of ten (10) acres;
      3.   Density: A maximum density of seven (7) mobile home spaces per gross
acre;
      4.   Ingress And Egress: Ingress and egress from an arterial or collector
street;
      5.   Area, Width And Yard: Area, width and yard standards as follows:
         a.   Six thousand (6,000) square foot minimum mobile home lot size;
         b.   Sixty foot (60') minimum space width at the building setback
line;
         c.   Ninety four foot (94') minimum space depth;
         d.   Twenty foot (20') minimum setback from any portion of the mobile
home, room additions or related awnings to the front lot line;
         e.   Five foot (5') minimum setback from one side lot line and ten
feet (10') from the opposite side lot line to the mobile home, room additions
or related awnings;
         f.   Ten foot (10') minimum setback from the mobile home, room
additions or awnings to the rear lot line and any exterior park boundary;
      6.   Masonry Wall:
         a.   A masonry wall six feet (6') in height shall be required along
all exterior property lines unless the planning commission determines that
topographic or other land related conditions make such wall unnecessary. The
masonry wall, when adjacent to a public street, shall be set back ten feet
(10') from the property line, and a ten foot (10') wide landscaped strip shall
be installed between the wall and property line. Other exterior walls may abut
the property line;
         b.   The developer/owner shall maintain all landscaping between the
wall and the street. Additional landscaped strips along other exterior property
lines may be provided by the developer or required by the planning commission
to ensure compatibility between the park and adjacent land uses;
      7.   Access: Access to all mobile home lots shall be from the interior
private streets of the subdivision. There shall be no public streets within the
subdivision, except as required and determined to be necessary by the planning
commission. There shall be no individual access to any mobile home lot from any
public right of way;
      8.   Recreational Open Space And/Or Facilities: A minimum of one hundred
(100) square feet of recreational open space and/or recreational facilities
shall be provided for each mobile home lot in the subdivision. Public or
private streets, vehicle storage areas and exterior boundary landscaping areas
shall not be included in calculating recreational open space. A minimum of ten
percent (10%) of the required recreational square footage shall be enclosed
within a recreation hall or building. All such facilities shall be constructed
in the first phase of any phased project;
      9.   Private Streets: Private streets inside the subdivision shall have a
minimum width of thirty two feet (32') from edge of pavement to edge of
pavement. Private streets shall be constructed of a minimum of two inches (2")
of asphalt over six inches (6") of ABC;
      10.   Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be installed in
compliance with the subdivision ordinance and shall be designed so as to
provide adequate drainage and as an edging on both sides of private streets;
      11.   Parking: A minimum of two (2) automobile parking spaces shall be
provided on each mobile home lot. These spaces may be of tandem design, but may
not project within the required front yard area. All required parking spaces
must be paved with either two inches (2") of asphalt or four inches (4") of
concrete;
      12.   Visitor Off Street Parking: A minimum of one visitor off street
parking space shall be provided for each five (5) mobile home lots. These
visitor parking spaces shall be located as approved by the planning commission;
      13.   Refuse Collection Facilities: All canister type refuse collection
facilities shall be surrounded on three (3) sides by visually opaque screening
fences or walls;
      14.   Entrances: Each mobile home subdivision shall be provided with a
minimum of two (2) separate vehicular entrances. The entrances shall be located
no less than twenty five feet (25') apart. One of the entrances may be designed
and constructed for use by emergency vehicles only;
      15.   Fixtures In Compliance: All electrical and plumbing fixtures,
hookups and improvements in mobile home subdivisions shall be in compliance
with all applicable city ordinances in effect at the time of construction;
      16.   Waste Disposal Systems: All sewage and other liquid waste disposal
systems in mobile home subdivisions shall be required to make connection with
public sewer facilities where available. If no public sewer facilities are
available, the planning commission may approve a sewage disposal system which
has been reviewed and approved by the Southwest Utah district health
department;
      17.   Water And Electrical: Each mobile home lot shall be provided with
an approved public water supply and electrical connection;
      18.   Utilities Underground: All utilities shall be installed
underground;
      19.   Enclosed Storage Area: Each mobile home subdivision shall be
provided with an enclosed area for the storage of tenants' boats, recreational
vehicles and other similar property. The size and location of the storage area
shall be approved by the planning commission at the time of conditional use
permit approval; and
      20.   Sanitary Facilities: Sanitary facilities shall comply with the
mobile home park sanitation regulations adopted by the Utah state board of
health in effect at the time of application. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
CHAPTER 14
SUPPLEMENTARY AND QUALIFYING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-14-1: Effect Of Chapter
9-14-2: Lot Standards
9-14-3: Every Dwelling To Be On A Lot; Exceptions
9-14-4: Yard Space For One Building
9-14-5: Sale Or Lease Of Required Space
9-14-6: Sale Of Lots Below Minimum Space Requirements
9-14-7: Yards Unobstructed; Exceptions
9-14-8: Area Of Accessory Buildings
9-14-9: Minimum Height Of Main Buildings
9-14-10: Maximum Height Of Accessory Buildings
9-14-11: Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
9-14-12: Maximum Height Of Fences, Walls And Hedges
9-14-13: Water And Sewerage Requirements
9-14-14: Curbs, Gutters And Sidewalks
9-14-15: Livestock And Animals
9-14-16: Parking Requirements
9-14-17: No Parking In Front Yard
9-14-18: Landscaping
9-14-19: Elderly Residential Facilities
9-14-20: Underground Utilities Required
9-14-21: Exceptions To Height Limitations
9-14-22: Additional Height Allowed
9-14-23: Model Homes
9-14-24: Residential Facilities For Persons With A Disability
9-14-25: Residential Rentals, Short Term
9-14-26: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
9-14-1: EFFECT OF CHAPTER:
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the zone regulations appearing elsewhere in this title. (Ord.
89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-14-2: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every lot, existing or
intended to be created, shall have such area, width and depth as is required by
this title for the district in which the lot is located, except under the
following condition:
Preexisting lots: Where a person who neither owns nor has a right of possession
to any contiguous parcel of land legally subdivided and has the right of
possession to a lot or parcel of land by virtue of a duly recorded deed or
contract for sale, "required area", shall mean the area of said lot or parcel
of land; provided, that the deed or contract of sale, by which such right of
possession was separated, has been recorded prior to the adoption of this
section, any previous ordinance or any subsequent ordinance imposing area
requirements on said lot or parcel of land. All such parcels must still meet
the required setbacks of the designated zoning district. Any exceptions must
obtain a variance from the Board of Adjustment.
   B.   All lots shall have frontage upon a dedicated street, at least fifty
feet (50') in width, except for flag lots, or upon a private street approved by
the Planning Commission. (Ord. 93-7, 4-14-1993; amd. 2007 Code)
9-14-3: EVERY DWELLING TO BE ON A LOT; EXCEPTIONS:
Every dwelling structure shall be located and maintained on a separate lot
having no less than the minimum area, width, depth and frontage required by
this title for the district in which the dwelling structure is located, except
that group dwellings, condominiums and other multistructure dwelling complexes
under single ownership and management, which are permitted by this title and
have been approved by the Planning Commission, may occupy one lot for each such
multistructure complex. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-14-4: YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING:
No required yard or other open space around an existing building or which is
hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space
for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an
adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon
a building is to be erected or established. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-14-5: SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE:
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other
requirements of this title for a lot or building may be sold or leased away
from any such lot or building. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-14-6: SALE OF LOTS BELOW MINIMUM SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area requirements
for the district in which it is located may be divided from a larger parcel of
land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building or development
of a lot. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-14-7: YARDS UNOBSTRUCTED; EXCEPTIONS:
Except as allowed in the downtown mixed use (DM) zone, every part of a required
yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed, except for accessory buildings
in a side yard or rear yard. However, in order to project into a side yard or
rear yard setback, the placement of an accessory building shall be considered
only under the conditions cited elsewhere in this title for each applicable
zoning district. This provision shall not apply to the ordinary projections of
skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, flues and other ornamental
features which project into a yard not more than two and one-half feet (21/2').
Also not included in this provision are open or lattice enclosed fire escapes,
fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers projecting
into a yard not more than five feet (5'). (Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009)
9-14-8: AREA OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
No accessory building nor group of accessory buildings in any residential
district shall cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear yard,
unless an accessory building or group of accessory buildings covering more than
twenty five percent (25%) are approved under a conditional use permit. (Ord.
2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-14-9: MINIMUM HEIGHT OF MAIN BUILDINGS:
All dwellings shall be erected to a height of at least one story above grade,
unless the dwelling is considered a bona fide earth shelter home designed for
energy saving purposes to be located below the finished grade. The lived in
basement of an uncompleted single-family dwelling shall not be considered an
earth sheltered home. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-14-10: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Except for allowed agricultural buildings located in a zoning district that
allows agricultural uses, no building which is accessory to a one-family, two-
family, three-family or four- family dwelling shall be erected to a height
greater than one story or twenty feet (20'), unless an additional story or
height in excess of twenty feet (20') is approved under a conditional use
permit. Accessory buildings exceeding one story or twenty feet (20') in height
shall not encroach into the side yard or rear yard setbacks. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-
9-2004)
9-14-11: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
In all districts which require a front yard, no obstruction to view in excess
of three feet (3') in height shall be placed on any corner lot within a
triangle formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at
points thirty feet (30') from the intersection of the street lines, except for
a reasonable number of trees pruned high enough to permit unobstructed vision
to automobile drivers and pedestal type identification signs and pumps at
gasoline service stations. (See illustrations in chapter 22 of this title.)
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-14-12: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES:
   A.   Fences, walls and hedges may be erected or allowed to the permitted
building height when located within the buildable area of an approved lot;
provided, that a building permit is obtained for any structure over six feet
(6') in height.
   B.   Fences, walls and hedges may not exceed six feet (6') in height within
any required rear yard or interior side yard. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
   C.   Fences, walls and hedges may not exceed three feet (3') in height
within the first ten feet (10') of the required front yard as measured from the
street property line. (Ord. 97-22, 7-23-1997)
   D.   For the purpose of this title, single shrub plantings shall not
constitute a hedge if the closest distance between the foliage of any two (2)
plants remains at least five feet (5').
   E.   Where a fence, wall or hedge is located along a property line
separating two (2) lots and there exists a difference in grade between the two
(2) properties, such fence, wall or hedge may be erected or allowed to the
maximum height permitted on either side of the property line. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-
1989)
9-14-13: WATER AND SEWERAGE REQUIREMENTS:
In all cases where a proposed building or use will involve the use of sewerage
facilities, and a sewer main line is located within three hundred feet (300'),
connection to such main line will be required prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. Where a connection to a "public sewer system", as
defined by the state department of health, is not available, the proposed
individual sewage disposal facility shall comply with the regulations for
individual wastewater disposal systems in effect at the time the building
permit is applied for. A certificate of approval from said department shall
accompany the certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-14-14: CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS:
The installation of curb, gutter and sidewalks of a type approved by the city
shall be required on any existing or proposed street adjoining a lot on which a
new use is to be established in any commercial, residential, administrative and
professional, or mobile home zoning district, unless specifically waived by the
city council or deferred by the mayor. Such curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be
required as a condition of building or use approval.
   A.   Waiver Procedure: Any landowner who wishes to request a waiver of the
installation of curb, gutter and/or sidewalk must submit a written request for
waiver of curb, gutter and/or sidewalk to the public works department. Such
request may be in the form of a letter which describes the unique circumstances
which justify such a waiver. The request will be placed on the next regular
city council agenda. The city council shall use the following standards in
determining whether or not to grant the waiver:
      1.   The density and pedestrian circulation pattern of the immediate area
do not require curb, gutter and/or sidewalks to facilitate orderly drainage and
safe pedestrian access;
      2.   The proposed drainage plan for the subject parcel has been reviewed
by the public works department, and the public works department provides a
written statement concurring with the finding that curb, gutter and/or sidewalk
are not necessary to provide orderly drainage; (Ord. 93-18, 10-27-1993; amd.
2007 Code)
      3.   No city developed drainage and/or circulation plans are available
for the public streets in the immediate vicinity; and
      4.   The landowner agrees to file a written statement with the city
recorder in which the landowner and any successors or assigns agree not to
oppose any special improvement district which may be proposed to install curb,
gutter and/or sidewalk in the future.
   B.   Deferral Procedure: Such curb, gutter and/or sidewalk improvements may
be deferred when deemed appropriate by the mayor. Deferral may be allowed when
the mayor finds that:
      1.   The construction is impractical due to physical constraints which do
not allow installation of such improvements as a feasible element of the new
use;
      2.   The neighborhood is absent similar improvements, and the city has no
plans for the installation of such improvements within two (2) years of the
establishment of the new use; and
      3.   The public works director has reviewed the request and has submitted
a recommendation.
   C.   Deferral Agreement: When deferred, the owner of land requesting the
deferral shall enter into an agreement with the city for the installation of
curb, gutter and/or sidewalk at a future date; as determined by the mayor, upon
the advice of the public works director and city attorney. This agreement shall
provide for the following:
      1.   The agreement shall be acceptable to the public works director and
city attorney;
      2.   Construction of required improvements shall begin within ninety (90)
days of any future receipt of notice to proceed from the city;
      3.   In the event of default by the owner or successors, the city is
authorized to cause the construction to be done and charge the entire expense
to the owners or successors, including interest from the date of notice of the
cost until paid;
      4.   The agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder
at the expense of the owner and shall constitute notice to all successors of
title to the real property of the obligation set forth, and also a lien in the
amount to fully reimburse the city, including interest;
      5.   In the event of litigation caused by any default of the owner or
successors, the owner or successors agree to pay all costs involved, including
reasonable attorney fees, which shall become a part of the lien against the
real property;
      6.   The term "owner" shall include not only the present owner, but also
heirs, successors, assigns, executors and administrators, with the intent that
the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a
lien against it;
      7.   The landowner agrees to file a written statement with the city
recorder in which the landowner and any successors or assigns agree not to
oppose any special improvement district which may be proposed to install curb,
gutter and/or sidewalk in the future; and
      8.   Any other provisions deemed necessary by the mayor or city attorney.
(Ord. 93-18, 10-27-1993)
   D.   Appeals Procedure: Any landowner who does not agree with the
determination of the city council or mayor, or contents of the proposed
agreement to install curb, gutter and/or sidewalks, may appeal such
determination by filing a request for review in writing to the board of
adjustment. Such request shall identify the specific portions of the proposed
agreement which the landowner wishes to amend or delete. The board of
adjustment may utilize the same standards of review for such appeals as are
listed in the waiver section above, as well as other applicable information
provided by the city manager or city attorney. (Ord. 93-18, 10-27-1993; amd.
2007 Code)
9-14-15: LIVESTOCK AND ANIMALS:
The raising and keeping of livestock or animals is permitted on lots of greater
than one-half (1/2) acre in size, in all applicable zones, as long as all
livestock and animals shall be housed in enclosed corrals, stables or other
enclosures with open fenced exercise areas which are located a minimum of one
hundred feet (100') from any dwelling and all board of health requirements are
complied with. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-14-16: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The site plans submitted with each single-family dwelling unit shall include
two (2) off street parking spaces, and except for dwelling units in the DM
zone, one of which shall be enclosed in a garage or carport. The additional
required parking space shall be constructed of concrete and be a minimum of
nine feet by nineteen feet (9' x 19') in size. Both parking spaces required by
this section shall comply with the front yard setback requirements of the zone
in which the lot is located. Locating one parking space immediately in front of
the other required parking space (tandem parking) is specifically prohibited,
except for parking in a mobile home - recreational vehicle (MH) zone. (Ord. 89-
5, 3-1-1989; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2008-02, 1-9-2008; Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009)
9-14-17: NO PARKING IN FRONT YARD:
The front yard of any residential lot shall not be used for the location of any
building or long term parking area for any vehicle, including boats,
recreational vehicles, snowmobiles, jet skis, motorcycles or other similar
vehicles. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-14-18: LANDSCAPING:
All site plans submitted with building permit applications shall include a city
approved scaled drawing of the proposed landscaping of the lot. The scaled
drawing shall indicate plant types, sizes and amounts, and other features such
as colored gravel and rocks, etc. Such drawing shall address the following
standards:
   A.   Requirements: The area of the street located between the curb line and
the private property line, excluding a sidewalk, if any exists, shall be
completely landscaped with at least fifty percent (50%) in live vegetation, and
maintained by the abutting property owner. Tree and shrub crowns and branch
extensions shall be included in the fifty percent (50%) calculation. Said area
shall be kept free of weeds and other unsightly materials or conditions.
   B.   Maintenance: Buildings, uses and lots shall be maintained in such a
manner as to enhance community pride and beautification. No junk, rubbish,
weeds or other unsightly materials or conditions, including motor vehicles in
an inoperable condition for more than six (6) months, shall be permitted on any
lot, right of way or easement, or as part of any building or use.
   C.   Consistent With Approval: On site landscaping shall be consistent with
the approved scaled drawing and as required in each particular zoning district
and other applicable sections cited elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-
9-2004)
9-14-19: ELDERLY RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES:
   A.   Permitted Use Multiple-Family Zone:
      1.   A residential facility for elderly persons is a permitted use in any
area where residential dwellings are allowed, except an area zoned to permit
exclusively single-family dwellings. Prior to establishing a residential
facility for elderly persons, a building permit must be obtained by application
to the city, which shall be issued if the applicant can show that:
         a.   The facility meets all city building, safety, zoning and health
ordinances applicable to similar dwellings;
         b.   Adequate off street parking spaces are provided;
         c.   The facility is capable of use as a residential facility for
elderly persons without structural or landscape alterations that would change
the structure's residential character;
         d.   The residential facility for elderly persons is not established
or maintained within three-fourths (3/4) mile of another residential facility
for elderly persons or "residential facility for persons with a disability" (as
defined by Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-605);
         e.   No person being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse may be
placed in the residential facility for elderly persons;
         f.   Placement in the residential facility for elderly persons shall
be on a strictly voluntary basis and not a part of, or in lieu of, confinement,
rehabilitation or treatment in a correctional facility.
      2.   Upon application for a permit to establish a residential facility
for elderly persons in any area where residential dwellings are allowed, except
an area zoned to permit exclusively single-family dwellings, a facility that
conforms to these provisions shall be granted a permit.
      3.   The use granted and permitted by this subsection is nontransferable
and terminates if the structure is devoted to a use other than as a residential
facility for elderly persons, or if the structure fails to comply with city
ordinances.
   B.   Conditional Use Single-Family Zones:
      1.   Subject to the granting of a conditional use permit, a residential
facility for elderly persons shall be allowed in any municipal zoning district
which is zoned to permit exclusively single-family dwelling use, if that
facility:
         a.   Conforms to all applicable health, safety, zoning and building
codes;
         b.   Is capable of use as a residential facility for elderly persons
without structural or landscape alterations that would change the structure's
residential character;
         c.   Conforms to the city's criteria adopted by ordinance, governing
the location of residential facilities for elderly persons in areas zoned to
permit exclusively single-family dwellings;
         d.   The residential facility for elderly persons is not established
or maintained within three-fourths (3/4) mile of another residential facility
for elderly persons or "residential facility for persons with a disability" (as
defined by Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-605);
         e.   No person being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse may be
placed in the residential facility for elderly persons;
         f.   Placement in the residential facility for elderly persons shall
be on a strictly voluntary basis and not a part of, or in lieu of, confinement,
rehabilitation or treatment in a correctional facility.
      2.   The use granted and permitted by this subsection is nontransferable
and terminates if the structure is devoted to a use other than as a residential
facility for elderly persons or if the structure fails to comply with
applicable health, safety and building codes.
   C.   Discrimination: Discrimination against elderly persons and against
residential facilities for elderly persons is prohibited. The decision of the
city regarding the application for a permit by a residential facility for
elderly persons must be based on legitimate land use criteria, and not be based
on the age of the facility's residents.
   D.   Other Permitted Uses Not Limited: The requirements of this section that
a residential facility for elderly persons obtain a conditional use permit or
other permits do not apply if the facility meets existing zoning ordinances
that allow a specified number of unrelated persons to live together. (Ord.
2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-14-20: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES REQUIRED:
All distribution utilities shall be installed underground. Transformer
equipment shall be screened from streets and adjacent properties. (Ord. 96-5,
2-14-1996)
9-14-21: EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Subject to conditional use permit approval, penthouse or roof structures for
the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar
equipment required to operate and maintain a building, and fire or parapet
walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, water
tanks, wireless or television masts, theater lofts, silos or similar structures
may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed. (Ord. 2003-06, 3-12-
2003)
9-14-22: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT ALLOWED:
Any exception to the zoning height requirements must be approved by the city
council. When approved by the city council, buildings and structures may
receive a height waiver to be erected to a height or story greater than the
height or story allowed in a zoning district. Among the council’s
deliberations, the following will be considered as part of its’ review process:
   A.   The proposed height waiver at the particular location, is necessary and
desirable, and is to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the
general well being of the neighborhood and community; and
   B.   The request will not create public health concerns; and
   C.   Any aesthetic impacts on the surrounding area will be mitigated; and
   D.   Any adverse effects the request may impose on the surrounding area will
be addressed and mitigated. (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004; amd. Ord. 2018-26, 10-10-
2018)
9-14-23: MODEL HOMES:
   A.   Number Permitted: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code,
after a preliminary plat has been approved, model homes may be constructed
within the area covered by the preliminary plat if all of the conditions of
this section are complied with. In order to have model homes, the preliminary
plat shall have a minimum of twenty five (25) lots or units. The number of
model homes allowed shall be based on the total number of lots or units
approved for the preliminary plat and the following schedule:
 
  Lots Or UnitsModel Homes
                
25 –   40  2
41 –   55  3
56 –   70  4
71 –   85  5
86+             6
 
One of the model homes may be used as a temporary office as long as applicable
building codes are complied with.
   B.   Plan, Agreement And Application Required: The owner or developer of
land within an approved preliminary plat who desires to construct model homes
therein shall file the following with the community development department:
      1.   Three (3) copies of a model home site plan (which must be a typical
representation of the proposed development) showing the proposed locations of
all models and of all other structures proposed to be built, the locations of
roads, walks, parking areas and other improvements within the site, and
landscaping plans, as well as building elevations of the model homes.
      2.   An "agreement and consent to judgment" signed and acknowledged by
both the owner and developer guaranteeing that all land and improvements
constructed as a part of the model homes shall conform with the final plat,
zoning and improvement plans, and guaranteeing that if the final plat is not
recorded within twelve (12) months from the date of preliminary plat approval
or any authorized extension thereof, all of the model home site plan
improvements shall be removed at the sole cost of the owner thereof and the
land restored to its former condition. The form of the agreement shall be
approved by the city attorney before it is filed.
      3.   A completed site plan application and associated review fee.
   C.   Approval, Amendment Or Denial Authority; Findings: The zoning
administrator has the authority to approve, amend or deny the site plan. In
approving a model home site plan, the following findings shall be made:
      1.   The design of the improvements:
         a.   Is consistent with the preliminary plat and its conditions.
         b.   Is consistent with the zoning requirements of the zone.
         c.   Will not adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare.
      2.   Signs are consistent with the city sign regulations.
      3.   There is adequate off street parking.
      4.   All weather surface access is provided to the model homes and
parking areas.
      5.   Fire protection (operating fire hydrants) is provided to the site.
      6.   Sanitary facilities are provided at the site for public use.
      7.   A dumpster is provided for the site.
   D.   Permit Application: After the site plan has been approved by the zoning
administrator, the owner or developer may apply for building permits for the
model homes in accordance with the approved site plan. All plans,
specifications and certificates required for compliance with the building code,
together with the payment of the prescribed fees, shall be required.
   E.   Plans And Specifications: Plans and specifications shall be submitted
to the public works department for the construction of necessary streets,
curbs, gutters, paving and fire protection to serve the model homes, and
necessary utilities, sewers and storm drains shall be constructed. Plans and
specifications shall be approved by the public works project manager prior to
the issuance of building permits. Final street construction may be deferred
until such time as the model homes are no longer in use, providing a bond in an
amount approved by the public works project manager guaranteeing final street
construction is posted.
   F.   Occupancy: No residential occupancy shall be permitted in any dwelling
unit constructed as a model home until the building official has verified that
improvements related to marketing have been removed; the dwelling, garage and
driveway have been fully restored for residential use; and that all of the
requirements applicable to the dwelling have been met, along with all building
code requirements.
   G.   Appeal Of Decision: A decision of the zoning administrator may be
appealed to the appeal authority designated in this title. (Ord. 2006-41, 12-
13-2006)
9-14-24: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose for this section is to comply with section 10-9a-
520 of the Utah code, and to avoid discrimination in housing against persons
with disabilities as provided in the Utah fair housing act and the fair housing
amendments act as interpreted by courts having jurisdiction in Utah. If any
facility, residence, or other circumstance meets the definition of a
"residential facility for persons with a disability" as set forth in this
section, the requirements of the section shall govern the same notwithstanding
any other provision of this zoning ordinance.
   B.   Definitions: The words and phrases defined below shall be used in
interpreting and construing this section:
    BUILDING: A permanently located structure, including, but not limited to,
dwelling units, designed, intended or used for occupancy by any person or for
storage of property of any kind.
   DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of a person's major life activities, including a person having a record
of such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment.
"Disability" does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any
federally controlled substance, as defined in section 102 of the controlled
substances act, 21 USC 802, or successor law. As used in this definition:
      1.   "Physical or mental impairment" includes:
a. Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or
anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including
speech organ; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and
lymphatic; skin and endocrine; or
b. Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic
brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning
disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment includes, but is not
limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and
hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy,
multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, human immunodeficiency
virus infection, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other
than addiction caused by current, illegal use of a controlled substance) and
alcoholism.
      2.   "Major life activities" means functions such as caring for oneself,
performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing,
learning and working.
      3.   "Has record of such an impairment" means has a history of, or has
been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
      4.   "Is regarded as having an impairment" means:
a. Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit one or
more major life activities but that is treated by another person as
constituting such a limitation; or
b. Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
major life activity only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such
impairment; or
c. Has none of the impairments defined in subsection 1 of this definition but
is treated by another person as having such an impairment.
   DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof containing one or more dwelling
units occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one
or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for
the construction or location thereon of any such building or portion thereof.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended as a
residence for a single family with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities
provided within the dwelling unit.
   FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or
guardianship, or a group of not more than sixteen (16) unrelated persons living
together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, together with incidental
domestic servants.
   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: A change in a rule, policy, practice, or service
necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling. As used in this definition:
      1.   "Reasonable" means a requested accommodation will not undermine the
legitimate purposes of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit
that the accommodation would provide to a person with a disability.
      2.   "Necessary" means the applicant must show that, but for the
accommodation, one or more persons with a disability likely will be denied an
equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their choice.
      3.   "Equal opportunity" means achieving equal results as between a
person with a disability and a nondisabled person.
   RESIDENCE: A dwelling unit where an individual is actually living at a given
point in time and intends to remain, and not a place of temporary sojourn or
transient visit.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A residence in which
more than one person with a disability resides and which is licensed or
certified by the department of human services under title 62A, chapter 2 of the
Utah code, licensure of programs and facilities.
   C.   Permitted Use:
      1.   Use Permitted: Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of the zoning
regulations, a residential facility for persons with a disability shall be a
permitted use in any zoning district where residential dwellings are allowed.
      2.   Use Nontransferable: The permitted use by this section is
nontransferable and shall terminate if:
         a.   The facility is devoted to a use other than a residential
facility for persons with a disability, or
         b.   The license or certification issued by the Utah department of
human services for such facility terminates or is revoked, or
         c.   The facility fails to comply with requirements set forth in this
section.
   D.   Development Requirements: Each residential facility for persons with a
disability shall conform to the following requirements:
      1.   Applicable Regulations: The facility shall comply with building,
safety, and health regulations applicable to similar structures.
         a.   Each facility shall be subject to the same property development
standards applicable to similar structures located in the same zoning district
in which the facility is located.
         b.   Adequate off street parking spaces shall be provided.
         c.   Each facility shall be limited to no more than sixteen (16)
residents.
         d.   Any residential facility for persons with a disability that are
substance abuse facilities located within five hundred feet (500') of a school
shall provide the following:
            (1)   A security plan satisfactory to local law enforcement
authorities, and
            (2)   Twenty four (24) hour supervision for residents, and
            (3)   Other twenty four (24) hour security measures.
      2.   Separation Required: Each facility shall be at least five thousand
two hundred eighty feet (5,280') from any other such facility, as measured in a
straight line between the closest property lines of the lots or parcels on
which they are located.
      3.   No Dangerous Persons Permitted: No facility shall be made available
to an individual whose tenancy would:
         a.   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals, or
         b.   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
      4.   License Or Certification Required: Prior to the establishment of any
facility, the person or entity licensed or certified by the department of human
services to establish and operate the facility shall:
         a.   Provide a copy of such license or certification to the city, and
         b.   Certify in a sworn affidavit to the city that no person will
reside in the facility whose tenancy would:
            (1)   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals, or
            (2)   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of
others.
   E.   Reasonable Accommodation Required: None of the foregoing conditions
shall be interpreted to limit any reasonable accommodation necessary to allow
the establishment or occupancy of a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
      1.   Application: Any person or entity who wishes to request a reasonable
accommodation shall make application therefor to the community development
director and shall articulate in writing the basis for the requested
accommodation.
      2.   Decision: Each application for a reasonable accommodation shall be
decided within not more than thirty (30) days. The decision shall be based on
evidence of record demonstrating:
         a.   The requested accommodation will not undermine the legitimate
purposes of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit that the
accommodation would provide to a person with a disability,
         b.   That but for the accommodation, one or more persons with a
disability likely will be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their
choice, and
         c.   That equal results will be achieved as between the person with a
disability requesting the accommodation and a nondisabled person.
      3.   Appeal: If a request for a reasonable accommodation is denied, the
decision may be appealed to the board of adjustment in the manner provided for
appeals of administrative decisions as set forth in section
9-4A-8 of this title.
   F.   Proof Of Licensure For Other Treatment Facilities: Prior to the
establishment of any facility for which a state license or certification is
required under the Utah human services code 1 , the person or entity which must
obtain such a license or certification shall submit proof to the community
development director that the facility has been duly licensed or certified by
the agency having regulatory jurisdiction over the facility. (Ord. 2009-09, 4-
8-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA title 62A.
9-14-25: RESIDENTIAL RENTALS, SHORT TERM:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. This section
establishes procedures for designating areas within the city where the rental
of residential units on an overnight or short term basis is appropriate and
acceptable, and to aid the development of housing, particularly by owners who
reside elsewhere and wish to rent their units when not in use. This section is
intended to fully exclude such overnight and short term rental practices in
residential areas, unless and until such overnight and short term rental has
obtained a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 17 of this title.
   B.   Definitions: The words and phrases defined below shall be used in
interpreting and construing this section:
    GUEST BEDROOM: Each bedroom in the rental dwelling unit in addition to the
first bedroom.
   SHORT TERM: A period of twenty seven (27) days or less (including
overnight).
   C.   Conditional Use Permit Required In Residential Zones: Subject to, and
conditioned upon, the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter
17 of this title, short term rentals shall be allowed in any municipal
residential zoning district which is zoned to permit exclusively single-family
or multiple-family dwelling use, only if that residential use meets all of the
following requirements:
      1.   Is located on a lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or
more; and
      2.   Conforms to all applicable health, safety, zoning and building
codes; and
      3.   Is capable of use as a short term residential rental without
structural or landscape alterations that would change the structure's
residential character; and
      4.   Receives approval from seventy five percent (75%) of the property
owners of the individual lots or units within a five hundred foot (500') radius
of the short term residential rental applicant. Approvals shall be in the form
of originally signed and notarized letters from said property owners.
Additionally, if the proposed short term rental parcel of property is located
within a subdivision with a homeowners' association ("HOA"), the applicant must
obtain a letter of approval, in a form acceptable to the city, from the HOA's
board; and
      5.   Be controlled by a local property management person or company whose
residence or place of business shall be within twenty (20) miles of the short
term residential rental property; and
      6.   Have adequate off street parking, allowing for only two (2) vehicles
plus one additional vehicle for every two (2) guest bedrooms. Parking
requirements shall not include parking on public (or private) streets.
   D.   Automatic Termination: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
chapter 17, "Conditional Uses", of this title, a conditional use permit
granted, pursuant to this section shall automatically terminate (or in the
alternative shall be terminable by the city), if any of the following occur:
      1.   The residence or structure is devoted to a use other than as a short
term residential rental (excluding the occupancy of the residence by the
applicant); or
      2.   There is change of ownership of the property; or
      3.   The residence or structure fails to comply with applicable health,
safety, or building codes; or
      4.   There has been a violation of this section, or a violation of
chapter 17, "Conditionals Uses", of this title; or
      5.   Other activity has occurred at, or related to the short term
residential property, which the City reasonably determines is clearly contrary
to the purpose and intent of this section.
   E.   License Required: The owner or property manager of each short term
residential rental property shall obtain a short term residential rental
property business license as required by this Code prior to commencing the use.
   F.   Rules And Regulations Posted: Each approved property shall permanently
post, in a conspicuous place, the rules and regulations as it relates to the
approved conditions of that particular conditional use permit, for that
specific location.
   G.   Penalties And Enforcement: Any person, firm or corporation, whether as
principal agent, employee, or otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the
violation of the provisions of this section (or chapter 17, "Conditional Uses",
of this title) shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code (Washington City Criminal Code). Any such person, firm or
corporation shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during which any portion of any violation of this section is
committed, continues or is permitted by such person, firm or corporation. The
provisions of this section may be enforced by either civil or criminal actions
in courts of appropriate and competent jurisdiction. The City's choice to
pursue a civil judicial case shall not interfere with the City's right to
prosecute violations of this section as criminal offenses. The City may bring
actions for civil and equitable relief, including enjoining specific land uses
and affirmative injunctions. (Ord. 2015-03, 2-11-2015)
9-14-26: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purposes of this section are: 1) to establish location,
appearance, and safety standards that will help mitigate potential impacts
related to the construction, use and maintenance of telecommunications
facilities; 2) to provide for the orderly establishment of telecommunications
facilities in the City; 3) to minimize the number of antenna support structures
by encouraging the location of antennas on pre-existing support structures,
encouraging the use of stealth facilities, encouraging the co-location of
multiple antennas on a single structure, and encouraging the use of City-owned
property for antenna support structures; and 4) to comply with the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 by establishing regulations that do not prohibit
or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services,
do not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent
services, and are not based on the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the Federal
Communications Commission's regulations concerning such emissions.
   B.   Definitions: The following words shall have the described meaning when
used in this section:
    ANTENNA: A transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that
radiates or captures radio or microwave signals.
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any structure that can be used for the purpose of
supporting an antenna(s).
   CITY: Washington City, Utah.
   CITY-OWNED PROPERTY: Real property that is owned, leased or controlled by
the City.
   COLLOCATION: The location of an antenna on an existing structure, tower or
building that is already being used for telecommunications facilities.
   EQUIPMENT FACILITY: Any building, shelter or cabinet used by
telecommunication providers to house switching, backup or other equipment at a
telecommunications facility.
   GUYED TOWER: A tower that supports an antenna or antennas and requires guy
wires or other stabilizers for support.
   LATTICE TOWER: A self-supporting three- or four-sided, open steel frame
structure used to support telecommunications equipment or antennas.
   MONOPOLE: A single, self-supporting, cylindrical pole, constructed without
guy wires or ground anchors, that acts as the support structure for antennas.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL USE: A school, church, clubhouse or public/governmental
building in a Residential Zoning District. For the purposes of this section any
Mixed Use Zone shall be considered a Residential Zone.
   NONSTEALTH DESIGN: Any antenna or equipment facility not camouflaged in a
manner to blend with surrounding land uses, features or architecture. The
design does not conceal the intended use of the telecommunications facility. A
monopole with equipment facilities above ground and unscreened would be
considered non-stealth.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: "Personal wireless services" has the same
meaning as provided in section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47
USC section 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly known as cellular
and Personal Communication System (PCS) services.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property not owned by the City or another public
or governmental entity.
   ROOF LINE: On buildings without a pitched roof, the roof line shall mean the
top of the exterior wall elevation. On buildings with a pitched roof, roof line
shall mean the ridgeline of the roof.
   ROOF MOUNTED ANTENNA: An antenna or series of antennas mounted on a roof,
mechanical room or penthouse of a building or structure.
   STEALTH FACILITIES: Wireless facilities that have been designed to be
compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, which
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas and/or towers, and that have
been certified as "stealth facilities" by the Planning Commission.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY(IES): An unmanned structure which consists of
equipment, including transmitters, antennas, antenna support structures and
equipment facilities as defined herein, that transmit and/or receive voice and/
or data communications through wireless radio signals such as "cellular" or
"PCS" (Personal Communications System) communications and paging systems.
   TOP-HAT ANTENNA: A spatial array of antennas, generally located on a
freestanding structure, where the visible width of antennas and antenna
mounting structures are more than three feet (3') in width as viewed looking
directly at the structure.
   TOWER: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole tower, lattice tower, or
guyed tower, that is used as a support structure for antenna(s).
   UTILITY POLE ANTENNA: Any antenna mounted directly to an existing City owned
power pole or street light pole with the exception of decorative street lights.
This definition shall not include poles carrying telephone lines or any other
type utility not specifically included above.
   WALL MOUNTED ANTENNA: An antenna or series of individual antennas mounted on
the vertical wall of a building or structure.
   WHIP ANTENNA: An antenna that is cylindrical in shape. Whip antennas can be
directional or omnidirectional and vary in size depending upon the frequency
and gain for which they are designed.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: See definition of telecommunication
facility.
   C.   Findings: The Planning Commission and City Council shall make the
following findings:
      1.   Personal wireless services are of increasing importance and value to
the citizens of Washington City. The growing industry and evolving technology
continue to increase the quality of life for City residents and contribute to
the public safety, health, and welfare of the City. Accommodating the
expansions of networks and transmission facilities is important to creating a
well-connected, functioning City.
      2.   The City needs to balance the interests and desire of the
telecommunications industry and its customers to provide competitive and
effective telecommunications systems in the City, against the sometimes
differing interests and desires of others concerning safety, welfare,
aesthetics, and orderly planning of the community.
      3.   The unnecessary proliferation of telecommunications facilities
throughout the City creates a negative visual impact on the community.
      4.   The visual effects of telecommunications facilities can be mitigated
by fair standards regulating their siting, construction, maintenance and use.
      5.   Locating antennas on existing buildings and structures, or
constructing an antenna as a stealth facility, creates less of a negative
visual impact on the community than the erection of towers.
      6.   The public policy objectives to reduce the proliferation of
telecommunication towers and to mitigate their impact can best be facilitated
by encouraging the use of less visually intrusive antennas and permitting the
locating of wireless communication systems on telecommunication towers and
antenna support structures that are located on property owned, leased, or used
by the City.
      7.   The City owns parcels of property evenly spread throughout the City,
where telecommunications facilities could be located so as to be as inoffensive
as possible to the residents and businesses of the City.
      8.   Transmission facilities are subject to State and Federal laws that
include possible requirements for wireless providers to make room on
transmission facilities for collocation of other carriers as well as local
government authority to create or acquire sites to accommodate the erection of
telecommunication towers. This authority allows a city to promote the location
of telecommunication towers in a manageable area and to protect the aesthetics
and environment of the area.
   D.   Applicability: This section applies to both commercial and private low
power radio services and facilities, such as "cellular" or PCS (personal
communication system) communications and paging systems. All cellular
facilities shall comply with the regulations set forth in this section and any
pertinent regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal
Aviation Administration. Neither the term "telecommunication facility" nor the
requirements of this section shall apply to the following types of
communications devices, although they may be regulated by other City ordinances
and policies:
      1.   Amateur Radio: Any tower or antenna owned and operated by an amateur
radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
      2.   Satellite: Any device designed for over-the-air reception of
television broadcast signals, multi-channel multipoint distribution service or
direct satellite service.
      3.   Cable: Any cable television headend or hub towers and antennas used
solely for cable.
      4.   Wireless Internet: Wireless internet broadcasting.
   E.   Expert Review:
      1.   The City will seek third party review of the following:
         a.   All applications requesting facility height in excess of the
building height for the zone in which the request is being sought.
         b.   All applications requesting a lower preference facility type over
a higher preference facility type.
         c.   All applications for facilities located in a lower preference
zone compared to a higher preference zone.
         d.   Any application the Planning Commission determines the need to
require an expert review due to the complexity of the application or the
proposed facility's potential impact on adjacent properties or important
community viewsheds.
      2.   The expert review must address the following:
         a.   The accuracy of the applicant's submittal and supporting
documents.
         b.   The applicability of the applicant's analysis techniques and
methodologies.
         c.   The validity of conclusions.
         d.   Whether the proposed wireless communication facility meets the
applicable standards of this chapter, as well as any applicable State or
Federal regulations.
      3.   The applicant will provide the technical material required to
conduct the expert review as per the City's application form, including, but
not limited to, the geographic search ring used to identify the proposed
location of the desired wireless communications facility, the handoff candidate
of the proposed facility, and radio frequency propagation analysis. The
applicant will pay all costs associated with the third party review. Prior to
initiating the review the applicant will be required to pay a two thousand
dollar ($2,000.00) deposit. The applicant will reimburse the City the remainder
of the costs associated with the expert review within fifteen (15) business
days of the receipt of an invoice. An application must be denied if all costs
associated with the expert review have not been paid.
      4.   If the City has a qualified employee to do the expert review, it
shall be done by the qualified City employee. If there is no such person
employed by the City, the City shall select the person or entity to perform the
third party expert review. The third party reviewer shall not be an employee or
agent of the applicant.
      5.   If the City determines, based on its consideration of the third
party review, that any technical evidence or justification provided by the
applicant is substantially open to question, the application submitted under
this section may be denied.
   F.   Approval Process: All applications for telecommunications facilities
require review and approval by the Planning Commission. Applications shall be
processed in accordance with the City's permitted or conditional use permit
approval process, whichever is applicable according to the requirements of this
section. An exception to this is when a wireless carrier applies for a facility
to be collocated on a monopole or other structure that was specifically
designed and approved with room for one or more collocated transmission
facilities. In this case, the submission requirements will be the same, but the
site plan may be approved administratively by the Community Development
Director or his assignee.
   G.   Application Requirements: Any person desiring to develop, construct or
establish a telecommunication facility in the City shall submit an application
for site plan approval to the Community Development Department.
Telecommunication facilities that require conditional use permit approval shall
also file an application for conditional use and will be subject to the
conditional use requirements of this section and chapter 17 of this title
regarding conditional uses.
   H.   Building Permit(s) Required: Prior to the construction of any
telecommunication facility, the applicant shall obtain the proper building
permits, road cut permits, and other permits as required by the City. No
building permit shall be issued until the facility has been approved by the
appropriate authority based on the requirements of this section.
   I.   Location And Type Priority:
      1.   Priority Of Antenna Site Location: Telecommunication facilities
shall be located as unobtrusively as is reasonably possible. To accomplish this
goal, the provider shall make a good faith effort to site antennas in the
following order of priority:
         a.   Existing Structures Or Stealth Facilities: First priority shall
be granted to antennas located on existing structures or antennas qualifying as
stealth facilities, as follows:
            (1)   Existing Structures: Antennas located on lawfully existing
buildings, structures or support structures are: a) located on a
telecommunication facility designed and approved for collocation, b) located in
a Non-Residential Zoning District, or c) located in a Residential Zoning
District on property that is being used for non-residential uses (e.g.,
government, school or church); or
            (2)   Stealth Facilities: Antennas certified as stealth facilities
as set forth in this section.
         b.   Monopoles On City-Owned Property: Monopoles constructed on City-
owned property.
         c.   Monopoles On Property Owned By A Non-City Public Agency:
Monopoles constructed on property owned by a non-City agency.
         d.   Monopoles On Non-Residential Private Property: Monopoles on non-
residential private property, provided that the private property is: 1) located
in a Non-Residential Zoning District, or 2) located in a Residential Zoning
District on property that is used for a non-residential use (e.g., government,
school or church).
         e.   Other: Any combination of antenna type and location other than
those listed above.
      2.   Burden Of Proof: If the applicant desires to locate antennas on a
site other than the highest priority site, the applicant shall have the burden
of demonstrating to the Planning Commission why it could not locate antennas on
sites with a higher priority than the site chosen by the applicant. To do so,
the applicant shall provide the following information to the approving
authority:
         a.   Higher Priority Sites: The identity and location of any higher
priority sites located within the desired service area.
         b.   Reason For Rejection Of Higher Priority Sites: The reason(s) why
the higher priority sites are not technologically, legally or economically
feasible. The applicant must make a good faith effort to locate antennas on a
higher priority site. The City may request information from outside sources to
justify or rebut the applicant's reasons for rejecting a higher priority site.
         c.   Justification For Proposed Site: Why the proposed site is
essential to meet the service demands of the geographic service area and the
Citywide network. If the applicant desires to construct a monopole, the
applicant shall also submit a detailed written description of why the applicant
cannot obtain coverage using existing building or structures or stealth
facilities.
   J.   Permitted Uses: The following combinations of antenna types and
locations are permitted uses, provided that the applicant complies with this
section and any other applicable laws and regulations.
      1.   Existing Structures On City-Owned Property: Antennas located on
existing buildings, structures and antenna support structures located on City-
owned property.
      2.   Existing Structures On Private Property: Wall and roof mounted
antennas located on lawfully existing buildings and structures located on
private property, provided that the private property is:
         a.   Located in a Non-Residential Zone, or
         b.   Located in a Residential Zone on property that is used for a non-
residential use (e.g., government, school or church).
      3.   Collocation: Collocation on lawfully existing antenna support
structure approved for collocation provided the new antenna(s) meet the size,
height and other applicable monopole antenna requirements contained in this
section.
      4.   Stealth Facilities: Antennas certified as stealth facilities by the
Planning Commission that are located on a parcel in a Nonresidential Zoning
District or in a Residential Zoning District containing a non-residential use.
   K.   Conditional Uses: The following combinations of antenna types and
locations shall be considered as conditional use, provided that the applicant
complies with this section and other applicable laws and regulations:
      1.   Antennas In Multi-Family Developments: Wall mounted antennas, roof
mounted antennas, and stealth facilities located in an R-3, PUD or PCD Zone on
property that is being used for a multi-family residential building having ten
(10) or more dwelling units.
      2.   Monopoles In Non-Residential Zoning Districts: Monopoles constructed
in the OS, AP, C-1, C-2 and C-3, I-1, I-2 and BP Zones.
      3.   Others: Combinations of antenna types and locations other than those
listed as permitted uses above or as not permitted uses below.
   L.   Not Permitted Uses:
      1.   The following antenna types and antenna locations are not permitted,
except upon a showing of necessity (inability to achieve coverage or capacity
in the service area) by the applicant, in which case they shall be considered
as conditional uses:
         a.   Lattice Towers And Guyed Towers: Lattice towers, guyed towers,
and other non-stealth towers, with the exception of monopoles, are not
permitted in any zoning district.
         b.   Monopoles On Private Property In A Residential Zoning District:
Monopoles located on Residentially zoned private property, if the Residentially
zoned property has a residential use (as opposed to a school, church, or other
non- residential use).
         c.   Whip Antennas: Whip antennas on wall mounted support structures.
   M.   Specific Regulations By Type: Wireless facilities are characterized by
the type or location of the antenna structure. There are four (4) general types
of antenna structures contemplated by this section: wall mounted antennas; roof
mounted antennas; stealth facilities; and monopoles. If a particular type of
antenna structure is allowed by this section as a permitted or conditional use,
the minimum standards for that type of antenna are as follows, unless otherwise
provided in a conditional use permit:
      1.   Wall Mounted Antennas:
         a.   Maximum Height: Wall mounted antennas shall not exceed above the
roof line of the building or structure or extend more than four feet (4')
horizontally from the face of the building.
         b.   Setback: Wall mounted antennas shall not be located within twenty
feet (20') of a Residential Zoning District unless it is located on a non-
residential structure as approved by this section.
         c.   Mounting Options: Antennas mounted directly on existing parapet
walls, penthouses, or mechanical equipment rooms are considered to be wall
mounted antennas if no portion of the antenna extends above the roof line of
the parapet wall, penthouse, or mechanical equipment room.
         d.   Color: Wall mounted antennas, equipment and supporting structures
shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the
background against which they are most commonly seen. Antennas and the
supporting structure on the building shall be architecturally compatible with
the building. Whip antennas are not allowed on a wall mounted antenna
structure, but may be camouflaged in a stealth facility as per stealth
requirements of this section.
         e.   Maximum Area: The total area for all wall mounted antennas and
supporting structures on any one building shall not exceed five percent (5%) of
any exterior wall of the building.
      2.   Roof Mounted Antennas:
         a.   Maximum Height: The maximum height of a roof mounted antenna
shall be eighteen feet (18') above the roof line of the building.
         b.   Setback: Roof mounted antennas shall be set back from the
exterior wall of the building or structure a distance at least equal to the
height of the antenna above the roof.
         c.   Mounting Options: A roof-mounted antenna shall be mounted only on
structures with flat roofs. Roof mounted antennas may be mounted directly on a
roof, or on top of the existing penthouse or mechanical equipment rooms if the
total height of the antennas does not exceed eighteen feet (18') above the roof
line of the building.
         d.   Color: Roof mounted antennas, equipment and supporting structures
shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the
background against which they are most commonly seen. Antennas and the
supporting structure on the building shall be architecturally compatible with
the building.
         e.   Combination Of Wall And Roof Mounted Antennas: Any building may
have a combination of wall and roof mounted antennas meeting the requirements
of this section.
      3.   Stealth Facilities:
         a.   Determination: Not every disguised or screened telecommunication
facility qualifies as a stealth facility. Whether or not a particular facility
qualifies as a stealth facility shall be decided by the Planning Commission as
part of the approval process. In making the decision, the Planning Commission
shall consider the definition of stealth facilities set forth in this section
and shall consider whether the facility is disguised, blended or screened in a
manner that eliminates any negative impact of the telecommunication facility.
Each stealth facility certification applies to one location only. Because of
differing circumstances specific to each site, an antenna that qualifies as a
stealth facility in one location may not qualify as a stealth facility in a
different location.
         b.   Maximum Height: The overall height of any structure proposed to
be used for a stealth fixture antenna shall be consistent with any similar
structure being used as a model for the stealth structure. A stealth fixture
shall be no more than ten feet (10') higher than the structure to which it is
attached; provided the fixture and the structure to which it is attached is
consistent with the character of similar structures located in the same area,
as determined by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall make
specific findings to support its determination.
         c.   Disguise: A stealth fixture antenna shall be disguised as part of
the structure to which it is attached or otherwise concealed from public view
as much as reasonably possible. A stealth fixture antenna may be attached to or
disguised as a flag pole, light pole, power pole, man-made tree, clock tower,
steeple or a structure used primarily for another use so long as any antenna
located on the structure does not detract visually from the primary use.
Stealth fixture antennas and all associated equipment visible to public view
shall be painted to match the color of the structure to which it is attached.
Equipment and/or equipment shelters used in connection with stealth fixture
antennas shall be camouflaged.
         d.   Engineered Structure: A structure to which a stealth fixture
antenna is attached shall be designed by a State certified engineer to verify
that the structure can support the stealth fixture antenna.
         e.   Antenna Size: A stealth fixture antenna, including the mounting
structure, shall not exceed thirty inches (30") in diameter; provided however,
that antennas exceeding thirty inches (30"), including the mounting structure,
may be permitted if the antenna is a stealth fixture antenna located on or
within a clock tower, steeple, man-made tree or other similar structure.
         f.   Conversion: Subject to Planning Commission approval, stealth
facilities may include the conversion of existing flagpoles, light standards,
athletic field lights or other similar structures to a stealth facility
provided the structure's height is not increased more than ten feet (10').
         g.   Utility Pole Antennas: Utility pole antennas may be allowed as a
stealth facility at the discretion of the Planning Commission and subject to
the following minimum requirements:
            (1)   Location: Utility pole antennas may only be located on
existing City owned utility poles except for decorative street lights.
            (2)   Method Of Mounting: Such antennas shall be designed and
installed by the applicant according to Washington City Power Department
specifications and requirements.
            (3)   Height: Antennas shall not extend more than ten feet (10')
above the top of the pole.
            (4)   Antenna Size: The antennas, including the mounting structure,
shall not exceed twenty four inches (24") in diameter.
            (5)   Electrical Equipment: Electrical equipment shall not be
located in the public right-of-way.
            (6)   Agreement: Each telecommunication provider is required to
enter into an agreement with the City prior to installing any telecommunication
facilities in a public right-of-way. The City shall review site plan conditions
prior to the execution of the agreement.
      4.   Monopoles:
         a.   Justification: If the applicant desires to construct a monopole,
the applicant shall first submit a detailed written description of why the
applicant cannot obtain coverage using existing buildings or structures or
stealth facilities. The description shall include a radio frequency engineering
review of the proposed monopole telecommunication facility in relation to the
requested height and possible alternative locations.
         b.   Visual Analysis: The applicant shall submit a visual analysis
which may include photo simulation, field mock up or other techniques, which
identifies the potential for visual impacts of the proposed monopole. The
analysis shall consider views from public areas (streets, parks, etc.) and from
private residences.
         c.   Maximum Height: The maximum height of the monopole or monopole
antenna shall be sixty feet (60'), although the Planning Commission may allow
an antenna or antenna support structure up to one hundred twenty feet (120') in
height, if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the approving body
that the additional height is necessary to obtain coverage or to allow
collocation, and that the applicant has taken steps to mitigate adverse effects
on the surrounding neighborhood. The antenna itself shall not exceed ten feet
(10') in height.
         d.   Setback: Monopoles shall be set back a minimum distance equal to
four (4) times the height of the proposed monopole structure from any
residential lot line, measured from the base of the monopole to the nearest
residential lot line unless the applicant can demonstrate that the lesser
distance is necessary as demonstrated in a certified radio frequency
engineering report.
         e.   Antenna Sizing: The maximum visible width of antennas and antenna
support structures on a monopole shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height or
three feet (3') in width as viewed looking directly at the monopole at same
elevation as the antennas and antenna support structure. "Top hat" design is
not permitted.
         f.   Color: A surface treatment may be required as part of the
conditional use permit so that monopoles, antennas, and related support
structures match the background against which they are most commonly seen.
         g.   Distance From Other Monopoles: Monopoles and towers shall be
located at least one-half (1/2) mile from each other, except upon a showing of
necessity by the applicant, or upon a finding by the Planning Commission that a
closer distance would adequately protect the health, safety and welfare of the
community. This distance requirement shall not apply to stealth facilities or
to antennas attached to lawful structures such as transmission towers, utility
poles, outdoor lighting structures, and water tanks.
         h.   Location On Parcel: Monopoles shall be located as unobtrusively
on a parcel as possible, given the location of existing structures, nearby
residential areas, and service needs of the applicant. Monopoles shall not be
located in a required landscape area, or buffer area.
         i.   Collocation Requirement: Unless otherwise authorized by the
Planning Commission for good cause shown, every new monopole shall be designed
and constructed to be sufficient size and capacity to accommodate at least one
additional wireless telecommunication provider on the structure in the future.
Any conditional use permit for the monopole may be conditioned upon the
agreement of the applicant to allow collocation of other personal wireless
providers on such terms as are common in the industry.
   N.   Additional Conditional Use Permit Considerations: In addition to the
conditional use permit considerations listed in chapter 17 of this title, the
Planning Commission shall also consider the following factors when deciding
whether to grant a conditional use permit for a telecommunication facility:
      1.   Compatibility: Compatibility of the facility with the height, mass
and design of buildings, structures and uses in the vicinity of the facility.
      2.   Screening: Whether the facility uses existing or proposed
vegetation, topography or structures in a manner that effectively screens the
facility.
      3.   Parcel Size: Whether the facility is located on a parcel of
sufficient size to adequately support the facility.
      4.   Location On Parcel: Whether the structure is situated on the parcel
in a manner that can best protect the interests of surrounding property owners,
but still accommodate other appropriate uses on the parcel.
      5.   Location In General: Whether location or co-location of the facility
on other structures in the same vicinity is practicable, without significantly
affecting the antenna transmission or reception capabilities.
      6.   Collocation: The willingness of the applicant to allow collocation
on its facility by other personal wireless services providers on such terms as
are common in the industry.
   O.   Lease Agreement: The City has no implied obligation to lease any
particular parcel of City-owned property to an applicant. The City shall enter
into a standard lease agreement with the applicant for any facility built on
City property. The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to execute the
standard lease agreement on behalf of the City. The lease shall contain the
condition that the site plan and/or conditional use permit must first be
approved by the Planning Commission before the lease can take effect, and that
failure to obtain such approval renders the lease null and void.
   P.   Safety:
      1.   Regulation Compliance:
         a.   Compliance With FCC And FAA Regulations: All operators of
wireless facilities shall demonstrate compliance with applicable Federal
Communication Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
regulations, including FCC radio frequency regulations, at the time of
application and periodically thereafter as requested by the City. Failure to
comply with the applicable regulations shall be grounds for revoking a site
plan or conditional use permit approval.
         b.   Other Licenses And Permits: The operator of every
telecommunications facility shall submit copies of all licenses and permits
required by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design,
construction, location and operation of the facility to the City, shall
maintain such licenses and permits in good standing, and shall provide evidence
of renewal or extension thereof upon request by the City.
      2.   Monopole Safety:
         a.   Protection Against Climbing: Monopoles shall be protected against
unauthorized climbing by removing the climbing pegs from the lower twenty feet
(20') of the monopole.
         b.   Fencing: Monopoles and towers shall be fully enclosed by a
minimum six foot (6') tall fence or wall, as directed by the City, unless the
Planning Commission determines that a wall or fence is not needed or
appropriate for a particular site due to conditions specific to the site.
         c.   Security Lighting Requirements: Monopoles and towers shall comply
with the FAA requirements for lighting. As part of the conditional use permit
consideration, the City may also require security lighting for the site. If
security lighting is used, the lighting impact on surrounding residential areas
shall be minimized by using indirect lighting, where appropriate.
      3.   Abandonment: The City may require the removal of all antennas and
monopoles if the facility has been inoperative or out of service for more than
twelve (12) consecutive months.
         a.   Notice: Notice to remove shall be given in writing by personal
service, or by certified mail addressed to the operator's last known address.
         b.   Violation: Failure to remove the antennas and monopoles after
receiving written notice to remove is a violation of the terms of this section.
The City may initiate criminal and/or civil legal proceedings against any
person, firm, entity or corporation, whether acting as principal, agent,
property owner, lessee, lessor, tenant, landlord, employee, employer or
otherwise, for failure to remove antennas and monopoles in accordance with this
section. The City may also remove such structures itself, and may bill its
costs in removing the structures to the operator. Any lease agreement with the
City may also stipulate failure to remove the antennas and monopoles after
receiving written notice to do so pursuant to this section automatically
transfers ownership of the antennas, monopoles, support buildings and all other
structures on the site to the City.
      4.   Emergency: The City shall have authority to move or alter a
telecommunication facility in case of emergency. Before taking any such action,
the City shall first notify the owner of the facility, if feasible.
   Q.   Additional Requirements:
      1.   Storage Areas And Solid Waste Receptacles: No outside storage or
solid waste receptacles shall be permitted on a telecommunications facility
site.
      2.   Equipment Enclosures: All electronic and other related equipment and
appurtenances necessary for the operation of any telecommunication facility
shall, whenever possible, be located within a lawfully pre-existing structure.
When a new structure is required to house such equipment, the structure shall
be harmonious with, and blend with, the natural features, buildings and
structures surrounding such structure.
      3.   Accessory Buildings: Freestanding accessory buildings used with a
telecommunication facility shall not exceed a combined total of four hundred
fifty (450) square feet and shall comply with the setback requirements for
structures in the zoning district in which the facility is located.
      4.   Parking: The City may require a minimum of one parking stall for
sites containing a monopole, tower, and/or accessory buildings, if there is
insufficient parking available on the site.
      5.   Maintenance Requirements: All wireless facilities shall be
maintained in a safe, neat and attractive manner.
      6.   Landscaping: All telecommunications facilities shall be adequately
landscaped in order to provide visual screening as deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission on a site specific, case by case basis. For monopoles where
there are no buildings immediately adjacent to the monopole and equipment
facilities, the site shall be surrounded by dense tree growth to screen views
of the facility in all directions. These trees may be existing on the subject
property or planted as part of the site improvements. The Planning Commission
may require additional landscaping as part of the site plan approval.
      7.   Fencing: A six foot (6') high solid decorative fence or wall shall
be installed and maintained along the entire boundary line of the proposed
project. Chainlink fencing with slats is not considered a solid fence or wall
for the purpose set forth in this subsection.
      8.   Power Lines: All power lines on the lot leading to the
telecommunication facility shall be underground.
   R.   Historic Districts: Any telecommunication facility proposed for a
location within a Historic District or on a historic landmark site as listed on
the National or State Register of Historic Places must be reviewed by the
Planning Commission as a conditional use. (Ord. 2018-04, 1-10-2018)
CHAPTER 15
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
9-15-1: Maintenance Permitted
9-15-2: Repairs And Alterations
9-15-3: Additions, Enlargements And Moving
9-15-4: Restoration Of Damaged Buildings
9-15-5: Alteration Where Parking Insufficient
9-15-6: One Year Vacancy
9-15-7: Occupation Within One Year
9-15-8: Change Of Use
9-15-9: Nonconforming Use Of Land
9-15-1: MAINTENANCE PERMITTED:
A nonconforming building or structure may be maintained. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-15-2: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
Repairs and alterations may be made to nonconforming buildings or buildings
housing a nonconforming use. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-15-3: ADDITIONS, ENLARGEMENTS AND MOVING:
A building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use or a building or
structure nonconforming as to height, area or yard requirements may be added to
or enlarged, if approved by the planning commission. The planning commission
shall not authorize the addition or enlargement of a nonconforming building or
structure, or a building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use unless
evidence is presented showing:
   A.   The proposed addition or enlargement, at the particular location, is
necessary or desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute
to the general well being of the neighborhood and community;
   B.   Such addition or enlargement will not, under the circumstances of the
particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the
persons residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or
improvements in the vicinity;
   C.   The proposed addition or enlargement will comply with regulations and
conditions specified in this title for such use or building or structure;
   D.   The proposed addition or enlargement does not exceed:
      1.   More than fifty percent (50%) of the current nonconforming use, or
      2.   More than thirty percent (30%) of the current building or structure
area. (Ord. 2008-29, 8-13-2008)
9-15-4: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDINGS:
A nonconforming building or structure, or a building or structure occupied by a
nonconforming use, which is damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or other calamity
may be restored and the occupancy or use of such buildings, structure or part
thereof, which existed at the time of such damage, may be continued or resumed;
provided, that such restoration is started within a period of one year and is
diligently pursued to completion. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-15-5: ALTERATION WHERE PARKING INSUFFICIENT:
A building or structure that is nonconforming because of lack of sufficient
automobile parking space in connection therewith as required by this title may
be altered or enlarged, provided additional automobile parking space is
supplied to meet the requirements of this title for such alteration or
enlargement. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-15-6: ONE YEAR VACANCY:
A building or structure or portion thereof occupied by a nonconforming use
which is, or heretofore becomes, vacant and remains unoccupied by a
nonconforming use for a continuous period of one year, shall not thereafter be
occupied except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district
in which it is located. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-15-7: OCCUPATION WITHIN ONE YEAR:
A vacant building or structure may be occupied by a use for which the building
or structure was designed or intended if so occupied within a period of one
year after the use became nonconforming. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-15-8: CHANGE OF USE:
The nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be changed except to a
conforming use; and where such change is made, the use shall not thereafter be
changed back to a nonconforming use. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-15-9: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
The nonconforming use of land, existing at the time of the adoption hereof, may
be continued; provided, that no such nonconforming use of land shall be
expanded or extended on the same lot or adjoining property, unless approval has
been granted as provided for in section
9-15-3 of this chapter. If such nonconforming use of land, or any portion
thereof, is abandoned or changed for a period of one year or more, any future
use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2008-29, 8-13-2008)
CHAPTER 16
OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
9-16-1: Off Street Parking Required
9-16-2: Size
9-16-3: Access To Individual Parking Spaces
9-16-4: Other Vehicles
9-16-5: Number Of Parking Spaces
9-16-6: Access Requirements
9-16-7: Location Of Gasoline Pumps
9-16-8: Maintenance Of Parking Lots
9-16-9: Parking For The Disabled
9-16-10: Parking Lot Landscaping
9-16-11: Prohibited Parking For Specific Vehicles
9-16-12: Guest Parking Requirements For Multiple-Family Developments
9-16-13: On Site Parking Space Reduction Options In The Downtown Mixed Use (DM)
Zone
9-16-1: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIRED:
At the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in
capacity or any use is established, there shall be provided off street parking
spaces for automobiles in accordance with the requirements set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-16-2: SIZE:
The dimensions of each off street parking space shall be at least nine feet by
nineteen feet (9' x 19') for diagonal or ninety degree (90°) spaces, or ten
feet by twenty two feet (10' x 22') for parallel spaces. (Ord. 99-26, 10-20-
1999)
9-16-3: ACCESS TO INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACES:
Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, and except as allowed in the
downtown mixed use (DM) zone, access to each parking space shall be from a
driveway and not from a public street. A conditional use permit shall be
required for all uses listed as conditional uses in the district regulations or
elsewhere in this title. A conditional use permit may be revoked by the
planning commission upon failure to comply with conditions precedent to the
original approval of the permit. (Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009)
9-16-4: OTHER VEHICLES:
Other vehicles such as boats, travel trailers, campers, etc., shall be parked
off of the street. No long term parking of such vehicles on public streets is
allowed. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-16-5: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES:
The number of off street parking spaces required shall be as follows:
 Spaces Required
                                              Spaces Required
Business or professional offices              1 parking space for each 250
                                              square feet of floor area.
                                              1 parking space for each 3.5
Churches with fixed seats                     fixed seats, or 1 parking space
                                              for each 7 feet of linear pew,
                                              whichever is greater.
Churches without fixed seats, sports arenas,  1 parking space for each 3.5
auditoriums, theaters, assembly halls,        seats of maximum seating
meeting rooms                                 capacity.
Furniture and appliance stores                1 parking space for each 60
                                              square feet of floor area.
Hospitals                                     2 parking spaces for each bed.
                                              1.1 parking spaces for each
                                              living unit, plus 1 parking space
Hotels, motels, motor hotels                  for each 2 employees working on
                                              the largest shift, plus parking
                                              space for all accessory uses as
                                              herein specified.
                                              1 parking space for each employee
Nursing homes                                 working on the highest employment
                                              shift, plus 1 parking space for
                                              each 5 beds.
                                              1 parking space for each 4 seats
                                              or 1 parking space for each 150
Restaurants, taverns, private clubs and all   square feet of floor area
other similar dining and drinking             (excluding kitchen, storage or
establishments                                other areas which will not
                                              accommodate customers), whichever
                                              is greater.
Retail stores and shops, except as provided   1 parking space for each 250
in “furniture and appliance stores” above square feet of retail floor
                                              space.
                                              As determined by the planning
                                              commission, based on the nearest
Shopping centers or other groups of uses not  comparable use standards,
listed above                                  including standards for
                                              individual uses within a mix of
                                              uses.
                                              Single-family, Twin-home, Tri-
                                              plex and Four-plex Dwellings: 2
                                              off street parking spaces, and
                                              except for dwelling units located
                                              in the DM zone, 1 of which shall
                                              be enclosed in a garage or
                                              carport. The additional required
                                              parking space shall be
                                              constructed of concrete or
                                              asphalt and be a minimum of 9
                                              feet by 19 feet in size. Both
                                              parking spaces required by this
                                              section shall comply with the
                                              front yard setback requirements
                                              of the zone in which the lot is
                                              located. Except for the mobile
                                              home-recreational vehicle (MH)
                                              zone, locating 1 parking space
                                              immediately in front of the other
                                              required parking space (tandem
                                              parking) is specifically
                                              prohibited. Any single-family
                                              dwelling which is converted to a
                                              two-, three-, four- or multiple-
                                              family dwelling in compliance
                                              with the provisions of this title
                                              must provide 2 off street parking
                                              spaces for each dwelling unit
                                              constructed. Each parking space
                                              must meet the provisions of this
                                              chapter.
                                              All Other Multiple Family
                                              Dwelling Developments: Use the
                                              following charts to calculate
                                              required parking:
                                              Apartments / Condos - Multiple
                                              Family Dwelling Developments: Use
                                              the following chart to calculate
                                              required parking:
                                              Dwelling Unit  Number of Spaces:
                                              Type:
                                              One Bedroom    1.5
Single-family two-, three-, four-, or other   Two Bedroom    2.0
multiple family dwellings                     Three Bedroom, 2.25*
                                              plus
                                              * This number may be reduced to
                                              2.0 when the development is a mix
                                              of one, two and three (or more)
                                              bedroom units, as long as the
                                              number one bedroom units is equal
                                              to or greater than the number of
                                              three bedroom units. 
                                              All required parking spaces for
                                              Multiple-Family Dwelling
                                              Developments, shall be located
                                              within three hundred feet (300')
                                              of the building footprint.
                                              Required visitor parking spaces
                                              may be located beyond the three
                                              hundred foot (300') requirement.
                                              In certain cases where problems
                                              associated with topography or lot
                                              configuration, the city council
                                              may approve an alternative
                                              parking layout.
                                              Townhome Developments: Use the
                                              following chart to calculate
                                              required parking:
                                              Dwelling Unit  Number of Spaces:
                                              Type:
                                              One and Two    2.0
                                              Bedroom
                                              Three Bedroom, 2.25
                                              plus
                                              All required parking spaces
                                              Townhome Developments shall be
                                              located within three hundred feet
                                              (300') of the building footprint.
                                              Required visitor parking spaces
                                              may be located beyond the three
                                              hundred foot (300') requirement.
                                              In certain cases where problems
                                              associated with topography or lot
                                              configuration, the city council
                                              may approve an alternative
                                              parking layout.
                                              1 parking space for each 1,000
                                              square feet of gross floor area,
Wholesale establishments, warehouses,         or 1 parking space for each
manufacturing establishments, and all         employee working on the largest
industrial uses                               shift, whichever is greater, plus
                                              1 parking space for each 200
                                              square feet of office or sales
                                              area.
 
(Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989; amd. Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004; 2007 Code; Ord. 2008-02, 1-
9-2008; Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009; Ord. 2022-62, 11-9-2022)
9-16-6: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Access requirements shall be as specified in the access management plan adopted
by the city and on file in the city office. (2007 Code)
9-16-7: LOCATION OF GASOLINE PUMPS:
Gasoline pumps shall be set back not less than eighteen feet (18') from any
street line to which the pump island is vertical and twelve feet (12') from any
street line to which the pump island is parallel, and not less than ten feet
(10') from any residential or agricultural district boundary line. If the pump
island is set at an angle on the property, it shall be located so that the
automobiles stopped for service will not extend over the property line. (Ord.
89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-16-8: MAINTENANCE OF PARKING LOTS:
Every parcel of land used as a public or private parking lot shall be developed
in accordance with the following requirements:
   A.   Surfacing: All driveway approaches and parking spaces required by this
chapter shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or portland cement or other hard
surfacing pavement material approved by the planning commission. All other lot
area intended for vehicle storage of any kind shall be covered with a minimum
of six inches (6") of compacted road base material, and shall be kept in a dust
free condition. The planning commission may require hard surfacing of any
vehicle storage area. The parking area shall be so graded as to dispose of all
surface water. If such water is to be carried to adjacent streets, it shall be
piped under sidewalks. (Ord. 96-07, 2-28-1996)
   B.   Screening: The sides and rear of any off street parking lot which faces
or adjoins a residential district shall be screened from such district by a
solid visual barrier not less than six feet (6') in height at the grade of the
parking lot or other barrier acceptable and approved by the planning
commission.
   C.   Maintenance: Each parking lot shall be permanently maintained.
   D.   Lighting: Lighting used to illuminate any parking lot shall be arranged
to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in any residential district
and from street traffic. (Ord. 89-5, 3-1-1989)
9-16-9: PARKING FOR THE DISABLED:
Any parking area to be used by the general public shall provide parking spaces
designated and located to adequately accommodate the disabled, and these shall
be clearly marked as such. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be located in
close proximity to the principal building. The designation of parking spaces
for the disabled shall constitute consent by the property owner to the
enforcement of the restricted use of such spaces to disabled motorists by the
city. Parking spaces for the disabled shall conform to the standards of the
Americans with disabilities act. The number of required parking spaces
accessible to the disabled shall be as follows:
Total Number      Required Minimum Number
Of Parking Spaces Of Accessible Spaces
Total Number         Required Minimum Number
Of Parking Spaces    Of Accessible Spaces
   1   to   15
   26   to  �250
   51   to  �375
   76    to  4�100
   101    to �5 150
   151    to �6 200
   201    to �7 300
   301    to �8 400
   401    to �9 500
   501    to �2 percent of total
   1,001    and   20, plus 1 for each 100 spaces over 1,000
 
In addition, for every eight (8) accessible parking spaces, one accessible van
space must be provided. The dimensions of a standard accessible parking space
shall be at least nine feet by nineteen feet (9' x 19') with a five foot (5')
wide access aisle (total of 14 feet x 19 feet). The dimensions of an accessible
van space shall be at least nine feet by nineteen feet (9' x 19') with an eight
foot (8') wide access aisle (total of 17 feet x 19 feet). (Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-
2004)
9-16-10: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Trees: Trees shall be located throughout parking lots and not simply at
the ends of parking aisles. In order to be considered within parking lots,
trees shall be located in planters that are bounded on at least three (3) sides
by parking area paving. Parking areas shall include one tree for every five (5)
parking spaces and shall be uniformly dispersed to provide shade. Trees shall
be a minimum size of fifteen (15) gallons (at least 1 inch in diameter) at
planting, and shall be of a species which shall reach a thirty foot (30') to
fifty foot (50') crown within fifteen (15) years.
   B.   Percentage Required; Protection: At least five percent (5%) of the
parking lot area shall be developed and maintained as landscaped area. At least
half of the landscaped area shall be in the form of live trees, shrubs and
ground cover. Landscaping shall be protected from vehicular and pedestrian
encroachment by raised planting surfaces, depressed walls or the use of curbs.
(Ord. 2004-18, 6-9-2004)
9-16-11: PROHIBITED PARKING FOR SPECIFIC VEHICLES:
   A.   No person shall park, or allow to remain standing or idling for more
than fifteen (15) minutes, any "motor vehicle", as defined by the U.S.
department of transportation, that has eight (8) or more wheels touching the
ground, or has a total length, including an attached trailer or other attached
object, exceeding thirty nine feet (39'), upon any street or roadway of the
city, except to load or unload the vehicle, as long as the loading or unloading
is done expeditiously, or upon restricted vehicle routes and truck routes so
designated within the city and in obedience to traffic signs and markings upon
said routes, or for city approved construction and maintenance.
   B.   No person shall park, or allow to remain standing or idling for more
than fifteen (15) minutes, any "motor vehicle", as defined by the U.S.
department of transportation, that has eight (8) or more wheels touching the
ground, or has a total length, including an attached trailer or other attached
object, exceeding thirty nine feet (39'), upon any privately owned property
within the corporate city limits of the city, if that property is zoned for
residential use, including MH zones and the residential portions of PUD and PCD
zones, with the exception of the agricultural zones and the RA-5 zone. (Ord.
2004-19, 6-9-2004)
9-16-12: GUEST PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIPLE-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS:
Except for the DM Zone, guest parking spaces in the ratio of one parking space
per three and one-quarter (3.25) units shall be provided for all multiple-
family residential developments, including apartments, condominiums, duplexes,
attached or detached townhomes, triplexes and fourplexes, and any combination
thereof. For developments that have units with personal driveways a minimum of
twenty feet (20') in length and eighteen feet (18') in width, located in front
of a two car garage and are limited to the use of those units, up to thirty
percent (30%) of those driveways may be counted toward meeting the guest
parking requirement. In calculating the guest parking requirement, any fraction
of five-tenths (0.5) and above shall be rounded up to the subsequent whole
number and any fraction below five-tenths (0.5) shall be rounded down to the
preceding whole number. (Ord. 2007-26, 8-22-2007; amd. Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-
2009; Ord. 2019-26, 12-11-2019; Ord. 2022-62, 11-9-2022)
9-16-13: ON SITE PARKING SPACE REDUCTION OPTIONS IN THE DOWNTOWN MIXED USE (DM)
ZONE:
To maximize buildable area as a way to assist in bringing vitality to the
city's downtown, parking space reduction options are available provided that
the number of parking spaces required for a development is satisfied by
utilizing the options. The options for reducing on site parking spaces are
cited below. However, providing all of the required parking spaces on site is
still permissible.
   A.   Providing A Bus Stop Facility: Providing a bus stop facility and
associated furnishings, including the costs and installation, at a location
determined by the city and other appropriate agencies, qualifies for a
reduction in on site parking spaces. The bus stop should be in close proximity
to the development site. The design of the facility and associated furnishings,
the location of the facility in relation to its proximity to the development
site, and the number of on site parking spaces that may be reduced shall be
approved by the city after discussing the option with the developer.
   B.   Providing On Street Parking Spaces: Providing on street parking spaces
on the side streets perpendicular to Telegraph Street and providing street
furniture on the streets fronting the development site, including the costs and
installation of improvements (which may also include piping the irrigation
gutters), qualifies as on site parking spaces. The parking spaces should be in
close proximity to the development site and shall, together with the on site
parking spaces, satisfy the number of parking spaces required for the
development. The design of the on street parking area and street furniture, the
location of the parking area in relation to its proximity to the development
site, and the locations and quantities of the street furniture on the streets
fronting the development site shall be approved by the city after discussing
the option with the developer.
   C.   Contributing To A Public Parking Lot Or Structure: Contributing to a
public parking lot or structure and providing street furniture on the streets
fronting the development site, including the costs and installation of
improvements (which may also include piping the irrigation gutters), qualifies
for a reduction in on site parking spaces. The amount of the contribution for a
public parking lot or structure, the design of the street furniture, and the
locations and quantities of the street furniture on the streets fronting the
development site shall be approved by the city after discussing the option with
the developer. (Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009)
CHAPTER 17
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
9-17-1: Purpose
9-17-2: Permit Required
9-17-3: Application
9-17-4: Fees
9-17-5: Site Development Plan; Building Elevations
9-17-6: Permit Approval
9-17-7: Appeal Of Decision
9-17-8: Expansion Of Conditional Use
9-17-9: Inspection
9-17-10: Time Limit
9-17-11: Revocation
9-17-1: PURPOSE:
Certain uses which may be harmonious under special conditions and in specific
locations within a district may be improper under general conditions and in
other locations. A conditional use permit is intended to allow the proper
integration of such uses into the city only if such uses are designed and laid
out in a manner approved by the planning commission and/or city council. This
chapter describes the process required to obtain a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2008-29, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
9-17-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses listed as conditional
uses in the district regulations or elsewhere in this title. A conditional use
permit may be revoked by the planning commission upon failure to comply with
conditions precedent to the original approval of the permit. (Ord. 2008-29, 8-
13-2008; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
9-17-3: APPLICATION:
A completed application (along with all required exhibits and studies) for a
conditional use permit, signed by the property owner or the property owner's
authorized agent, shall be submitted to the community development department by
the approved meeting cutoff date prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of
the planning commission at which the application is to be considered. Notices
of the planning commission meetings shall be mailed to all property owners
appearing on the latest ownership plats in the county recorder's office within
a three hundred foot (300') radius of any property for which actions of the
planning commission and/or city council are being requested. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant for such actions to provide one set of
addressed mailing labels necessary to provide such notices, and a list showing
the names and addresses of all property owners being notified. (Ord. 2009-07,
3-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
9-17-4: FEES:
The application for any conditional use permit shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee as determined by the city council. (Ord. 2004-11, 5-12-2004;
amd. Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
9-17-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN; BUILDING ELEVATIONS:
   A.   Criteria:
      1.   The applicant for a conditional use permit shall prepare a site
development plan and building elevations which meet the following criteria:
         a.   Name and address of applicant and property owner;
         b.   The locations, dimensions and setbacks of all existing and
proposed buildings, fences, or walls (including materials and colors), and
other structures to be included in the proposed development;
         c.   The proposed landscaping plan, signage plan and lighting plan;
         d.   The location and dimensions of existing and proposed roads,
striped automobile parking spaces and loading areas, traffic circulation
patterns, curbing, gutters, sidewalks, paved areas, and roads and driveway
adjoining and across from the development;
         e.   The locations and dimensions of existing and proposed drainage
facilities, utilities, easements and fire hydrants;
         f.   Building elevations, showing all building sides and roof,
including the proposed materials and colors;
         g.   Plans for screening mechanical equipment (roof mounted or
otherwise) and dumpsters;
         h.   The lot dimensions, existing and proposed topographical elevation
contours, and a north arrow;
         i.   Necessary explanatory notes; and
         j.   Other materials deemed necessary by city staff to assist the
planning commission and/or city council in arriving at an appropriate decision,
including, but not limited to, a traffic study, a drainage study and a
geotechnical report.
      2.   The site development plan, building elevations and required studies
shall be submitted with the application for a conditional use permit as
outlined above.
   B.   Review: The community development department shall contact other city
personnel, and other agencies as needed, for review purposes. The community
development department shall furnish to the applicant any comments regarding
the site development plan, building elevations and/or required studies which
may assist the applicant in preparing the request for presentation to the
planning commission and/or city council. If any city department or other agency
requests additional time for review of the site development plan, building
elevations and/or required studies, the community development department may
recommend to the planning commission and/or city council that deliberation of
the application be tabled until the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
planning commission and/or city council. The application cannot be tabled for
more than four (4) planning commission and/or city council meetings after the
submittal of the application. (Ord. 2004-11, 5-12-2004; amd. Ord. 2008-29, 8-
13-2008; Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
9-17-6: PERMIT APPROVAL:
Certain conditional use permits will be decided by the planning commission and
other conditional use permits will be decided by the city council following a
recommendation by the planning commission, as outlined below:
   A.   Planning Commission Decision: The planning commission will be
responsible for holding all public hearings for all conditional use permit
applications. They will also be responsible for decisions on all conditional
use permits, except those conditional uses listed in the Administrative and
Professional (AP), Community Commercial (C-1), Service Commercial (C-2),
General Commercial (C-3), Downtown Mixed Use (DM) zoning districts, and
commercially designated areas within Planned Community Developments. For those
conditional uses listed in the commercial zoning districts, the planning
commission will be the recommending body to the city council.
   B.   City Council Decision: In the specific zoning districts listed above,
the City Council, after receiving a recommendation for a conditional use permit
from the planning commission, will decide to uphold the recommendation for
approval, modify the recommendation for approval, or deny the conditional use
permit application.
   C.   Conditions Of Approval: Such conditions of approval may include, but
shall not be limited to, specifications concerning: structures, landscaping;
density; ingress or egress; fencing; parking; or lighting. Height, density and
size requirements for structures in each zone are maximum and may be reduced or
modified as conditions to the approval of any conditional use application.
   D.   The planning commission and/or city council shall not authorize a
conditional use permit unless evidence is presented showing:
      1.   The proposed use, at the particular location, provides a service or
facility which will contribute to the general well being of the neighborhood
and community; and
      2.   That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular
case, be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvement in
the vicinity; and
      3.   The proposed use will comply with regulations and conditions
specified in this title for such use; and
      4.   The proposed use will conform to the intent of the general plan.
(Ord. 2008-29, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
9-17-7: APPEAL OF DECISION:
Any person shall have the right to appeal any decision rendered by the planning
commission or city council in relation to conditional use permit decisions.
Appeals on any planning commission decision will be made to the appellate body
which is the city council. Appeals on any city council decision will be made to
the appellate body which is the District Court. Appeals to the city council
will be made by submitting an application to appear before the city council to
the community development department and stating the reason for the appeal,
within ten (10) working days following the date upon which the decision was
made by the planning commission. After receiving said appeal, a meeting with
the city council shall be scheduled within twenty (20) working days, and the
city council may affirm, reverse or alter any action taken by the planning
commission, based on their review of the planning commission's decision and the
application of the standards listed in section
9-17-5 of this chapter. Appeals to the District Court will be as directed by
such court. (Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
9-17-8: EXPANSION OF CONDITIONAL USE:
No structure or use allowed by the issuance of a conditional use permit may be
expanded without the approval of the planning commission or city council,
whichever was the approving authority. The applicant for such expansion shall
follow the same application procedures as outlined above. (Ord. 2008-29, 8-13-
2008; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
9-17-9: INSPECTION:
   A.   Following the approval of a conditional use permit by the planning
commission and/or city council, the official charged with the enforcement of
this title shall review and approve an application for a building permit
pursuant to section
9-2-2 of this title, and shall ensure that the development is undertaken and
completed in compliance with all conditions and permits pertaining to said
development.
   B.   No certificate of occupancy or business license shall be issued by any
city employee for any use authorized by conditional use approval, nor shall any
structure be occupied until the official charged with the enforcement of this
title certifies that all conditions of the permit have been completed, and that
the applicant has complied with all conditions placed upon the permit at the
time of approval of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 2004-11, 5-12-2004; amd.
Ord. 2008-29, 8-13-2008; Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
9-17-10: TIME LIMIT:
All conditional use permits shall expire within a maximum period of one year of
approval, unless there has been substantial performance toward the completion
of the conditions set forth in the permit. The planning commission and/or city
council may grant a maximum extension of six (6) months under exceptional
circumstances. In the event that a conditional use permit is granted on a
temporary basis, the planning commission and/or city council may issue a permit
for six (6) months, with one maximum extension of six (6) months. An extension
request shall be submitted to the community development department prior to the
expiration of the conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall be non
transferable to a different location, but shall run with the land as long as
the use is in continuous operation. If the use ceases operation for a
continuous period of one year, the conditional use permit shall expire and the
use shall not occupy the site unless a new conditional use permit is approved.
(Ord. 2008-29, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
9-17-11: REVOCATION:
Regardless of the use's current owner or operator, a conditional use permit may
be revoked by the planning commission after a hearing is held where the
planning commission determines that the applicant or the use's current owner or
operator has failed to comply with the conditions imposed with the original
permit, and/or the use has ceased to operate for a continuous period of one
year. The permit may be reinstated upon the determination of the planning
commission that the cause for the revocation has been corrected and the
applicant or the use's current owner or operator has submitted evidence
indicating that the site development plan and building elevations approved by
the planning commission and/or city council will be completed in a time frame
accepted and approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 2008-29, 8-13-2008;
amd. Ord. 2023-13, 4-12-2023)
CHAPTER 18
SIGNS
SECTION:
9-18-1: Purpose
9-18-2: Scope
9-18-3: Interpretation
9-18-4: Definitions
9-18-5: Administration And Enforcement
9-18-6: Permit Required
9-18-7: Compliance Required
9-18-8: Traffic Safety
9-18-9: Permanent Signs
9-18-10: Temporary Signs
9-18-11: Abandoned Or Nonmaintained Sign Or Sign Identifying A Discontinued Use
9-18-12: Right To Appeal
9-18-13: Legal Nonconforming Signs
9-18-14: Prohibited Signs
9-18-15: Signs Not Requiring A Permit
9-18-16: Regulation Of Signs By Zone
9-18-17: Construction Specifications
9-18-18: Temporary Sign Standards
9-18-19: Common Signage Plan
9-18-20: Special Standards For Commercial Signs On Telegraph Road, Washington
Parkway, And 300 East
9-18-21: Sign Regulations By Zone
9-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and authorize the use of signs which
are compatible with their surroundings, create a minimum distraction to
motorists, and effectively, efficiently and conveniently advertise local
businesses or events which promote a healthy, growing community while
maintaining a sense of the history and beauty of the city. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-
2003)
9-18-2: SCOPE:
   A.   The prevention of distractive signage by this chapter is intended to
ensure that property values are maintained or enhanced and to protect
pedestrians and motorists alike. The creation of sign design, location, size,
type, compatibility and aesthetic regulations is to achieve this purpose.
   B.   The regulations of this chapter are intended to apply to both on
premises and off premises signs, but do not apply to handheld placards and
other similar devices traditionally used for public protest and the exercise of
free speech. Any noncommercial message may be substituted for any commercial
message permitted under this chapter. It is not the intent of this chapter to
regulate the content of public speech. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the sign
regulations contained herein are declared to be the maximum allowable for the
purposes set forth. If the zoning administrator or a designated representative
determines that an application needs further interpretation, the signage
request may be forwarded to the planning commission for their review of the
proposal.
   B.   If the applicant wishes to propose or retain a sign that does not
conform to ordinance standards, a decision for a variance or special exception
must be obtained by application to the board of adjustment as outlined in
chapter 4, article A of this title. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of this chapter:
BILLBOARD: See definition of Sign, Off Premises.
COPY: The wording on a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter
form.
PROMOTIONAL BOARD: A permanently attached, changeable copy portion of an
approved sign. The area of said promotional board shall not exceed thirty three
percent (33%) of the maximum area of sign, per face, permitted in the
particular zone where the use is located.
SIGN: Any device, structure, fixture or placard using graphics, symbols and/or
written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or
identifying any establishment, product, goods or services. Devices not included
in this definition include official traffic or government signs, window
displays, flags of any nation, government or noncommercial organization,
religious symbols, or the display of street numbers.
SIGN, A-FRAME: A sign constructed of plywood or other light material which is
not supported by any other materials, and is assembled in such a manner where
two (2) sides are attached at the top so as to allow the sign to stand in an
upright position.
SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion or light
and/or color changes achieved through mechanical, electrical or electronic
means; an automatic changeable copy sign, as defined in this section; or a
manual changeable copy sign, as defined in this section.
SIGN, AREA OF: The area of a sign that is used for display purposes, excluding
the minimum frame and supports. Only the largest face of any double sided (back
to back) sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area. A sign is
considered double sided when the signs are parallel or diverge from a common
edge by an angle of not more than forty five degrees (45°). In relation to
signs which do not have a frame or separate background, sign area shall be
calculated on the basis of the area of the smallest, single continuous
geometric figure large enough to frame the display.
SIGN, AWNING: A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the
surface of an awning.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY (AUTOMATIC): A sign, including any portion of the sign,
on which the copy or symbols change automatically on a lamp bank or through
electrical, electronic, or mechanical means (such as time and temperature
units).
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY (MANUAL): A sign on which copy is changed manually in the
field through placement of letters or symbols on a panel mounted in or on a
track system (such as reader boards with changeable letters).
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor,
subcontractor, financial institution, marketing firm and/or material supplier
participating in construction on the property upon which the sign is located.
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT PROMOTIONAL: A sign announcing a future or ongoing project
that has received approval for development (e.g., "coming soon", "an active
adult community", etc.).
SIGN, ELECTRONIC READER: A sign used primarily as a billboard(s), or off
premises sign which employs actual motion, the illusion of motion or light and/
or color changes achieved through mechanical, electrical or electronic means,
changeable copy sign, a sign or a portion thereof on which the copy or symbols
change automatically through electrical or electronic means.
SIGN, FLASHING: A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing
light source used primarily to attract attention.
SIGN, FLAT: A sign erected parallel to and attached to the outside wall of a
building and extending no more than twenty four inches (24") from said wall,
with copy on the face side only.
SIGN, FREESTANDING POLE: A sign supported in the ground and not attached to any
building.
SIGN, GROUND: A sign supported by a fixed, permanent frame support in the
ground.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated
internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.
SIGN, MAINTENANCE OF: The cleaning, painting, repair or replacement of
defective parts of a sign that does not alter the basic copy, design, or
structure of a sign.
SIGN, MARQUEE: Any sign attached to or supported by a permanent canopy of rigid
materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building.
SIGN, MONUMENT: A sign affixed to a base on the ground which is incorporated
into the landscape or architectural design scheme of a development and displays
the name of the development and/or the business name(s) and/or use(s) within
the development. A sign with support posts no more than two feet (2') between
the bottom of the sign area and the ground may be considered as a monument
sign.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING: A sign or sign structure, or portion thereof, lawfully
erected and existing at the effective date hereof, which does not comply with
all regulations prescribed by this chapter and the zoning district in which it
is located.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: A sign which directs attention to a use, product, commodity
or service not related to or located on the premises on which the sign is
located, such as billboards or outdoor advertising.
SIGN, ON PREMISES: A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it
is located.
SIGN, PORTABLE: Any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently
affixed to the ground or to a structure or building.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign attached to a building or canopy and extending in a
nonparallel manner in whole or in part more than twelve inches (12") beyond any
wall of the building or canopy.
SIGN, PROPERTY: A real estate sign related to the property upon which it is
located and offering such property for sale, rent or lease.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building.
SIGN, SETBACK OF: The minimum distance which any portion of the sign or sign
structure shall be located from any street right of way line and yard line
coterminous with a street.
SIGN, SNIPE: A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, utility pole,
supports for another sign, etc.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign not constructed or intended for use longer than six
(6) months.
SIGN, WALL: A sign that is painted either on a wall or its facing, and not
having a sign frame or separation from the wall or facing.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign installed inside a window, intended for external viewing.
(Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003; amd. Ord. 2008-33, 11-12-2008; Ord. 2013-01, 1-23-
2013)
9-18-5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Zoning Administrator To Enforce: The zoning administrator or a
designated representative shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter in determining that the permitting process,
construction and design, and inspection process conform to this chapter and
applicable ordinances or regulations.
   B.   Inspection And Certification: Upon completion of the sign, the building
official or a designated representative shall inspect the sign and its
structural and electrical connections to ensure compliance with all duly
adopted codes and ordinances. The imprint or identifying insignia of the sign
owner and sign erector of all off premises signs shall be in plain and public
view.
   C.   Issuance Of Notices Or Violations: The zoning administrator or a
designated representative may issue a written notice of violation to the person
having charge or control or benefit of any sign found to be unsafe or dangerous
or in violation of this chapter. Such official may also issue criminal
citations and swear to information against violators.
   D.   Legal Action: The zoning administrator or a designated representative
is hereby authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any
case where any sign is illegally constructed, placed or modified, or in any
case where any sign is used in violation of any city ordinance, including, but
not limited to, this chapter and all other chapters of this title. (Ord. 2003-
05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-6: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall paint, mark or write on, or post, or
otherwise affix any handbill or sign to any public or private lands or
structure without obtaining a permit from the city, unless otherwise exempted
in this chapter. No person shall physically change or modify an existing sign
(including off premises signs) that would convert or alter the existing sign to
utilize new or additional features without obtaining a permit from the city,
unless otherwise exempted in this chapter. No sign shall be located on or
project over publicly owned land or inside existing street rights of way or
planned rights of way as identified in the city transportation master plan.
(Ord. 2013-06, 2-13-2013)
   B.   Illegal Posting: Any handbill or sign found posted upon any public
property contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by any city
official. The person responsible for any such illegal posting shall be liable
for the cost incurred in the removal thereof, and the city is authorized to
effect the collection of the cost.
   C.   Application For Permit: Application for a permit to place or construct
a sign in any location shall be submitted to the city on the city standard
building permit form, along with the associated site plan and building
elevation plans showing the locations, dimensions, materials, colors and copy
of all existing and proposed signs. The zoning administrator or a designated
representative may require a conditional use permit under the conditions of
this chapter. All signs not specifically allowed herein shall require a
conditional use permit issued in conformance with this title. Application for a
conditional use permit shall be made according to the procedures outlined in
chapter 17 of this title. The expiration date for the completion of such permit
shall be one hundred eighty (180) days from the time the permit is obtained.
The zoning administrator or the designated representative may consider the
substantial effort toward completion in extending a permit, if the sign is not
completed in the allotted time.
   D.   Permit Fees: All applications for permits filed with the city shall be
assessed a planning review fee and a fee in accordance with the duly adopted
building permit fee schedule of the city. If a conditional use permit is also
required, the fee required by chapter 17 of this title shall also be assessed.
   E.   Illumination: An illuminated sign shall not be installed in such a
manner which permits the light to penetrate beyond the property so as to
constitute a nuisance. An illuminated sign alleged to be a nuisance by the
neighboring property owners or tenants shall be subject to a public hearing
before the planning commission as to the validity of the nuisance complaint.
Such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the public hearing
procedures outlined in chapter 17 of this title. If the illuminated sign is
determined to be a nuisance, it shall be subject to the city nuisance
ordinance.
   F.   Indemnification: All persons involved in the maintenance, installation,
alteration or relocation of signs in the city shall agree to hold harmless and
indemnify the city, its officers, agents, and employees against any and all
claims of negligence resulting from such work, insofar as this chapter has not
specifically directed the placement of a sign. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-7: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
The placement, construction or modification of any sign within the city shall
be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-8: TRAFFIC SAFETY:
   A.   Street Or Driveway Intersection: No sign shall be permitted at a street
or driveway intersection which would create a condition that is unsafe for
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or is inappropriate with respect to location,
size, time or duration of display, or is maintained in a deteriorated
condition.
   B.   Words Or Phrases Prohibited: Signs placed near an intersection shall
not make use of the words "stop", "danger", "slow", or other words or phrases
ordinarily identified with traffic direction that may cause confusion or
interfere with the safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, nor shall the
illumination of any sign impair the vision of those passing by.
   C.   Clear View Of Intersecting Streets: A minimum clearance of eight feet
(8'), measured vertically from the grade of the intersecting streets, shall be
maintained for any sign located within a triangular formation designated by the
point of intersection of the property lines abutting the street intersection
and points thirty feet (30') from the point of intersection along the property
lines.
   D.   Abatement And Removal Of Unsafe Or Dangerous Signs: If an unsafe or
dangerous sign is not repaired or made safe within five (5) working days after
giving notice to the property owner, caretaker of the sign, or business owner
or manager of the business located on the property, the zoning administrator or
a designated representative may immediately abate and remove the sign, and the
person having charge, control or benefit of any such sign shall pay to the city
the costs incurred in such removal within thirty (30) calendar days after
written notice is mailed to such person. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-9: PERMANENT SIGNS:
A permanent sign for which a permit is required but not obtained, or otherwise
in violation of this chapter, shall conform to the regulations of this chapter
within thirty (30) days from the issuance of the zoning administrator's or
designated representative's written notice to the property owner, caretaker of
the sign, or business owner or manager of the business located on the property,
or such sign shall be abated or removed. The person responsible for any such
illegal posting and/or maintenance of said sign shall be liable for the cost
incurred in the removal thereof, and the city is authorized to effect the
collection of such costs. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-10: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
A temporary sign for which a permit is required but not obtained, or otherwise
in violation of this chapter, shall conform to the regulations of this chapter
within seventy two (72) hours from the issuance of the zoning administrator's
or designated representative's notice to the property owner, caretaker of the
sign, or business owner or manager of the business located on the property, or
such sign shall be abated or removed. The person responsible for any such
illegal posting and/or maintenance of said sign shall be liable for the cost
incurred in the removal thereof, and the city is authorized to effect the
collection of such costs.
   A.   On Private Property: A temporary sign posted upon private property may
be installed or constructed only upon the issuance of a permit, or the sign
shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the prescribed penalties.
Such sign shall conform to the regulations of this chapter within seventy two
(72) hours from the issuance of the zoning administrator's or designated
representative's notice to the property owner, caretaker of the sign, or
business owner or manager of the business located on the property, or such sign
shall be abated or removed, or legal action shall be initiated seeking such
abatement or removal. The person responsible for any such illegal posting and/
or maintenance of said sign shall be liable for the cost incurred in the
removal thereof, and the city is authorized to effect the collection of such
costs.
   B.   On Public Property: Any sign posted upon public property may be removed
immediately by the city. Any such sign removed shall not be destroyed within a
period less than thirty (30) days from the date of removal. In no case shall
the failure to remove said sign constitute acquiescence or waiver by the city
of the illegal placement of the sign. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-11: ABANDONED OR NONMAINTAINED SIGN OR SIGN IDENTIFYING A DISCONTINUED
USE:
The zoning administrator or a designated representative shall require that each
abandoned sign, nonmaintained sign or sign identifying a discontinued use be
removed from the building or premises when such sign has not been repaired or
put into use by the owner or caretaker of the sign within forty five (45) days
of proper written notice of abandonment, nonmaintenance or discontinuance given
by the zoning administrator or the designated representative to the owner or
caretaker of the sign. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-12: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
Any person adversely affected by the action of the zoning administrator or the
designated representative in the enforcement of this chapter may appeal to the
board of adjustment as outlined in chapter 4, article A of this title. (Ord.
2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-13: LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Any existing sign established in conformance with the adopted zoning
regulations at the time of construction or placement, shall not be modified or
repositioned on the property without first being brought into conformance with
the most current city regulations governing signage. The term "modify" shall
include the changing of a sign text or message to indicate a change in the
approved use of the property or change in ownership. The term "modify" shall
not include the changing of changeable text or copy on signs designed for such
text or copy.
   A.   Vacancy Or Abandonment: A legal nonconforming sign may not regain its
status after forty five (45) days of vacancy or abandonment, even if the
original business reoccupies the property.
   B.   Special Exceptions:
      1.   An appeal of section
9-18-11 of this chapter may be heard by the board of adjustment which is
authorized to grant a special exception to allow the retention, alteration,
movement or expansion of a nonconforming sign; provided, that the board finds
or is provided conclusive information indicating the following conditions are
met:
         a.   The nonconforming sign poses an alternative equivalent means of
meeting the intent of this chapter and the general plan.
         b.   The action will not impose a burden on other properties in the
city beyond that posed by a conforming sign.
         c.   Approval will provide a forum for free expression or other
articulable benefits to the public. The board of adjustment shall consider
whether approval of such a sign creates an unfair competitive advantage to that
business. A new business generally shall not qualify for a special exception
for reuse of a nonconforming sign left by a previous business. Purely economic
factors, such as the expense of removing or altering a nonconforming sign or of
purchasing a new conforming sign, are not to be considered as reasons for the
board to grant a special exception.
      2.   The board is empowered to attach reasonable requirements (including
expiration and renewal requirements) with which the petitioner must comply as a
condition of approval of a special exception. The duration of the special
exception shall not be transferable. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-14: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following devices are prohibited in any zone in the city:
   A.   Abandoned signs.
   B.   A-frame signs.
   C.   Roof signs that are animated, that project above the roofline or
parapet wall, and/or that have exposed mounting brackets and hardware.
   D.   Snipe signs.
   E.   Any truck, trailer or other vehicle conspicuously or regularly parked
on or off premises, with an advertising message or logo displayed to attract
attention to a business, product or promotion. A business or individual may be
required to remove such vehicle if the zoning administrator or a designated
representative determines that the vehicle is being utilized for advertising
purposes.
   F.   Graffiti.
   G.   Spotlights or beacons directed into the night sky, except as part of an
approved promotional period for temporary signs.
   H.   Off premises signs (including billboards), except as otherwise provided
for in this chapter.
   I.   Portable signs, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter.
   J.   Signs attached to or on public property, except as otherwise provided
for in this chapter. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-15: SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT:
   A.   Private Property: The following signs shall be allowed without a sign
permit on private property only:
      1.   Directional Or Instructional Signs: Signs which provide direction or
instruction and are located entirely on premises and which do not in any way
advertise a business. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area
or four feet (4') in height. These signs may identify restrooms, public
telephones, walkways, or shall provide direction such as parking lot entrance
and exit signs and those of a similar nature.
      2.   No Trespassing Or No Dumping Signs: "No trespassing" or "no dumping"
signs may not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area for a single sign, or are
limited to four (4) signs at four (4) square feet each for each lot, unless the
zoning administrator or a designated representative finds more signs are
required to prevent violations.
      3.   Neighborhood Identification Signs: A sign, masonry wall, landscaping
or other similar materials or features may be combined to form a display for
neighborhood identification; provided, that the legend of such sign or display
shall consist of only the neighborhood name and/or address.
      4.   Symbols Or Insignia: Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of
recognized historical agencies, or identification emblems of religious orders
or historical agencies; provided, that no such sign shall exceed eight (8)
square feet in area; and provided further, that all such signs be placed flat
against the main building.
      5.   Institutional Uses: Churches, public schools, public utility
companies, libraries, governmental buildings, parks, public golf courses, and
similar uses are allowed one monument sign of thirty two (32) square feet. If
the institution has more than one frontage and is located on an arterial
street, then an additional sign of the same size is allowed.
      6.   Notice/Bulletin Boards: Notice/bulletin boards not over thirty two
(32) square feet in area for medical, public, charitable or religious
institutions, where the same are located on the premises of such institutions
and are oriented solely to the interior of the property and are not used to
direct exterior vehicular attention to any product or service of the
institution.
      7.   Plaques: Plaques or nameplate signs, not more than two (2) square
feet, which are fastened directly to the building or which commemorate a
historical, cultural or artistic event, location or personality for which the
department of public works has granted a written permit.
      8.   Flags: The flags, emblems or insignia of any nation or political
subdivision. Corporate flags may not exceed twelve (12) square feet and may be
flown in tandem with the state or national flag. Large flags flown in high wind
may cause a noise nuisance and are subject to removal upon investigation.
      9.   Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets with the names of
buildings and date of erection cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to
be part of the building. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
      10.   Changing Copy: Changes to a currently approved sign for which the
exclusive proposed change or modification is limited to the actual copy (i.e.,
symbols and/or letters) on such sign. This exception does not extend to (i.e.,
this exception is not allowed for) animated signs. (Ord. 2013-07, 2-13-2013)
      11.   Holiday Decorations: Noncommercial signs of a primarily decorative
nature, clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any
national, local or religious holiday. Such signs may be of any type, number and
area, and shall be contained entirely within the boundaries of the lot or
premises on which they are erected, and should be placed so as to avoid
confusion with authorized traffic lights and signals and shall conform to
traffic safety standards. They shall be removed within a reasonable period
after the holiday is over.
      12.   Political Or Campaign Signs: In addition to signage otherwise
authorized by this chapter, political or campaign signs on behalf of candidates
for public office or measures on election ballots are permitted as stated
herein.
      13.   On Premises Real Estate Signs: One nonilluminated real estate sign
per lot or premises, not to exceed six (6) square feet in sign area. Such signs
must be removed ten (10) days following the sale, rent or lease of the
property.
      14.   On Premises, Noncommercial Signs: Signs normally associated with
residential uses which are not of a commercial nature shall not exceed four (4)
square feet (e.g., house numbers, occupant names or other property
identification).
      15.   Menu Boards And Fuel Price Signs: Menu boards incidental to drive-
through restaurants, which are sized and directed to the drive-through lane,
and fuel price signs as required by state and federal regulations.
   B.   Private Or Public Property: The following signs shall be allowed
without a sign permit on private or public property:
      1.   Public Necessity Signs: Signs installed by a unit of the government
for the control of traffic and other regulatory purposes, including street
signs, danger and warning signs, railroad crossing signs, hospital signs,
directional or warning signs for public service companies, utilities or
institutions, or signs erected by or on the order of a public officer in the
performance of public duty.
      2.   Temporary Signs For Official Use: Temporary signs posted by the city
or other governmental agency, or their respective representatives acting on
behalf of a governmental organization, when the sign serves as a public notice.
(Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-16: REGULATION OF SIGNS BY ZONE:
Refer to the table entitled "regulation of signs by zone" found in section
9-18-21 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-17: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Compliance With Building And Electrical Codes: All signs shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the most current versions of
the building code and electrical code adopted by the city council.
   B.   Anchoring:
      1.   No sign shall be suspended by nonrigid attachments that will allow
the sign to swing in the wind.
      2.   All freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures erected
on or permanently attached to concrete foundations.
      3.   All allowable portable signs on display shall be braced or secured
to prevent motion.
   C.   Additional Construction Specifications:
      1.   No sign shall be erected, altered or maintained so as to obstruct
any fire escape, required exit, window or door opening.
      2.   No sign shall be attached in any manner which will interfere with
any ventilation opening.
      3.   Signs shall be located so as to maintain horizontal and vertical
clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with electrical
code specifications. In no case shall a sign be installed closer than thirty
six inches (36") horizontally or vertically from any conductor or wire. (Ord.
2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-18: TEMPORARY SIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Placement Of Signs: Temporary signs shall not be placed in or over a
public right of way, or otherwise impair the visibility of traffic, constitute
a vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazard, or cause a public nuisance of any
kind. No temporary sign shall be attached to a utility pole, fence or tree.
They must be firmly secured to the building or ground.
   B.   Events Not Requiring A Permit: Temporary signs may be attached to
existing permanent signs for grand openings or upon the change of ownership or
name of the business. Such temporary signs shall only be allowed during the
grand opening period or upon the change of ownership or name change period,
with neither period of time extending beyond sixty (60) days. Off premises
temporary signs are not allowed unless otherwise cited or regulated by this
chapter.
   C.   Special Promotion Periods: Off premises temporary signs may be allowed
by conditional use permit during officially recognized holidays or "going out
of business/bankruptcy sales". Going out of business or bankruptcy sales
promotions may last for a period of no more than ninety (90) days from the
start of the promotional period. Holiday promotions shall be allowed without a
permit for a period of five (5) days, including the holiday (i.e., 2 days
before and after the holiday).
   D.   Other Events Or Additional Signage: Events intending to use temporary
signs or additional signs which are not covered by this chapter may apply for a
conditional use permit with the city. Application for a conditional use permit
shall be made according to the procedures outlined in chapter 17 of this title.
(Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-19: COMMON SIGNAGE PLAN:
A common signage plan can improve the design aesthetics of shopping centers and
neighboring properties. If the following provisions are met, a twenty five
percent (25%) increase in total sign area for freestanding signs shall be
allowed as an incentive to incorporate a common signage plan:
   A.   Increase In Sign Area: If the owner of two (2) or more contiguous lots
or the owner of a single lot with more than one main building submit to the
zoning administrator or a designated representative a common signage plan that
conforms to the provisions contained herein, a twenty five percent (25%)
increase in the maximum total freestanding sign area shall be allowed for the
combined lots or buildings, to be allocated as the owner elects; provided, that
the maximum sign area for any one freestanding sign be limited to five hundred
(500) square feet. Additional freestanding sign area may be allowed for any one
sign with conditional use permit approval in order to allow for adequate
visibility for the traveling public.
   B.   Site Plan: The common signage plan shall include an accurate site plan
of the lots that will be included in the plan (shopping centers or neighboring
properties) showing the locations of buildings, parking lots, driveways and
landscaped areas; the computation of the maximum total freestanding sign area
allowed, the maximum number of freestanding signs allowed, and the maximum
height allowed for the freestanding signs; and the locations of all proposed
freestanding signs.
   C.   Consistency Standards: The common signage plan shall specify standards
for consistency among all signs on the lots affected by the plan with regard to
color scheme, lettering or graphic style, lighting, building sign locations,
sign material and sign proportions.
   D.   Number: The number of freestanding signs shall be limited to a total of
one for each street on which the lots included in the plan have frontage, and
shall provide for shared or common usage of such signs. For lots zoned C-2 or
C-3 within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of a freeway exit, one
additional freestanding sign may be allowed if it is limited to a monument type
of freestanding sign. All freestanding signs shall be separated by at least one
hundred feet (100').
   E.   Other Restrictions: The common signage plan may contain such other
restrictions as the owner of the lots may reasonably determine.
   F.   Signatures Required: The common signage plan shall be signed by all
owners or their authorized agents in such form as the zoning administrator or
the designated representative shall require.
   G.   Amendment To Plan: A common signage plan may be amended by submitting a
new plan that conforms to all requirements of the common signage plan
provisions then in effect.
   H.   Existing Nonconforming Signs: If any new or amended common signage plan
is submitted for a property on which existing signs are located, it shall
include a schedule for bringing into conformance, within three (3) years, all
signs not conforming to the proposed amended plan or the requirements of the
common signage plan provisions in effect on the date of submission.
   I.   Conformance With Plan Required: After the zoning administrator or the
designated representative approves a common signage plan, no sign shall be
erected, placed, painted or maintained, except in conformance with such plan,
and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this chapter.
In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a plan and any other
provision of this chapter, this chapter shall control.
   J.   Plans Not Meeting Objective: The objective of a common signage plan is
to prevent sign clutter by reducing the number of freestanding signs and/or
having a common design theme for signs. If the zoning administrator or the
designated representative determines that a plan does not meet that objective,
the applicant shall either revise the plan or take the proposal to the planning
commission for their consideration. If the plan is taken to the planning
commission, they will be the approving body for the plan, but only after they
determine that it meets the stated objective.
   K.   Other Signs: The size and placement of entrance and exit signs, awning
signs, flat signs, wall signs, marquee signs, projecting signs, and roof signs
are regulated by the provisions contained elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord.
2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-20: SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL SIGNS ON TELEGRAPH ROAD, WASHINGTON
PARKWAY, AND 300 EAST:
   A.   Scope: Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, this section
shall take precedence and imposes additional restrictions for signs within
commercial and industrial zones on Telegraph Road from 300 East to 300 West,
Washington Parkway from Telegraph Road to Commerce Way, and all along 300 East.
   B.   Special Standards: Except for signs along the cross streets of corner
lots and along I-15, where they are at least two hundred fifty feet (250') from
the rights of way of the above listed streets, freestanding signs are hereby
limited to monument type signs with the following design standards:
      1.   Height: The maximum height of a sign shall not exceed ten feet (10')
from adjacent natural grade.
      2.   Size: The size of a sign be limited to seventy five (75) square feet
for properties with up to one hundred feet (100') of frontage on a public road.
An additional one square foot of sign area may be allowed for each two feet
(2') of public road frontage, up to a maximum size of one hundred (100) square
feet per sign. If a common signage plan is approved, the size of a sign may be
increased an additional twenty five percent (25%) in area, to a maximum size of
one hundred twenty five (125) square feet. (Ord. 2015-10, 4-8-2015)
      3.   Location: Signs must be located on private property and not within
any existing or planned public right of way as identified in the city
transportation master plan. Signs shall not obstruct visibility at driveway
entrances and exits, intersections and other points along the roadway. Signs in
the downtown mixed use zone shall be outside of the front yard and street side
yard setbacks and shall not interfere with any sidewalk or pedestrianway. (Ord.
2008-33, 11-12-2008; amd. Ord. 2009-14, 10-14-2009)
      4.   Multiple Signs: Each parcel of property or commercial complex may
have one monument type sign. One additional monument type sign is permitted if
the property has more than two hundred feet (200') of frontage on a public
road. Where two (2) freestanding signs are constructed, they shall be separated
by at least one hundred feet (100'). A third monument type sign is permitted
for properties with more than four hundred feet (400') of frontage on a public
road, and a fourth monument type sign is permitted for properties with six
hundred feet (600') or more of public road frontage. All monument type signs
shall be separated by at least one hundred feet (100').
      5.   Materials: Sign materials shall be similar to or compatible with the
main structure which they identify. Signs shall be constructed predominantly of
natural materials such as redwood, ceramic tile, masonry, stucco, stone, or
materials which simulate the referenced materials. Letters may be illuminated
and of a plastic, metal or similar material, including neon. Requests to use
alternative materials may be approved by the zoning administrator or a
designated representative. Flashing lights, rotating parts or other animation
is not permitted. A changeable copy (automatic) sign or promotional board is
permitted when part of a larger sign.
      6.   Background: The sign background shall be finished in subdued earth
tone colors. "Earth tones" may be defined in this context to include the full
spectrum of soil and clay colors. Acceptable spectrums include off whites to
deep browns and reddish browns, grays, grayish greens to dark greens, and
black. Letters shall provide sufficient contrast to be easily legible. Overall
color scheme shall complement the color scheme of the main structure.
Registered national trademarks are permitted as part of the sign. Bright "Day-
Glo" or fluorescent colors are prohibited.
      7.   Variances: In accordance with chapter 4, article A of this title,
the board of adjustment is authorized to hear requests for variances from these
special standards.
      8.   Other Signs: Entrance and exit signs, awning signs, flat signs, wall
signs, marquee signs, projecting signs, and roof signs are permitted subject to
the provisions contained elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 2003-05, 3-12-2003)
9-18-21: SIGN REGULATIONS BY ZONE:
Zone Sign Size Height Location Other
Zone        Sign         Size        Height       Location     Other
                         2 square                 Attached to
            Nameplate    feet                    main          
                         maximum per              structure
                         use
                                                  On private
                                                  property, no
                                                  closer than
                                                  10 feet to a
All zones                                         driveway, no
                         16 square                closer than  Shall be removed
            Political    feet        6 feet       150 feet to  within 1 week
                         maximum per maximum      any polling  following
                         sign                     place, and   election day
                                                  maintaining
                                                  a clear view
                                                  of
                                                  intersecting
                                                  streets
                                                  On private   Shall be removed
                                                  property,    within 6 months
                                                  set back 12  of occupancy
OS, A, RA,               24 square                feet from    approval, or
R-1, R-2,                feet        12 feet      property     when 100 percent
R-3, MH,    Construction maximum     maximum      lines, and   of the
PUD3                     (aggregate               maintaining  facilities are
                         total)                   a clear view occupied,
                                                  of           whichever comes
                                                  intersecting first
                                                  streets
                                                               Signs shall not
                                                               project above
                                                               the walls upon
                                                               which they are
                                                               attached, shall
                                                               not be animated4
            Awning,      15 percent               Attached to  or illuminated,
            flat,        maximum of               the wall of  sign copy is
           marquee or   a wall                  the main     limited to
            wall         surface                  structure    development or
                                                               use
                                                               identification1,
                                                               and these sign
                                                               types are not
                                                               allowed on
                                                               single- family
                                                               dwellings
                         Up to 32
                         square                   On private   1 sign per
                         feet, plus               property,    street frontage,
                         1 square                 set back 6   with site
                         foot for                 feet from    appropriate
                         every 10                 property     landscaping
           Monument     feet of     6 feet       lines, and   around each
                         total       maximum      maintaining  sign, with a
                         frontage                 a clear view minimum spacing
                         over 30                  of           of 100 feet
                         feet, to a               intersecting between
                         maximum of               streets      freestanding
                         64 square                             signs
                         feet
                                                  On private
                                                  property, no
                                                  closer than
                                                  10 feet to a
                         6 square    6 feet       driveway,    1 sign per lot
           Property     feet        maximum      and          or parcel per
                         maximum                  maintaining  street frontage
                                                  a clear view
                                                  of
                                                  intersecting
                                                  streets
                         Up to 32                 On private
                         square feet              property,
                         for up to                set back 12
                         10 units,                feet from
                         plus 2                   property     Shall be removed
            Development  square feet 12 feet      lines, and   after all units
A, RA, R-1, promotional  for each    maximum      maintaining  have initially
R-2, R-3,                additional               a clear view been sold
MH, PUD3                 unit, to a               of
                         maximum of               intersecting
                         128 square               streets
                         feet
                                                               Window signs
            Window       8 square                            shall not be
                         feet                                  animated4 or
                                                               illuminated
                                                  On private   Shall be removed
                                                  property,    within 6 months
                                                  set back 12  of occupancy
                                                  feet from    approval, or
                         32 square   12 feet      property     when 100 percent
AP, C-13    Construction feet        maximum      lines, and   of the
                         maximum                  maintaining  facilities are
                                                  a clear view occupied,
                                                  of           whichever comes
                                                  intersecting first
                                                  streets
                         Up to 32
                         square                   On private
                         feet, plus               property,
                         1 square                 set back 12
                         foot for                 feet from    Shall be removed
            Development  each 10     12 feet      property     within 1 year
           promotional  feet of     maximum      lines, and   from the date
                         frontage                 maintaining  the sign was
                         over 30                  a clear view erected
                         feet, to a               of
                         maximum of               intersecting
                         96 square                streets
                         feet
                                                               Signs shall not
                         25 percent                            project above
                         maximum of                            the walls upon
                         a wall                                which they are
                         surface                               attached, shall
                         facing                                not be animated4
                         street                                or illuminated
            Awning,      frontage,                Attached to  if they are
           flat,        15 percent              the wall of  facing a
            marquee or   maximum of               the main     residential zone
            wall         a wall                   structure    along an
                         surface                               internal
                         facing                                property line,
                         internal                              and sign copy is
                         property                              limited to
                         lines                                 development or
                                                               use
                                                               identification1
                         Up to 64                              1 sign per
                         square                   On private   street frontage
                         feet, plus               property,    for any type of
                         1 square                 set back 10  freestanding
                         foot for                 feet from    sign, with
            Freestanding each 4 feet              property     architectural
           (except      of total    25 feet      lines, and   concealment of
            monument     frontage    maximum      maintaining  the support pole
            type signs)  over 30                  a clear view (s), with a
                         feet, to a               of           minimum spacing
                         maximum of               intersecting of 100 feet
                         128 square               streets      between
                         feet                                  freestanding
                                                               signs
                         Up to 32                              1 sign per
                         square                                street frontage
                         feet, plus               On private   for any type of
                         1 square                 property,    freestanding
                         foot for                 set back 6   sign, with site
                         every 4                  feet from    appropriate
                         feet of     6 feet       property     landscaping
           Monument     total       maximum      lines, and   around each
                         frontage                 maintaining  monument type
                         over 30                  a clear view sign, with a
                         feet, to a               of           minimum spacing
                         maximum of               intersecting of 100 feet
                         64 square                streets      between
                         feet                                  freestanding
                                                               signs
                                                               Projecting signs
                                                  Attached to  shall only be
                                                  the wall(s)  used in lieu of
                                                  of the main  awning, flat,
                                                  structure    marquee or wall
                                                  (s),         signs, shall not
                         24 square                projecting   project above
           Projecting   feet                    no more than the walls upon
                         maximum                  6 feet from  which they are
                                                  the wall(s), attached, and
                                                  nor beyond   sign copy is
                                                  the private  limited to
                                                  property     development or
                                                               use
                                                               identification1
                                                  On private
                                                  property, no
                                                  closer than
                                                  10 feet to a
                         32 square   6 feet       driveway,    1 sign per lot
           Property     feet        maximum      and          or parcel per
                         maximum                  maintaining  street frontage
                                                  a clear view
                                                  of
                                                  intersecting
                                                  streets
                         12 square
                         feet
                         maximum or
                         15 percent                            Window signs
           Window       of the                              shall not be
                         window                                illuminated
                         area,
                         whichever
                         is less
                                                  On private   Shall be removed
                                                  property,    within 6 months
                                                  set back 12  of occupancy
                                                  feet from    approval, or
C-2, C-3,                32 square   12 feet      property     when 100 percent
I-1, I-2,   Construction feet        maximum      lines, and   of the
BP3                      maximum                  maintaining  facilities are
                                                  a clear view occupied,
                                                  of           whichever comes
                                                  intersecting first
                                                  streets
                         Up to 32
                         square                   On private
                         feet, plus               property,
                         1 square                 set back 12
                         foot for                 feet from    Shall be removed
            Development  each 10     20 feet      property     within 1 year
           promotional  feet of     maximum      lines, and   from the date
                         frontage                 maintaining  the sign was
                         over 30                  a clear view erected
                         feet, to a               of
                         maximum of               intersecting
                         96 square                streets
                         feet
                                                               Signs shall not
                         25 percent                            project above
                         maximum of                            the walls upon
                         a wall                                which they are
                         surface                               attached, shall
                         facing                                not be animated4
                         street                                or illuminated
            Awning,      frontage,                Attached to  if they are
           flat,        15 percent              wall of the  facing a
            marquee or   maximum of               main         residential zone
            wall         a wall                   structure    along an
                         surface                               internal
                         facing                                property line,
                         internal                              and sign copy is
                         property                              limited to
                         lines                                 development or
                                                               use
                                                               identification1
                         Up to 300                             1 sign per each
                         square      35 feet      On private   300 feet of
                         feet, plus  maximum,     property,    street frontage
                         1 square    except for   set back 10  or part thereof
            Freestanding foot for    signs within feet from    for any type of
            (except      each 4 feet 1,500 feet   property     freestanding
           monument     of total    of a freeway lines, and   sign, with a
            type signs)  frontage    exit, which  maintaining  minimum spacing
                         over 30     may be a     a clear view of 150 feet
                         feet, to a  maximum of   of           between
                         maximum of  50 feet2     intersecting freestanding
                         400 square               streets      signs
                         feet
                                                               1 sign per each
                                                               300 feet of
                         Up to 32                              street frontage
                         square                   On private   or part thereof
                         feet, plus               property,    for any type of
                         1 square                 set back 6   freestanding
                         foot for                 feet from    sign, with site
                         every 4     6 feet       property     appropriate
           Monument     feet of     maximum      lines, and   landscaping
                         frontage                 maintaining  around each
                         over 30                  a clear view monument type
                         feet, to a               of           sign, and a
                         maximum of               intersecting minimum spacing
                         64 square                streets      of 150 feet
                         feet                                  between
                                                               freestanding
                                                               signs
                                                               Projecting signs
                                                  Attached to  shall only be
                                                  the wall(s)  used in lieu of
                                                  of the main  awning, flat,
                                                  structure    marquee or wall
                                                  (s),         signs, shall not
                         24 square                projecting   project above
           Projecting   feet                    no more than the walls upon
                         maximum                  6 feet from  which they are
                                                  the wall(s)  attached, and
                                                  nor beyond   sign copy is
                                                  the private  limited to
                                                  property     development or
                                                               use
                                                               identification1
                                                  On private
                                                  property, no
                                                  closer than
                                                  10 feet to a
                         32 square   6 feet       driveway,    1 sign per lot
           Property     feet        maximum      and          or parcel per
                         maximum                  maintaining  street frontage
                                                  a clear view
                                                  of
                                                  intersecting
                                                  streets
                                                               Roof signs are
                                                               subject to
                                                               (conditional use
                         25 percent                            permit)
                         maximum of                            approval, shall
                         a wall                                only be used in
                         surface                               lieu of awning,
                         facing                                flat, marquee,
                         street                                wall, projecting
                         frontage                 On the       or freestanding
                         that is                  parapet wall signs on the
                         below the                (s) or roof  same side of the
                         parapet or               surface(s)   main structure
                         roof                     of the main  (s) or the
                         surface                  structure    private property
                         where the                (s), but not onto which they
                         sign is                  projecting   would be
                         attached,   10 feet      above the    allowed, shall
           Roof         15 percent  maximum      top of       be installed in
                         maximum of               parapet wall such a manner
                         a wall                   (s) or the   that all
                         surface                  highest peak mounting and
                         facing                   (s) of the   support
                         internal                 roof surface structures and
                         property                 (s) onto     hardware are
                         lines that               which it is  architecturally
                         is below                 attached     screened from
                         the parapet                           public view,
                         or roof                               shall not be
                         surface                               animated, and
                         where the                             shall not be
                         sign is                               illuminated if
                         attached                              they are facing
                                                               a residential
                                                               zone along an
                                                               internal
                                                               property line
                                                               Window signs
                                                               shall not be
                                                               animated4 or
                         16 square                             illuminated if
           Window       feet                                the windows are
                         maximum per                           facing a
                         use                                   residential zone
                                                               along an
                                                               internal
                                                               property line
                                                  Within a
                                                  corridor
                                                  extending
                                                  500 feet on  Off premises
                                                  each side of signs are
                                                  the          subject to
                                                  centerline   conditional use
                                                  of I-15, at  permit approval,
                                                  least 200    shall be at
                         672 square  50 feet      feet from a  least 1,500 feet
C-3, I      Off premises feet        maximum2     residential  from any other
                         maximum                  structure,   off premises
                                                  and at least sign that is
                                                  500 feet     located on the
                                                  from an      same side of I-
                                                  interchange  15, and require
                                                  or rest area the approval of
                                                  (measured    UDOT5
                                                  along I-15
                                                  rights of
                                                  way)
            A signage
            plan for
            each
            proposed PCD
            shall be
            reviewed and Signage
PCD3        approved     plan        Signage plan Signage plan Signage plan
            when the     required    required     required     required
            request for
            rezoning
            property to
            PCD is
            reviewed and
            approved
 
Notes:
   1.    The promotional board portion of an approved sign may also contain
copy that does not specifically identify the development or use.
   2.    Additional height may be allowed with conditional use permit approval
for freestanding signs within 1,500 feet of a freeway exit, or off premises
signs along the defined I-15 corridor, if the freeway grade restricts adequate
visibility for the traveling public.
   3.    Sections
9-18-19 and
9-18-20 of this chapter contain additional provisions for a common signage plan
and special standards for commercial signs on Telegraph Road, Washington
Parkway, and 300 East.
   4.    Special standards for animated signs will be as follows:
      a.    Animated signs shall not have flashing, spinning or rotating script
or pictures.
      b.    Animated signs shall come equipped with automatic dimming
technology that automatically adjusts the sign's brightness in direct
correlation with the ambient light conditions.
      c.    No animated sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot-candle
above the ambient light as measured using a foot-candle (lux) meter at a preset
distance depending on sign area. The measurement distance shall be calculated
with the following formula:
The square root of the product of the sign area and 100 (example, a sign 64
square feet in size would have a measured distance of 80 feet, which is the
square root of (64 x 100)).
      d.    The change of message copy shall be limited to a minimum of 8
seconds, or in accordance with any present state laws regulating the time limit
of message copy.
      e.    All other federal, state and city laws shall be complied with as
they pertain to animated signs.
   5.    Special standards for off premises electronic reader signs will be as
follows:
      a.    Off premises electronic reader signs shall not be located any
closer than 200 feet to any residential structure.
      b.    Off premises electronic reader signs shall not be located any
closer than 2,640 feet of any other electronic reader sign on either side of I-
15.
      c.    The electronic reader sign shall come equipped with automatic
dimming technology that automatically adjusts the sign's brightness in direct
correlation with the ambient light conditions.
      d.    No electronic reader sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3
foot-candle above ambient light as measured using a foot-candle (lux) meter at
a preset distance depending on sign area. The measurement distance shall be
calculated with the following formula:
The square root of the product of the sign area and 100 (example, a sign 672
square feet in size would have a measured distance of 259 feet, which is the
square root of (672 x 100)).
      e.    All other federal, state and city laws are complied with as it
pertains to electronic reader signs.
(Ord. 2013-02, 1-23-2013; amd. Ord. 2015-10, 4-8-2015)
CHAPTER 19
TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
SECTION:
9-19-1: Purpose
9-19-2: Permitted Uses
9-19-3: Application
9-19-4: Findings For Approval
9-19-5: Conditions Of Approval
9-19-6: Condition Of Site Following Temporary Use
9-19-7: Revocation
9-19-1: PURPOSE:
The temporary use permit allows for short term activities which may be
appropriate when regulated. (Ord. 92-32, 9-23-1992)
9-19-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following temporary uses may be permitted, subject to the issuance of a
temporary use permit:
Christmas tree sales lots; a permit shall not be required when such sales are
in conjunction with the established commercial business holding a valid
business license, provided such activity shall be only held from the day before
Thanksgiving, through the first business day following Christmas Day.
Circuses, carnivals, fairs, festivals and concerts or other special events,
when not held within the premises designed to accommodate such events, such as
auditoriums, stadiums, or other public assembly facilities.
Emergency public health and safety needs.
Fireworks sales, however, a permit shall not be required when such sales are in
conjunction with an established commercial business holding a valid business
license, provided such activity shall be held between June 20 and July 25,
inclusive; December 20 through January 2; and fifteen (15) days before and on
the Chinese New Year.
On and off site contractors' construction yards in conjunction with an approved
development project.
Outdoor display and sales of merchandise within commercial land use districts,
limited to four (4) events per calendar year, per location, not exceeding four
(4) consecutive days. The permit shall be limited to two (2) events per
calendar year per applicant(s).
Real estate offices within approved development projects.
Trailer, coach or singlewide manufactured home as a temporary residence of the
property owner when a valid residential building permit is in force. The permit
may be granted for up to six (6) months.
Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator or
designated representative, are compatible with the land use district and
surrounding land uses. (Ord. 2008-31, 10-22-2008; amd. Ord. 2012-19, 10-10-
2012)
9-19-3: APPLICATION:
A temporary use permit may be approved, modified, conditioned or denied by the
zoning administrator or designated representative. The zoning administrator or
designated representative may refer such application to the planning
commission. Decisions of the zoning administrator or designated representative
and planning commission may be appealed to the board of adjustment. (Ord. 92-
32, 9-23-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
9-19-4: FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL:
The zoning administrator or designated representative may approve, or
conditionally approve, a temporary use permit application, only when all the
following findings are made: (Ord. 92-32, 9-23-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
   A.   The subject site is physically suitable for the type and intensity of
the land use being proposed;
   B.   The proposed use would be harmonious with existing developments within
the land use district and general area;
   C.   There are adequate provisions for water, sanitation and public
utilities and services to ensure that the proposed use is not detrimental to
public health and safety;
   D.   There is adequate access to serve the subject proposal;
   E.   The negative impacts of the proposed use shall be mitigated;
   F.   The proposed location, size, design and operating characteristics of
the requested use are not detrimental to the public interest, health, safety,
convenience or welfare of the city. (Ord. 92-32, 9-23-1992)
9-19-5: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the zoning
administrator or designated representative may impose conditions deemed
necessary to ensure that the permit will be in accordance with the findings
required by section
9-19-4 of this chapter. These conditions may involve any pertinent factors
affecting the operation of such temporary event, or use, and may include, but
are not limited to: (Ord. 92-32, 9-23-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
   A.   Provision for temporary parking facilities, including vehicular ingress
and egress;
   B.   Regulation of nuisance factors such as, but not limited to, prevention
of glare or direct illumination on adjacent properties, noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat;
   C.   Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including placement,
height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas
and other yards;
   D.   Provision for sanitary and medical facilities;
   E.   Provision for solid, hazardous and toxic waste collection and disposal;
   F.   Provision for security and safety measures;
   G.   Regulation of signs;
   H.   Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the
duration of the temporary use;
   I.   Submission of a performance bond or other surety devices, satisfactory
to the administrator, to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures
used will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event
and that the property will be restored to its former condition;
   J.   Submission of a site plan indicating any information required by this
chapter;
   K.   Any other conditions which will ensure the operation of the proposed
temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner and in accordance with the
intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 92-32, 9-23-1992)
9-19-6: CONDITION OF SITE FOLLOWING TEMPORARY USE:
Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris, litter or
any other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use,
and shall thereafter be used, pursuant to the provisions of this title. (Ord.
92-32, 9-23-1992)
9-19-7: REVOCATION:
A temporary use permit may be revoked or modified by the zoning administrator
or designated representative if any one of the following findings can be made:
(Ord. 92-32, 9-23-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
   A.   Circumstances have changed so that one or more of the findings of fact
contained in section
9-19-4 of this chapter can no longer be made;
   B.   The temporary use permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
   C.   One or more of the conditions of the temporary use permit have not been
met; and
   D.   The use is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation.
(Ord. 92-32, 9-23-1992)
CHAPTER 20
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 1
SECTION:
9-20-1: Purpose And Intent
9-20-2: Definitions
9-20-3: Location Of Sexually Oriented Businesses
9-20-4: Concentration Prohibited
9-20-5: Enforcement Of Location
9-20-6: Sign Regulations
9-20-7: Hours Of Operation
9-20-8: Injunction
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 8 of this code.
9-20-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse
secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses and to regulate the
signage to control the adverse effects of such signage and prevent
inappropriate exposure to the community. This chapter by its terms is designed
to prevent crime, protect the city retail trade, maintain property values and
generally protect and preserve the quality of the city neighborhoods,
commercial districts, and the quality of life. The provisions of this chapter
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material. This chapter is to be construed as a regulation of time,
place and manner of the operation of these businesses consistent with the
limitations provided by provisions of the United States and Utah constitutions.
(Ord. 94-12, 5-25-1994)
9-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever a word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined herein, but is
defined in related sections of Utah Code Annotated, or in other city ordinances
or resolutions, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall apply as if
set forth herein in full, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary
intention. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural, the term
"shall" is always mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. For the purpose
of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as set forth:
BUSINESS LICENSE AUTHORITY: Washington City manager or designee.
EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary or any other form of
compensation, whether such person is hired on the payroll of the employer, as
an independent contractor, as an agent, or in any other form of employment
relationship.
ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation or any form of
consideration, dates, socializes, visits, consorts with or accompanies or
offers to date, consort, socialize, visit or accompany another or others to or
about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or within any place
of public or private resort or any business or commercial establishment or any
private quarters. "Escort" shall not be construed to include persons who
provide business or personal services such as licensed private nurses, aides
for the elderly or handicapped, social secretaries or similar service personnel
whose relationship with their patron is characterized by a bona fide
contractual relationship having a duration of more than twelve (12) hours and
who provide a service not principally characterized as dating or socializing.
"Escort" shall also not be construed to include persons providing services such
as singing telegrams, birthday greetings or similar activities characterized by
appearances in a public place, contracted for by a party other than the person
for whom the service is being performed and of a duration not longer than one
hour.
ESCORT SERVICE: An individual or entity who, for pecuniary compensation,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce
patrons to escorts.
ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary
compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service,
escort or patron by contacting or meeting with escort services, escorts or
patrons at any location within Washington City, whether or not such third
person is employed by such escort service, escort, patron, or by another
business, or is an independent contractor or self-employed.
GATEWAY: A. Telegraph Street and Red Cliffs Drive, in their entirety within the
limits of Washington City.
   B.   300 East and Washington Fields Drive, in their entirety within the
limits of Washington City.
   C.   Green Springs Drive and Pine View Drive, in their entirety within the
limits of Washington City.
   D.   Buena Vista Boulevard and Middleton Drive, in their entirety within the
limits of Washington City.
   E.   SR-9, in its entirety within the limits of Washington City.
HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR SITES: Those buildings or sites found on either the
national or state historic registers or the Washington City register of
cultural and historic resources.
NUDE AND SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation,
partnership or any other entity or individual which furnishes, books or
otherwise engages or offers to furnish, book or otherwise engage the service of
a professional dancer licensed pursuant to this chapter for performance or
appearance at a business licensed for nude entertainment, seminude dancing bars
or adult theaters.
NUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a
state of nudity or seminudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a nude
entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: A state of dress in which the nipple and areola of
the female breast, or male or female genitals, pubic region or anus are covered
by less than the covering required in the definition of "seminude", as defined
in this section.
OUTCALL SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually oriented business
employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually oriented business,
including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers and other similar
employees.
PATRON: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or escort
or the customer of any business licensed pursuant to this chapter.
PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire,
profit, reward, or any other form of consideration.
PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, LLC, partnership
or other legal entity.
PUBLIC PARK: A park, playground, swimming pool, golf course, bike or jogging
path, or athletic field within Washington City which is under the control,
operation or management of Washington City leisure services department or other
Washington City department.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building which is used primarily for religious worship
and related religious activities.
SCHOOL: An institution of learning or instruction primarily catering to minors,
whether public or private. This definition shall include daycares, preschools,
nursery schools, kindergarten, elementary schools, junior high schools, middle
high schools, senior high schools or any special institution of learning under
the jurisdiction of the state department of education.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the
nipple and areola of the female breast, and the male or female genitals, pubic
region and anus shall be fully covered by an opaque covering no narrower than
four inches (4") wide in the front and five inches (5") wide in the back which
shall not taper to less than one inch (1") wide at the narrowest point.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the premises
of the sexually oriented business in activities related to the sexually
oriented portion of the business. This includes all managing employees,
dancers, escorts, models and other similar employees, whether or not hired as
employees, agents or as independent contractors. "Sexually oriented business
employees" shall not include individuals whose work is unrelated to the
sexually oriented portion of the business, such as janitors, bookkeepers and
similar employees. "Sexually oriented business employees" shall not include
cooks, serving persons, bartenders and similar employees, except where they may
be managers or supervisors of the business. All persons making outcall meetings
under this chapter, including escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers,
chauffeurs and other similar employees, shall be considered "sexually oriented
business employees".
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES: Those businesses defined as follows:
Adult Arcade: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines,
or other image producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons
each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides
or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store Or Adult Video Store: A commercial
establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or
more of the following:
   A.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representations
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   B.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use or
marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.
   C.   An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", and
still be categorized as "adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video
store". Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store or adult video store as long as one of its principal business purposes is
offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified
materials which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, "bottle club", or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features: a) persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or
seminude; b) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or c) films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Motel: A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which: a)
offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides
patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas" and which advertises the availability of this
sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public
right of way, or by means of any off premises advertising, including but not
limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television;
or b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10)
hours; or c) allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a
time period of less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown for any form of
consideration.
Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
Massage Parlor: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity,
massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic
treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body which
occurs as a part of or in connection with "specified sexual activities" or
where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related
thereto, exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas". The definition of
"sexually oriented businesses" shall not include the practice of massage in any
licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor by a licensed physician,
surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any nurse or technician working
under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or
osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional
athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.
Nude Entertainment Business: A business, including adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a
state of nudity or seminudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a nude
entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state
of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided for money or any
form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
Seminude Dancing Bars: Any business which sells or allows the consumption of
any alcoholic beverage on its premises that permits dancing, modeling or other
performance or appearance however characterized, in a state of seminudity.
Sexual Encounter Establishment: A business or commercial establishment, that as
one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a
place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for
the purpose of "specified sexual activities" or the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas", or activities when one or more of the persons is in a state
of nudity or seminudity. The definition of "sexually oriented businesses" shall
not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areolae; or
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
   A.   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
   C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
   D.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
   E.   Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a
mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed; or
   F.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections A through E of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Increase in the floor
areas occupied by the business by more than fifteen percent (15%), as the floor
areas exist at the time the business receives its initial sexually oriented
business license under the applicable Washington City licensing provisions in
effect at the time of initial issuance. (Ord. 94-12, 5-25-1994)
9-20-3: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
   A.   Sexually oriented businesses shall only be permitted in areas zoned
industrial under chapter 11 of this title, or any amendments thereto.
   B.   Sexually oriented businesses are subject to the following additional
restrictions:
      1.   No sexually oriented business shall be located within a one thousand
foot (1,000') radius of any church, park, school or residential zone as
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the property line of the school, park, religious institution or
residential zone nearest the sexually oriented business and the property line
of the sexually oriented business nearest the church, park, school or
residential zone.
      2.   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to locate within
one hundred sixty five feet (165') of any gateway, measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the property line of
any gateway nearest the sexually oriented business and the property line of the
sexually oriented business nearest any gateway. If any block shall be
surrounded on all four (4) sides by a designated gateway, then no sexually
oriented business shall be permitted in that block.
      3.   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted within a three
hundred thirty three foot (333') linear distance of any historic building or
site, measuring a straight distance, without regard to intervening structures
or objects, from the property line of the historic building or site nearest the
sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the sexually
oriented business nearest the historic building or site.
      4.   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted within a one
thousand foot (1,000') radius from the intersection of any interchanges of
Interstate Highway 15 (I-15) and a city street within the limits of the city.
The distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the I-15 side intersection of asphalt pavement (or
other hard road base material) of the I-15 interchange and a city street to the
property line of the sexually oriented business nearest the intersection. This
section shall be interpreted to include all current and all future interchanges
of I-15 within the limits of the city.
      5.   No sexually oriented business shall be allowed within one thousand
feet (1,000') linear distance of a "tavern", as defined under Utah Code
Annotated section 32A-1-105 (and any amendments thereto), measuring a straight
distance, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
property line of the tavern to the nearest property line of the sexually
oriented business. (Ord. 94-12, 5-25-1994)
9-20-4: CONCENTRATION PROHIBITED:
   A.   No sexually oriented business shall be allowed within one thousand feet
(1,000') linear distance of another such business measuring a straight
distance, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
property line of the one business to the nearest property line of the other
business.
   B.   Not more than one sexually oriented business shall be permitted to
operate, be established or be maintained within the same building, structure,
or portion thereof. (Ord. 94-12, 5-25-1994)
9-20-5: ENFORCEMENT OF LOCATION:
   A.   This chapter hereby requires that sexually oriented businesses shall be
permitted only as provided in sections
9-20-3 and
9-20-4 of this chapter. Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be
required and governed by the procedures and policies specified under the
applicable city licensing provisions for sexually oriented businesses.
   B.   In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be subject to the
following restrictions:
      1.   The person commits a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business in violation of section
9-20-3 or
9-20-4 of this chapter.
      2.   A person commits a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, if he causes or permits the operation, establishment or
maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business within the same
building, structure or portion thereof, except as provided in subsection 9-20-
4B of this chapter, or causes the substantial enlargement of any sexually
oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing
another sexually oriented business. (Ord. 94-12, 5-25-1994; amd. 2007 Code)
9-20-6: SIGN REGULATIONS:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in chapter 18 of this title,
or any amendments thereto, sexually oriented business signs shall be limited as
follows:
   A.   Number: No more than one sign shall be allowed on sexually oriented
business premises.
   B.   Size: No sign on the sexually oriented business premises shall be
allowed to exceed eighteen (18) square feet.
   C.   Animation: No animation shall be permitted on or around any sexually
oriented business sign or on the exterior walls or roof of the premises.
   D.   Descriptive Art: No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity
related to, or inferring, the nature of the business shall be allowed on any
sexually oriented business sign. Sexually oriented business signs shall only
contain alphanumeric copy.
   E.   Flat Wall Signs Permitted: Only flat wall signs shall be permitted for
any sexually oriented business.
   F.   Painted Advertising: Painted signs and painted wall advertising shall
not be allowed.
   G.   Prohibited Signs: Other than the signs specifically allowed by this
chapter, a sexually oriented business shall not construct, or allow to be
constructed, any temporary sign, banner, light or other device designed to draw
attention to the business location. (Ord. 94-12, 5-25-1994)
9-20-7: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a class C misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not an appropriate permit has been
issued for said business, and allows such business to remain open for business,
or to permit any employee, to engage in a performance, solicit a performance,
make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service, between
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. of any
particular day.
   B.   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a class C misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, if, working as an employee of a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not an appropriate permit has been issued for said
business, said employee engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes
a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service or solicits a service, between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. of any particular
day. (Ord. 94-12, 5-25-1994; amd. 2007 Code)
9-20-8: INJUNCTION:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
which is not in compliance with this chapter is subject to a suit for
injunction as well as prosecution for the criminal violation. Such violation
shall be punishable as a class C misdemeanor according to section
1-4-1 of this code, and if an injunction must be sought, attorney fees and
costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the sexually
oriented business. (Ord. 94-12, 5-25-1994; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 21
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME ZONE
SECTION:
9-21-1: Application And Supplemental Requirements
9-21-2: Fees Paid Prior To Construction
9-21-3: Deviations From Standards
9-21-1: APPLICATION AND SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to any other requirements provided by law, any application for a
building permit for construction of a new single-family or two-family dwelling
within the city shall be accompanied by a site plan and architectural plan with
appropriate drawings of adequate scale showing building materials, exterior
elevations and floor plans of all proposed structures, and complying with the
design criteria set forth as follows:
   A.   Zoning Requirements: The dwelling shall meet all requirements of the
zone in which the dwelling is located.
   B.   Code Requirements: Each dwelling must meet the requirements of the city
adopted building codes or, if it is a manufactured home, it must be certified
under the national manufactured housing construction and safety standards act
of 1974, meet the HUD code, and must have been issued an insignia approved by
the HUD and must not have been altered in violation of such codes.
   C.   Real Property Status: Each dwelling must be taxed as real property. If
the dwelling is a manufactured home, affidavits as required by Utah Code
Annotated section 59-2-602 must be filed under that section and a copy thereof
submitted to the city prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy.
   D.   Connection To Utilities: Each dwelling must be approved for and
permanently connected to all required utilities.
   E.   Foundation Requirements:
      1.   Each dwelling shall have a code approvable site built concrete,
masonry, steel or treated wood permanent foundation which meets the
requirements of city adopted codes or the city adopted building code guidelines
for manufactured housing installations, including any amendments or successors
thereto, and must be capable of transferring design, deadload and liveloads and
other design loads unique to local home sites due to wind, seismic, soil and
water conditions, that are imposed by or upon the structure into the underlying
soil or bedrock, without failure.
      2.   All perimeter footings must be a minimum of twelve inches (12")
below grade. All tiedown devices must meet city adopted building codes or other
applicable building codes. The space beneath the structure must be enclosed at
the perimeter of the dwelling in accordance with city adopted building code
guidelines and constructed of weather resistant materials aesthetically
consistent with concrete or masonry type foundation materials. At each exit
door there shall be a landing of a minimum of thirty six inches by thirty six
inches (36" x 36") constructed to meet the requirements of city adopted
building codes. All manufactured home running gear, tongues, axles and wheels
must be removed at the time of installation.
   F.   Roof Requirements: The roof of each dwelling shall have a minimum pitch
ratio of two feet six inches (2'6") to every twelve feet (12'), or lesser pitch
with parapet walls under a design approved by the chief building official. At
nongable ends of the roof there shall be an overhang at the eaves of not less
than six inches (6"), excluding rain gutters, measured from the vertical side
of the dwelling. The roof overhang requirements shall not apply to areas above
porches, alcoves and other appendages which together do not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the length of the dwelling. The roof surface shall consist of
wood shakes, asphalt, composition, wood shingles, tile or fiberglass shingles.
   G.   Exterior Siding Materials: Each dwelling shall have exterior materials
of a sufficient quality, durability and resistance to the elements to satisfy
the purpose of this section. Exterior siding material shall consist of wood,
hardwood, brick, concrete, stucco, glass, metal lap, vinyl lap, tile, or stone
meeting the requirements of city adopted building codes.
   H.   Front Entry Orientation: Each dwelling shall have a main front entry
facing a public street unless otherwise approved by the planning commission
based upon special circumstances justifying such exception.
   I.   Width Of Dwelling:
      1.   The width of each dwelling shall not be less than twenty feet (20')
at the narrowest point of its first floor, exclusive of any garages, bay
windows, room additions or other similar appendages. A basement shall not be
considered as a first floor. The width shall be considered the lesser of the
two (2) primary dimensions.
      2.   Manufactured homes shall be multiple transportable sections at least
ten feet (10') wide unless transportable in three (3) or more sections, in
which case only one section need be ten feet (10') wide.
   J.   Garage/Carport Requirement: Each dwelling shall be provided with a
primary garage or carport as required by this title of the applicable zone in
which the dwelling is located, and built in conformance to subsections F and G
of this section, and built to building codes adopted by the city.
   K.   Lot Size: Each dwelling located on a lot of seven thousand (7,000)
square feet or less in size shall have a minimum floor area on the main floor
or floors, exclusive of garages, of nine hundred (900) square feet. Each
dwelling located on a lot greater than seven thousand (7,000) square feet in
size shall have a minimum floor area on the main floor or floors, exclusive of
garages, of one thousand (1,000) square feet. A basement shall not be
considered as a floor. Measurements to determine the minimum area of the
dwelling shall be taken from the outside of foundation walls.
   L.   Nonconforming Homes: Replacement of an existing nonconforming
manufactured home on any lot outside a mobile home zone must comply with all
the requirements contained in this chapter.
   M.   Removal Of Home: Any previously occupied dwelling which is to be moved
from an existing location to a lot within the city shall be approved by the
chief building official, or his designated representative, prior to the move to
ensure that it meets the requirements of this chapter and applicable building
codes. Any violations must be corrected as directed by the chief building
official prior to occupancy of the dwelling. (Ord. 2002-19, 12-11-2002)
9-21-2: FEES PAID PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION:
All building permit and impact fees must be paid prior to construction. (Ord.
2002-19, 12-11-2002)
9-21-3: DEVIATIONS FROM STANDARDS:
The chief building official may approve deviations from one or more of the
developmental or architectural standards contained in subsections 9-21-1E
through G of this chapter, if the chief building official finds that the
architectural style proposed provides compensating features and that the
proposed dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in
the vicinity. The determination of the chief building official may be appealed
to the board of adjustment. (Ord. 2002-19, 12-11-2002)
CHAPTER 22
APPENDICES AND ILLUSTRATIONS
SECTION:
9-22-1: Appendix 1
9-22-2: Appendix 2
9-22-3: Appendix 3
9-22-4: Washington City Zoning Ordinance Illustrations
9-22-1: APPENDIX 1:
   APPENDIX 1
   WASHINGTON CITY
   TEMPORARY USE PERMIT STANDARDS
The following standards shall be adhered to for all temporary use, i.e.,
Christmas tree, pumpkin and fireworks sales, grand openings and other special
events, pursuant to the Washington City zoning ordinance:
1.  All temporary use permits shall be processed in the following order:
   Planning  Obtain the temporary use permit application form.
   Health    All uses involving food or drink will require a copy of a valid
              health department permit prior to issuing final approval.
              Most uses will require fire department approval when using tents
              or canopies. The applicant is advised to contact the fire
   Fire      department in advance of the event. Prior to issuing final
              approval, a copy of the fire department site plan approval is
              required.
              All uses shall require final planning and zoning department
   Planning  approval. Submittal shall include a completed temporary use
              permit application form, a site plan, copies of all required
              permits and payment of all applicable fees.
   Business   
   license   All temporary uses will require a special business license which
              must be displayed on site at all times during the event.
   Insurance Liability insurance and the amount thereof to be determined by
              the Washington City community development department.
2.  Sales shall conform to the following schedules:
   Christmas tree sales: Occupancy no sooner than ten (10) days prior to
    December 1. Sales allowed between December 1 and December 25, inclusive.
   Pumpkin sales: Occupancy and sales between October 15, and October 31,
    inclusive.
    Firework sales: Occupancy and sales between June 20 and July 25, inclusive;
   December 20 through January 2; and fifteen (15) days before and on the
    Chinese New Year.
    Grand openings and other special events: Sales shall be limited to a
   maximum of four (4) consecutive days, twice annually. Setup and take down
    periods to be determined by the Washington City zoning administrator.
3.  The site plan shall show the following:
    a. Access to and from the site.
   b. Parking area dimensions.
    c. Sales and displays area dimensions.
    d. Temporary structures, i.e., cashier/sales area.
4.  All signs shall conform to the zoning ordinance.
5.  Sanitary sewer facilities, either portable or permanent, shall be provided.
6.  Parking shall be required pursuant to the zoning ordinance.
7.  All nonimproved parking areas and main walk areas shall be kept damp or
    shall be covered with a material to prevent the raising of dust.
8.  Applicant shall provide safe and adequate roadway access including adequate
    vehicular sight distance at the driveway entrance/exit.
9.  In no event shall any portion of the proposed use encroach into any public
    rights of way or be located in a way which might cause a hazard.
10. The temporary use shall not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood
    by means of odor, noise, dust or other nuisances.
11. Written authorization from the property owner or their agent is required.
    The lots used for temporary activities shall be completely clear of all
12. temporary structures and debris which resulted from such operation within
    five (5) days after the termination of the activity.
    A two hundred dollar ($200.00) cash deposit will be required for temporary
    uses on vacant or undeveloped lots to assure cleanup. The deposit shall be
13. returned upon written request of the applicant following verification of
    the site cleanup. Any expense incurred by the city pursuant to cleanup of
    the subject property shall be deducted from the case deposit and the
    remainder returned to the applicant.
 
(2007 Code)
9-22-2: APPENDIX 2:
   APPENDIX 2
   WASHINGTON CITY
   TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
DATE:                TEMPORARY USE PERMIT NUMBER:           
APPLICANT'S NAME/TITLE:             
BUSINESS NAME:             
BUSINESS ADDRESS:              
Describe proposed activity - include type, duration, hours of operation, etc.:
Electricity needed: Yes      No      Food or Drink Yes     No     
ATTACH Site Plan: Show layout of activity - include area to be used parking,
ingress, egress, streets, dimensions, etc.:
By my signature I hereby agree to obtain all necessary approvals and to comply
with all conditions of this ordinance, and any special conditions attached to
this approval. I further attest that all the statements made on this
application are true and correct.
Applicant's Name      Property Owner Agent's Name
Signature         Signature
Address         Address
Telephone Number      Telephone Number
   For Official Use Only
Attachments:
 Site Plan                 $        Deposit Req'd: Yes      No     
 Health Permit             Receipt No.:    
 Fire Approval             
# of Parking Spaces Req'd    Comments/Special Conditions:    
Zoning                         
Type of Sanitary Facility       
                             
Method of Dust Control      Approved by:    
                            Date:    
 
(2007 Code)
9-22-3: APPENDIX 3:
   APPENDIX 3
   OCCUPANCY REVIEW FORM
 
1. Fill in information as requested on the first and second sheet.
2. The second and third sheet must be completed by the following:
   Washington City
  Community Development Department
   111 North 100 East
   8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. – Monday through Friday
   After the occupancy review form has been preliminarily approved by the zoning
3. administrator/building inspector, bring the completed form to the business
   license department.
   Washington City
4. Business License Department
   111 North 100 East
   8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. – Monday through Friday
5. Please be advised that the issuance of a business license does not authorize
   occupancy or use of a building for business operations until:
   a.    All building permits have been finalized.
  b.    Fire Department final approval is obtained.
   c.    Community Development & Police Department final approval is obtained as
   noted.
 
   ADDRESS OF BUILDING:
   WASHINGTON CITY
   OCCUPANCY REVIEW FORM
OWNER OF PROPERTY      
OWNER'S ADDRESS      
OWNER'S PHONE #      
NAME OF PROPOSED BUSINESS      
BUSINESS CONTACT PERSON      
BUSINESS CONTACT PHONE #      
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS INCLUDING EQUIPMENT USED AND MATERIALS TO BE USED OR
SOLD:
   Please Check Yes or No Below
                                            YES  NO
Warehouse/Wholesaling                         
Flammable liquids                                 
Dust producing operation                          
Plastic (storage, handling, use)                  
Compressed gas                                    
High piled combustible storage (over 8 feet)      
Vehicle repair or maintenance facilities          
Proposed storage of vehicles                      
Public assembly or education facility             
Proposed building alterations or additions        
 
Will any of the following products or services be sold or provided: Adult
films, tapes, books or magazines, drug paraphernalia, noncontrolled drugs,
massages, tattoos, adult motel, fortune telling, dancing, live entertainment,
taxi, limousines, firearms or refuse collection?
   YES          NO         
EXPLANATIONS OF YES ANSWERS:
APPLICANT'S SIGNATURE      
DATE            
   OFFICE USE ONLY
   ZONING DEPARTMENT
Property's current zoning:      
Property's general plan designation:      
Is use principally permitted?      
Conditional use permit required?      
Parking requirements for use:      
Number of spaces provided:      
Approved for use and location     ,    
Zoning Administrator   Date
Denied       
Reason for denial
            Zoning Administrator, Date
   Building/Safety Department
   Change of occupancy, applicant must submit detailed plans showing compliance
with all current code requirements for                         occupancy.
   Need further classification of proposed use. Submit fully dimensioned plans
showing existing conditions, all alterations and proposed uses for all areas.
   Occupancy, inspection permit application must be completed, occupancy permit
fees paid, and all complied with prior to approval and occupancy.
   Continuing use of existing building. No conditions.
Gas        Electric        Water        service has been disconnected. A
courtesy safety inspection is required.
Fire department approval required?    
Other Comments    
BUILDING AND SAFETY APPROVAL    
            Building Inspector, Date
Denied    
Reason for denial
(2007 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-02, 2-8-2012)
9-22-4: WASHINGTON CITY ZONING ORDINANCE ILLUSTRATIONS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2027.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2029.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2031.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b66696cd2c2610451eb2114d0eea6bcbf765d24/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2033.png]
 
(2007 Code)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Purpose
10-1-2: Definitions
10-1-3: Scope Of Application
10-1-4: Fees
10-1-5: Prohibited Acts
10-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to:
   A.   Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
city.
   B.   Promote the efficient and orderly growth of the city.
   C.   Provide standards for the physical development of subdivisions of land,
construction of buildings and improvements within the city, including, but not
limited to, the construction and installation of roads, streets, curbs,
gutters, drainage systems, water and sewer systems, design standards for public
facilities and utilities accesses to public rights of way, and to establish
fees and other charges for the authorizing of a subdivision. (Ord. 97-24, 7-23-
1997; amd. Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein, the following words shall mean:
              The land surrounded by streets and other rights of way, other than an alley, or land
BLOCK:        which is designated or shown as a block on any recorded subdivision plat or official
              map or plat adopted by the city.
CITY COUNCIL: The governing body of Washington City.
CITY          The person appointed by the city to be the City Engineer.
ENGINEER:
COLLECTOR     See definition of Street, Collector.
STREET:
              An application for subdividing land will be considered complete when all associated
COMPLETE      required documents have been submitted, which includes the preliminary plat or final
APPLICATION:  plat, with all required supporting documents, the preliminary plat or final plat
              check lists (with all items accounted for), and the applicable fee to the community
              development department.
CONSTRUCTION  The standards and specifications adopted by this title.
STANDARDS:
CUL-DE-SAC:   See definition of Street, Cul-De-Sac.
              The portion of a street within a subdivision comprising one-half (½) the minimum
HALF STREET:  required right of way on which improvements are constructed and in accord with one-
              half (½) of an approved typical street cross section.
IMPROVED LOT: A lot which has all the improvements required by chapter 5 of this title.
              Includes roads, streets, curbs, gutters, grading, landscaping, water and sewer
IMPROVEMENTS: systems, irrigation systems, drainage systems, public facilities and sewer materials
              required by this title.
LAND USE      For the purpose of this Title (Title 10), the planning commission is charged with
AUTHORITY:    being the land use authority.
              A parcel or tract of land within a subdivision which is or may be occupied by a
              building or structure and the accessory buildings, structures or uses customarily
LOT:          incidental thereto including such open spaces as are arranged and designed to be
              used in connection with the building according to the zone within which the lot is
              located.
LOT LINE      In a subdivision, means the relocation of a property boundary line between two (2)
ADJUSTMENT:   adjoining lots with the consent of the Owners Of Record.
MAJOR STREET  The major street plan of the city.
PLAN:
GENERAL PLAN: The general plan of the city.
OFFICIAL MAP: The official map or maps adopted by the city pursuant to the municipal zoning and
              planning enabling legislation.
PARCEL OF     A contiguous area of land in the possession or ownership of one (1) person.
LAND:
              An individual, individuals, tenants in common, joint tenants, a corporation,
PERSON:       partnership, firm, limited partnership or association of individuals, however styled
              or designated.
PLANNING      The planning commission of the city.
COMMISSION:
              A strip of land less than the minimum depth required by the zoning ordinance for a
PROTECTION    building lot bordering the boundary of a subdivision and a street within the
STRIP:        subdivision for the purpose of controlling the access of property owners abutting
              the subdivision to the street.
              A.   For subdivisions of two (2) units or less on an individual parcel, the
              reviewing body will be the land use authority and the Community Development
REVIEWING     Director.
BODY:         B.   For subdivisions of three (3) units or more on an individual parcel, the
              reviewing body will be the planning commission, the city council, and the community
              development director.
              A thoroughfare which has been dedicated and accepted by the city council, which the
              city has acquired by prescriptive right or which the city owns, or offered for
STREET:       dedication on an approved final plat, or a thoroughfare of at least twenty-six feet
              (26') in width which has been abandoned or made public by right of use and which
              affords access to abutting property, including highways, roads, lanes, avenues and
              boulevards.
STREET,       A street, existing or proposed, which is the main means of access to the major
COLLECTOR:    street system.
STREET, CUL-  A minor terminal street provided with a turn-around.
DE-SAC:
              A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to serve as a major
STREET,       trafficway and is designated on the master street plan as a controlled access
MAJOR:        highway, major street, parkway or other equivalent term to identify those streets
              comprising the basic structure of the street plan.
STREET,       A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to a limited access major street
MARGINAL      and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through
ACCESS:       traffic.
STREET,       A street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to a collector street and of
MINOR:        limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve the local needs of a
              neighborhood.
              A thoroughfare within a subdivision which has been reserved by dedication unto the
STREET,       subdivider of lot owners to be used as a private access to serve the lots platted
PRIVATE:      within the subdivision and complying with the adopted street cross section standards
              of the city and maintained by the subdivider or other private agency.
              A.   Any land that is divided, re-subdivided or proposed to be divided into two (2)
              or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or other divisions of land for the
              purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease, or development either
              on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions.
              B.   "Subdivision" includes:
                 1.    The division or development of land whether by deed, metes and bounds
              description, devise and testacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded instrument; and
                 2.    Divisions of land for residential and nonresidential uses, including land
              used or to be used for commercial, agricultural and industrial purposes.
              C.   "Subdivision" does not include:
                 1.   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the purpose of
              joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a configuration parcel of
SUBDIVISION:  unsubdivided agricultural land. If neither the resulting combined parcel nor the
              parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an applicable land use
              ordinance.
                 2.   A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining unsubdivided properties
              adjusting their mutual boundary if:
                    a.   No new lot is created; and
                    b.   The adjustment does not violate applicable land use ordinances.
                 3.   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record:
                    a.   Revising the legal description of more than one contiguous unsubdivided
              parcel of property into one legal description encompassing all such parcels of
              property; or
                    b.   Joining a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of property
              that has not been subdivided, if the joiner does not violate applicable land use
              ordinances.
              The division of any lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) to nine (9) lots,
              plots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose of whether immediate or
              future, of sale or building development where:
              A.   Each lot meets the frontage, width and area requirements of the zone in which
              it is located;
              B.   For simple two lot divisions, a conceptual plan and legal description of both
SUBDIVISION,  lots in the subdivision may be approved by the planning commission, community
MINOR:        development department, public works department, and the city attorney;
              C.   The parcels have a minimum of fifty feet (50') of frontage on a dedicated
              street or highway (excluding flag lot divisions, where the street entrance to the
              rear lot shall be a minimum of twenty-six feet (26') in width of frontage); and
              D.   For three (3) to nine (9) lot divisions, prior to the final approval of the
              minor subdivision by the land use authority, the subdivider shall provide or
              guarantee the provision of improvements, such as curb, gutter and sidewalks, on
              existing streets as are normally required in this title.
              Includes culinary water lines, pressure and gravity irrigation lines, sanitary and
              storm water sewer lines, electric power, gas and telephone (or like utility)
UTILITIES:    transmission and distribution lines, underground conduits and junction boxes.
              Transmission lines are intended to convey a specific utility from place to place
              without service taps or transformers. Distribution lines are intended to provide
              direct service access to customers.
ZONING        The zoning ordinance of the city. (Ord. 80-4, 6-18-1980; amd. (Ord. 87-14, 10-21-
ORDINANCE:    1987; Ord. 96-4, 2-14-1994; Ord. 97-24, 7-23-1997; 2007 Code; Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-
              2019; Ord. 2021-36, 8-11-2021; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
 
10-1-3: SCOPE OF APPLICATION:
All lots, plots, or tracts of land located within a subdivision shall be
subject to this title, whether the tract is owned by the subdivider or a
subsequent purchaser, transferor or holder of the land. (Ord. 80-4, 6-16-1980;
amd. Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-1-4: FEES:
Fees required by this Chapter shall be paid in the amount as indicated in the
Master Fee Schedule of the City. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-
2024)
10-1-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Subdividing Land: It shall be unlawful for any person to subdivide for
the purpose of transferring, selling, conveying or assigning any tract or
parcel of land which is located wholly or in part in the city, except in
compliance with this title.
   B.   Subdivisions: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or exchange
or offer to sell or exchange any parcel of land which is part of a subdivision
of land, or recorded in the office of the county recorder as a subdivision,
unless the subdivision has been approved by the city and meets the provisions
of this title.
   C.   Building Permits Prohibited Before Improvements Installed: Unless
waived by the governing body, it shall be unlawful for any person to receive a
building permit until all improvements, including road base and utilities, are
installed on the lot which the building is to be constructed. There shall be no
human occupancy of any building until the improvements have been accepted by
this city and the building and lot fully comply with the subdivision and zoning
ordinances of the city. It shall be unlawful for any subdivider to sell any
portion of an approved subdivision until the prospective buyer or builder has
been advised that occupancy permits will not be issued until the improvements
are completed. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT AND PERMITS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Enforcement Officials
10-2-2: Permits
10-2-3: Inspections
10-2-4: Penalty
10-2-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The public works director, or his/her assigned designee, and the community
development director, or his/her assigned designee are hereby designated and
authorized as the officers charged with the enforcement of this title. They
shall enforce all the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; amd.
Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-2-2: PERMITS:
There shall not be granted any permit or license, by any officer of the city,
for the use of any land or the construction or alteration of any building or
structure on a lot which would be in violation of any state law or rule or
regulation of the state or ordinance of the city until a subdivision plat has
been approved pursuant to this title. Any license or permit issued in conflict
with such provisions shall be null and void. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; amd.
Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-2-3: INSPECTIONS:
The public works inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected all fire
hydrants, water supplies, and sewage disposal systems in the course of
construction, installation or repair. Excavations for fire hydrants and water
and sewer mains and laterals shall have been approved by the city public works
department. If any such installation is covered before being inspected and
approved, it shall be uncovered after notice to uncover has been issued to the
responsible person by the public works inspector. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019;
amd. Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-2-4: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this title shall be guilty of a
class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
CHAPTER 3
PLATS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Concept Plan Review
10-3-2: Overview Of Subdivision Approval Process
10-3-3: Preliminary Plat
10-3-4: Documents Required
10-3-5: Final Plat
10-3-6: Minor Subdivision
10-3-7: Lot Line Adjustments
10-3-1: CONCEPT PLAN REVIEW:
Prior to submitting a preliminary plat, a subdivider may submit an initial
written "concept plan" to the community development department, including a
sketch plan of the proposed subdivision in which the proposed is sufficiently
described to determine whether the proposed subdivision complies with the
general plan, zoning ordinance, transportation plans and utility plans of the
city. The community development department shall advise the subdivider of
possible problems with the proposed subdivision after it receives the initial
concept, including sketch plans. Approval of the concept plan shall not
constitute approval of the "preliminary plat". This section is not mandatory
and a subdivider may submit a preliminary plat in lieu of the concept plan.
(Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-3-2: OVERVIEW OF SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCESS:
The following paragraphs provide a brief overview of the subdivision approval
process. This section is not intended to give an exhaustive review of the
subdivision process. Specific provisions relating to the application process
are found elsewhere in this Chapter. Except as otherwise allowed or required by
this Chapter, applications for approval of a subdivision shall be pursuant to
the following procedure:
   A.   For subdivisions consisting of two (2) units or less on an individual
parcel the following will apply:
      1.   The subdivider and/or his engineer are responsible for knowing and
complying with the provisions of this Chapter. Copies of applicable city
ordinances can be obtained from the community development department.
      2.   The subdivider, after preparing a preliminary plat, submits a
completed application which includes the preliminary plat, all required
supporting documents, the preliminary plat check lists (with all items
accounted for), and the applicable fee to the community development department.
      3.   The application for preliminary plat is reviewed by the city review
committee to determine if it complies with all applicable city ordinances.
      4.   If the city review committee finds that the proposed preliminary
plat complies with applicable city ordinances, the preliminary plat is then
scheduled to be forwarded onto the land use authority. If the city review
committee finds that the proposed preliminary plat does not comply with
applicable city ordinances, the preliminary plat and/or supporting documents
must be revised to the satisfaction of the city review committee before the
application can be forwarded to the land use authority.
      5.   The land use authority will hold a public hearing in reviewing the
application for preliminary plat. The land use authority, at the conclusion of
the public hearing, will either approve, conditionally approve, or deny the
preliminary plat.
      6.   If the land use authority approves or conditionally approves the
preliminary plat, the developer is then permitted to proceed in preparing the
specific construction drawings for the work to be performed in developing the
subdivision. When approval of the construction drawings has been granted by all
interested departments and utility companies, the developer may apply for final
plat to the city.
      7.   The subdivider, after preparing a final plat, submits a completed
application which includes the final plat, all required supporting documents,
the final plat checklist (with all items accounted for), and the applicable fee
to the community development department.
      8.   The application for final plat is reviewed by the city review
committee to determine if it complies with all applicable city ordinances, and
conforms to the approved preliminary plat.
      9.   If the city review committee finds that the final plat complies with
applicable city ordinances, and conforms to the approved preliminary plat, the
final plat is then forwarded onto the community development director. If the
city review committee finds that the proposed final plat does not comply with
applicable city ordinances, and does not conform to the approved preliminary
plat, the proposed final plat and/or supporting documents must be revised to
the satisfaction of the city review committee before the proposed final plat
can be forwarded to the community development director.
      10.   The community development director will review the application for
final plat. If the community development director determines that the proposed
final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, the community development
director will approve the final plat..
      11.   After approval by the community development director, the final
plat is forwarded onto the city engineer, and the city attorney for review as
to form and content. Once the city engineer and city attorney have completed
their reviews and the final plat receives their approvals, the final plat is
then recorded in the office of the county recorder.
   B.   For subdivisions consisting of three (3) units or more on an individual
parcel the following will apply:
      1.   The subdivider and/or his engineer are responsible for knowing and
complying with the provisions of this Chapter. Copies of applicable city
ordinances can be obtained from the community development department.
   2.   The subdivider, after preparing a preliminary plat, submits a completed
application which includes the preliminary plat, all required supporting
documents, the preliminary plat check lists (with all items accounted for), and
the applicable fee to the community development department.
      3.   The application for preliminary plat is reviewed by the city review
committee to determine if it complies with all applicable city ordinances.
      4.   If the city review committee finds that the proposed preliminary
plat complies with applicable city ordinances, the preliminary plat is then
scheduled to be forwarded onto the planning commission. If the city review
committee finds that the proposed preliminary plat does not comply with
applicable city ordinances, the preliminary plat and/or supporting documents
must be revised to the satisfaction of the city review committee before the
application can be forwarded to the planning commission.
      5.   The planning commission will hold a public hearing in reviewing the
application for preliminary plat. The planning commission, at the conclusion of
the public hearing, will either recommend approval, conditional approval, or
denial of the preliminary plat. onto the city council.
      6.   The city council will review the preliminary plat at a regularly
scheduled public meeting. The city council, after reviewing the preliminary
plat, will either:
         a.    Uphold and approve the planning commission's recommendation of
approval, conditional approval, or denial; or
         b.   Uphold and approve the planning commission's recommendation with
modifications; or
         c.   Overturn the recommendation of the planning commission
altogether.
      7.   If the city council approves or conditionally approves the
preliminary plat, the developer is then permitted to proceed in preparing the
specific construction drawings for the work to be performed in developing the
subdivision. When approval of the construction drawings has been granted by all
interested departments and utility companies, the developer may apply for final
plat to the city.
      8.   The subdivider, after preparing a final plat, submits a completed
application which includes the final plat, all required supporting documents,
the final plat checklist (with all items accounted for), and the applicable fee
to the community development department.
      9.   The application for final plat is reviewed by the city review
committee to determine if it complies with all applicable city ordinances, and
conforms to the approved preliminary plat.
      10.   If the city review committee finds that the final plat complies
with applicable city ordinances, and conforms to the approved preliminary plat,
the final plat is then scheduled to be forwarded onto the city council. If the
city review committee finds that the proposed final plat does not comply with
applicable city ordinances, and does not conform to the approved preliminary
plat, the proposed final plat and/or supporting documents must be revised to
the satisfaction of the city review committee before the proposed final plat
can be forwarded to the city council.
      11.   The city council will review the application for final plat on the
consent agenda of its next regularly scheduled meeting. If the city council
determines that the proposed proposed final plat conforms to the approved
preliminary plat, the city council will approve the final plat.
      12.   After approval by the city council, the final plat is forwarded
onto the city engineer, and onto the city attorney for review as to form and
content. Once the city engineer and city attorney have completed their reviews
and the final plat receives their approvals, the final plat is then recorded in
the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-
48, 11-10-2021; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Required: Prior to subdividing any tract of land, a subdivider shall
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Submission Of Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Application: At least fifteen (15) business days prior to the date
of the reviewing body meeting at which a preliminary subdivision plat is to be
considered, the subdivider shall submit a complete application of the proposed
preliminary plat to the community development department.
      2.   Notification To Adjacent Property Owners: The applicant shall submit
to the community development department a list of all property owners of
property located within three hundred feet (300') of the boundary of a proposed
subdivision. Written notice of the time, date and place where the city will
consider a preliminary plat will be mailed to the property owners by the
community development department. The written notice shall also advise the
property owners of the right to be present and to comment on the proposed
subdivision.
   C.   Form And Contents:
      1.   Scale Of Plat: The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale that
is legible and adequately shows the design and dimensions of the proposed
subdivision.
      2.   Content Of Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat shall show the
following checklist of items:
         a.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
         b.   Sufficient information to accurately locate the property shown on
the plat including a Vicinity map that adequately shows the proposed
subdivision and surrounding properties.
         c.   The names and addresses of the subdivider, the engineer or
surveyor of the subdivision, and the owners of the land immediately adjoining
the land to be subdivided as shown in the records of the county recorder.
         d.   North arrow and scale.
         e.   The boundary, legal description and phasing of the subdivision
with associated numbering of lots which shall be established sequentially
within each phase.
         f.   The plat will show sectional monumentation including the type of
monument, supply the number found on the monument referenced on the plat.
         g.   The Basis of Bearing between two (2) found Survey Monuments will
be shown on the preliminary plat.
         h.   Show all property being developed as part of the subdivision
plat.
         i.   The location, dimensions, and names of all proposed and existing
or recorded streets, easements, both within the proposed subdivision and within
six hundred feet (600') of the boundary thereof. The preliminary plat shall be
in accordance with and conform to the adopted City Master Transportation Plan.
         j.   The location, width and names of all public open spaces within or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
         k.   Show all existing utilities (sewer, water mains, power lines,
storm drain or other established utilities) located within the proposed
subdivision and within six hundred feet (600'). Each utility shown will be
labeled and dimensioned.
         l.   Show all existing and proposed new conveyances of ditches,
drainage channels, waterways, LID improvements and major washes.
         m.   The location of any and all floodplain and floodways with
associated established elevations as designated by FEMA. Also, show any Erosion
Hazard boundary lines as established by local jurisdictions.
         n.   Where applicable, a note shall be attached to the plat that falls
within the designated airport flight paths.
         o.   If the subdivision falls within the city's Hillside Protection
Overlay zone, the plat must reflect such and include the limitations as
directed by the Hillside Protection Committee.
         p.   Layout, number and dimension of each proposed lot within the
Subdivision.
         q.   Public use areas, common or limited common areas, shall be
labeled on the plat. Incorporate a chart identifying percentage of each use
(public, private, common, limited common areas etc.).
         r.   Show all required legends and notes pertaining to the proposed
Subdivision.
         s.   All street cross sections (existing or proposed) shall be shown
on the plat.
         t.   A tentative plan showing the proposed utilities and storm drain
for the subdivision, unless otherwise directed.
         u.   Each subdivision shall have two accesses, unless a single
proposed access is less than six hundred feet (600') in length measured from
the center of an existing cross street to the center of the proposed cul-de-
sac.
         v.   Show a minimum fifteen foot (15') landscape strip along the
boundary of the subdivision where the proposed plan shows double frontage lots.
The landscape strip shall be designed to have a minimum of ten percent (10%)
live growth in the form of trees, shrubs or ground cover.
         w.   For multifamily, commercial and/or industrial developments, show
a chart with the required and proposed parking stalls.
         x.   Show proposed pad elevations for each individual lot. Show all
Retaining/Rockery walls including height and material to be used. Show existing
and proposed contour lines in two foot (2') intervals (existing contours =
lightly dashed lines; proposed contours = dark solid line).
         y.   Show existing and proposed trails and parks. Proposed trails and
parks shall be in accordance with and conform to the Parks and Recreation
Master Plan.
   D.   Soil Controls: The city staff shall determine from a concept plan or
preliminary plat the need for environmental impact analysis, which would take
into account the soil, slope, vegetation, drainage and other geological
characteristics of the site. If the site is one acre or more in area that will
be disturbed, it is required that the applicant provide soil erosion and
sedimentation control plans and specifications prepared by a registered civil
engineer. It will be determined by city staff whether site disturbance of less
than one acre in area will require soil erosion and sedimentation control plans
and specifications, depending on the extent of disturbance.
   E.   Fees: Subdivision fees are required to be paid upon submission of a
complete application, according to the development fee schedule adopted by the
city council.
   F.   Review Of Preliminary Plat:
      1.   After the submittal of a complete application, the community
development department shall circulate for comment and review, copies of the
proposed preliminary plat to all affected departments and divisions of
municipal government, and to any districts which may be providing special
services. The applicant must respond to required corrections. If he/she
disagrees with those issues, those must be committed in writing. There is a
maximum of four (4) review cycles for plat approvals (preliminary and final
combined).
      2.   If it is found that the proposed preliminary plat complies with
applicable city ordinances, the preliminary plat is then scheduled to be
forwarded onto the reviewing body. If it is found that the proposed preliminary
plat does not comply with applicable city ordinances, the preliminary plat and/
or supporting documents must be revised to the satisfaction of the city before
the application can be forwarded to the reviewing body.
   G.   Conditions Of Preliminary Plat Approval:
      1.   For subdivisions with two (2) or less units per parcel, the land use
authority, after holding a public hearing shall approve a preliminary plat, if
it finds that the preliminary plat has been developed in accordance with the
standards and criteria specified in this title and all other applicable plans
and ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to, the general plan,
zoning ordinance, master transportation plan, construction design standards and
current building codes.
      2.   For subdivisions with three or more units per parcel, the planning
commission, after holding a public hearing shall recommend approval of a
preliminary plat to the city council if it finds that the preliminary plat has
been developed in accordance with the standards and criteria specified in this
title and all other applicable plans and ordinances of the city, including, but
not limited to, the general plan, zoning ordinance, master transportation plan,
construction design standards and current building codes. The city council will
then review and consider the recommendation of the planning commission for the
preliminary plat and shall approve the preliminary plat, if it finds that the
preliminary plat has been developed in accordance with the standards and
criteria specified in this title and all other applicable plans and ordinances
of the city, including, but not limited to, the zoning ordinance, master
transportation plan, general plan, construction design standards and current
building codes.
   H.   Approval Or Denial Of Preliminary Plat: After its review of a
preliminary plat, the reviewing body shall approve, conditionally approve or
deny the preliminary plat. In the event the reviewing body denies the
preliminary plat, it shall state to the subdivider each reason for the denial.
      1.   The reviewing body may impose such conditions as may be required in
order to bring the preliminary plat into compliance with the requirements of
city ordinances.
      2.   Authorization To Proceed: One copy of the approved preliminary plat
with written conditions attached shall be retained by the community development
department. The reviewing body's approved preliminary plat shall be
authorization for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of
construction plans and specifications for the improvements required in the
final plat. Prior to the construction of any improvements required by this
title, the subdivider shall provide the city with all plans, information and
data necessary to install and construct the improvements. These items shall be
examined by the city staff and shall be approved if it is determined that the
items are in accordance with the requirements of city ordinances. No building
permits shall be issued until after the final plat has been approved (unless
approval has been granted through the "model home ordinance" as found in Title
9-14-23 of the city code) and recorded. Approval of the preliminary plat by the
reviewing body does not constitute acceptance of the final subdivision plat by
the reviewing body.
      3.   Approval For Twelve Months: Approval of a preliminary plat by the
reviewing body shall be valid for twelve (12) months unless an extension of
time is granted. The subdivider shall request an extension of time on the
preliminary plat prior to the expiration of the twelve (12) month time limit.
The community development director may approve a six (6) month extension on a
preliminary plat. In the case that a second six (6) month extension is needed,
the subdivider shall request the second extension of time on the preliminary
plat prior to the expiration of the first six (6) month extension time limit.
The city will approve or deny the requested second extension on the preliminary
plat.
      4.   Appeal Process For Preliminary Plat: For disputes between the
applicant and the city, the following options may be considered:
         a.    For disputes relating to public improvement or engineering
standards that have exhausted the fifteen (15) days and the four (4) review
cycles, the applicant may request a review by a three person panel assembled by
the municipality. The request must be submitted within ten (10) days following
the fifteen (15) day and review cycle period.
         b.   For all other disputes, the municipality shall refer the question
(s) to the designated appeal authority at the applicant's submitted request
within ten (10) days following the fifteen (15) day and review cycle period.
The appeal authority shall consist of a panel of experts which includes: one
licensed engineer designated by the municipality; one licensed engineer
designated by the applicant; and, one licensed engineer agreed upon and
designated by the two (2) designated engineers. Members appointed to the appeal
authority panel may not have interest in the application in question. The
applicant must pay fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of the panel and the
municipality's published fee. The municipality pays the other fifty percent
(50%). The appeal authority panel's decision is final, unless the municipality
or the applicant petition for district court review within thirty (30) days
after the final written decision of the appeal authority is issued. (Ord. 2003-
24, 11-12-2003; amd. Ord. 2005-25, 7-13-2005; Ord. 2008-28, 8-13-2008; Ord.
2019-20, 11-13-2019; Ord. 2021-36, 8-11-2021; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-3-4: DOCUMENTS REQUIRED:
The subdivider shall provide to the community development department not later
than the time the subdivision plat is submitted for preliminary review and
approval the following documents:
   A.   Agreements With Adjacent Owners: Copies of any required agreements with
adjacent property owners to the proposed subdivision.
   B.   Soil Report: A preliminary soil report prepared by a registered geotech
engineer, based upon adequate test boring or excavations (if required by the
city). (Ord. 80-4, 6-18-1980; amd. Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-
14-2024)
10-3-5:  FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Before application for a final plat can be submitted to the city,
construction drawings and plans must first be approved by the city's public
works department. These construction plans will be in accordance with the
ordinances and design standards as adopted by the city.
   B.   Required: After compliance with the provisions of section
10-3-3 of this chapter, a final plat of the subdivision covering all or part of
an approved preliminary plat shall be prepared by a professionally licensed
surveyor not in the employ of the city, in conformance with the design
standards and submitted within twelve (12) months from the date of preliminary
plat approval, unless the time is, in writing, extended by the community
development director or the approving body of the preliminary plat. Otherwise,
preliminary approval shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.
   C.   Submission Of Final Plat: The final plat shall be submitted at least
twenty (20) days prior to the date of the meeting at which a final subdivision
plat is to be considered, the subdivider shall submit a complete application of
the proposed final plat to the community development department.
   D.   Contents, Procedure And Form of Final Plat:
      1.   The final plat shall be so drawn that the top of the drawing faces
either north or west, whichever better accommodates the drawing. The plat shall
be drawn to a scale that is legible and adequately shows the design and
dimensions of the proposed subdivision. The plat shall be signed by all persons
required to sign the final plat pursuant to subsection 10-3-5-(D)(k) of this
section and the final plat shall contain the following information:
         a.   The subdivision name prominently displayed on the plat.
         b.   Legible text size and orientation.
         c.   A north arrow and scale of the drawing with the current date.
         d.   Vicinity map adequately showing proposed subdivision and
surrounding properties.
         e.   Accurately drawn boundaries, showing the proper bearings and
dimensions of all boundary lines of the subdivision, label the basis of bearing
between two (2) found survey monuments. Give a description of monuments used
(agency, date and type).
         f.   The names, widths, lengths, bearings and curve data on
centerlines of proposed streets, alleys, and easements, also the boundaries,
bearings and dimensions of all portions within the subdivision intended to be
dedicated to the use of the public; and the lines, dimensions, bearings and
numbers of all lots, blocks, and parts reserved for any reason within the
subdivision. All lots and blocks are to be numbered consecutively under a
definite system. All proposed streets shall be named or numbered in accordance
with and in conformity to the adopted street numbering system. All proposed
streets shall also be labeled as public or private.
         g.   The legal description of the boundaries of the subdivision.
         h.   The registered professional engineer and/or land surveyor's
certificate of survey with associated stamp/signature.
         i.   The owner certificate of dedication.
         j.   A notary public acknowledgment as per Utah Code.
         k.   Signature blocks for: the city engineer approval; the city public
works department; the city attorney; city council/mayor approval with attesting
by the city recorder. A signature block for the county recorder's office will
also be provided.
         l.   Where applicable, show floodplain and erosion hazard boundaries,
as designated by FEMA and local flood hazard agencies.
         m.   Where applicable, show all open space, common, limited common and
Private areas, through the use of appropriate legend boxes. When these areas
Are made part of a subdivision, a note shall be added to the general note
section stating that these areas have a blanket easement for public utilities
and drainage.
         n.   Legends and all general notes pertaining to the proposed
subdivision shall be shown.
         o.   Identify all abutting property owners to the proposed
subdivision.
         p.   Street monuments placed and in accordance with city standards.
   D.   Review Of Final Plat: After the submittal of a complete application,
the community development department shall circulate for comment and review,
copies of the proposed final plat to all affected city departments and special
service districts. The applicant must respond to required corrections. If he/
she disagrees with those issues, those items must be committed in writing.
There is a maximum of four (4) review cycles for plat approvals (preliminary
and final combined). Following the completion of all reviews, the community
development department will move forward the final plat application to the
reviewing body.
      1.   If the proposed final plat complies with all applicable city
ordinances, and conforms to the approved preliminary plat, the final plat is
then forwarded onto the community development director. If it is found that the
proposed final plat does not comply with applicable city ordinances, the final
plat and/or supporting documents must be revised to the satisfaction of the
city before the application can be forwarded to the community development
director.
      2.   After consideration of the final plat the community development
director will approve, approve with modifications, or deny the final plat. If
the community development director denies the final plat, he/she shall state
the reasons for such denial.
      3.   Approval For Twelve Months: Approval of a final plat by the
community development director shall be valid for twelve (12) months. If the
final plat (or a final plat for a phase of the preliminary plat) has not been
recorded within a twelve (12) month period, the final plat shall expire. The
recording of the final plat for any phase of a preliminary plat shall lock in
the remaining phases of that preliminary plat so that it will not expire.
      4.   Appeal Process for final plat: For disputes between the applicant
and the city, the following options may be considered:
         a.    For disputes relating to public improvement or engineering
standards that have exhausted the twenty (20) days and the four (4) review
cycles, the applicant may request a review by a three person panel assembled by
the municipality. The request must be submitted within ten (10) days following
the twenty (20) day and review cycle period.
         b.   For all other disputes, the municipality shall refer the question
(s) to the designated appeal authority at the applicant's submitted request
within ten (10) days following the twenty (20) day and review cycle period. The
appeal authority shall consist of a panel of experts which includes: one (1)
licensed engineer designated by the municipality; one (1) licensed engineer
designated by the applicant; and, one (1) licensed engineer agreed upon and
designated by the two (2) designated engineers. Members appointed to the appeal
authority panel may not have interest in the application in question. The
applicant must pay fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of the panel and the
municipality's published fee. The municipality pays the other fifty percent
(50%). The appeal authority panel's decision is final, unless the municipality
or the applicant petition for district court review within thirty (30) days
after the final written decision of the appeal authority is issued. (Ord. 80-4,
6-18-1980; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; Ord. 2021-48, 11-17-2021;
Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-3-6:  MINOR SUBDIVISION:
The approval process for any subdivider meeting the requirements of a "minor
subdivision", as defined in section
10-1-2 of this title, shall comply with the following procedures:
   A.    For The Division Of Two (2) To Three (3) Lots (having no dedication of
land to the city): The subdivider shall prepare a conceptual plan of the
proposed minor subdivision which includes, at a minimum, a sketch of the lot
layout and a legal description of each lot and submit such materials to the
community development department for review and approval at the next land use
authority meeting. After land use authority approval, the materials shall be
submitted to the public works director, city engineer, and city attorney for
approval. After all approvals are obtained and all required improvements are
provided and guaranteed by the subdivider, the community development department
shall notify the county recorder's office of the minor subdivision and shall
notify the subdivider, in writing, giving authorization for the subdivision to
be recorded. In no case shall any lot of a minor subdivision be sold,
transferred or conveyed until such subdivision is recorded by the county
recorder. (If land is to be dedicated to the city as part of the minor
subdivision process, the procedures found in subsection B below shall be
followed)
   B.   For The Division Of Three (3) To Nine (9) Lots (and subdivisions with
two (2) or more lots which involve dedication of land to the city): The
subdivider shall prepare construction drawings for the proposed subdivision,
and submit such materials to the city's public works department for review and
approval. After obtaining approval of the construction drawings by the public
works department, the subdivider shall prepare a final plat as described in
section 10-3-5 of this title, and submit such materials to the community
development department for review and recommendation at the next land use
authority meeting. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-3-7: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Conditions: Petitions to adjust lot lines between adjacent properties
may be accomplished upon the recordation of an appropriate deed if:
      1.   No new dwelling lot or housing unit results from the lot line
adjustment;
      2.   The adjoining property owner(s) consent to the lot line adjustment;
      3.   The lot line adjustment does not result in remnant land that did not
previously exist; and
      4.   The adjustment does not result in violation of applicable zoning and
subdivision ordinance requirements.
   B.   Approval:
      1.    The community development director shall give final approval of the
lot line adjustment if it is found that the adjustment complies with the
physical development standards, the laws of the state and the rules and
regulations pursuant thereto.
      2.   Any person shall have the right to appeal to the city council any
decision rendered by the community development director in relation to a lot
line adjustment decision. Appeals to the city council shall be made by filing
with the city a written notice of appeal containing the reason for the appeal,
within ten (10) days following the date upon which the decision is made by the
community development director. After receiving said notice of appeal, the city
council may reaffirm the decision of the community development director or set
the appeal for a public hearing. If the appeal is set for public hearing, then:
         a.   The city council shall notify the community development director
of the date of said hearing at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the date
set for such hearing so that the community development director may prepare the
record for the hearing; and
         b.   The city council, after proper review of the decision of the
community development director and application of the standards, procedures and
provisions of subsection A of this section, may affirm, reverse, alter or
remand any decision of the community development director relating to a lot
line adjustment. (Ord. 2008-28, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; Ord.
2024-04, 2-14-2024)
CHAPTER 4
ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATED STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Dedication
10-4-2: Time Of Acceptance
10-4-1: DEDICATION:
The subdivider shall dedicate the streets, easements and other public
improvements to the city at the time the final plat is approved by the city.
The dedication shall be deemed an offer by the subdivider which shall be
irrevocable until one year after all of the improvements are completed. The
city shall accept the offer of dedication only if it finds that the subdivider
has constructed, installed and maintained the public improvements required by
this title and that the improvements comply with the minimum requirements of
this title at the time of acceptance. (Ord. 80-4, 6-18-1980; amd. Ord. 2019-20,
11-13-2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-4-2: TIME OF ACCEPTANCE:
Unless the reviewing body extends the time for acceptance of the dedicated
public improvements, the dedication shall be accepted on action by the
reviewing body, or at the expiration of one year following the completion of
the public improvements. In the event the reviewing body does not accept the
dedicated public improvements, the subdivider shall be so advised, in writing,
of the reason for the nonacceptance. (Ord. 80-4, 6-18-1980; amd. Ord. 2019-20,
11-13-2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
CHAPTER 5
IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED
SECTION:
10-5-1: Application Of Required Improvements
10-5-2: Improvements Made Prior To Recording Final Plat
10-5-3: Order Of Making Improvements
10-5-4: Guarantee Of Improvements
10-5-5: Release
10-5-6: Orderly Development Required
10-5-7: Subdivision Improvements And Construction Design Standards
10-5-8: Subdivision Grading
10-5-9: Rockery Walls
10-5-10: Penalty
10-5-1: APPLICATION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The improvements required by this title apply to all subdivisions and to all
persons that purchase, lease, rent or receive any interest in any land which is
located within a subdivision. (Ord. 80-4, 6-18-1980; amd. Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-
2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-5-2: IMPROVEMENTS MADE PRIOR TO RECORDING FINAL PLAT:
The improvements required by this title shall be constructed, installed and
maintained by the subdivider until accepted by the city prior to recording the
final plat in the Office of the County Recorder. The construction, installation
and maintenance is guaranteed in the manner provided in section
10-5-4 of this chapter. Improvements shall not be installed or constructed
until their location and specifications have been approved by the public works
director or his/her assigned designee. (Ord. 2019-20-11-13-2019; amd. Ord.
2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-5-3: ORDER OF MAKING IMPROVEMENTS:
Unless waived in writing by the public works director or his/her assigned
designee, underground utilities, water and sewer laterals, and fire hydrants
shall be installed prior to surfacing the streets and installing road base,
curbs, gutters and sidewalks. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-04, 2-
14-2024)
10-5-4: GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
In lieu of the actual completion and acceptance by the city of the improvements
required by this title and before approval of the final plat by the city, the
subdivider shall guarantee the installation and construction of the required
improvements within two (2) years from the date of approval of the final plat
and that the improvements shall be maintained in a state of good repair, free
from defective material or workmanship, for a period of twelve (12) months from
the date of completion by one (1) or more of the following methods:
   A.   Bond: The subdivider shall furnish and file with the city recorder a
bond with corporate surety in an amount equal to the cost of the improvements
not previously installed, as estimated by the city's public works director or
his/her assigned designee, to assure the installation and construction of such
improvements within twenty four (24) months immediately following the approval
of the subdivision plat by the reviewing body which bond shall be approved by
the city, and which bond shall guarantee that the improvements shall be
maintained in a state of good repair, free from material and workmanship
defects, for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of completion. After
twelve (12) months following the completion of the improvements for which a
surety or cash bond has been filed, the subdivider shall call for inspection by
the public works director or his/her assigned designee, such inspection to be
made within five (5) days from the date requested. If inspection shows that the
standards and specifications have been met in completion of such improvements,
the bonds therefore shall be released within fourteen (14) days from the time
of inspection.
   B.   Escrow:
      1.   The subdivider shall deposit with any insurance company, bank or
savings and loan institution in an escrow account and amount of money equal to
at least one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the costs of the
improvements required by this title not previously accepted by the city. The
costs of the improvements not accepted and not installed or constructed shall
be determined by the city's public works director or his/her assigned designee.
The escrow agreement shall be subject to approval by the city attorney and
shall be signed by the subdivider, the city and the escrow holder, and shall
contain substantially the following language:
   Agreement
      The undersigned hereby promises and warrants that it has on deposit in an
escrow account for the benefit of __________________ (name of municipality),
the sum of $_____________ which represents at least 125% of the estimated costs
of the improvements not accepted by the municipality and not constructed or
installed by the developer of the ________________________ subdivision. The
undersigned hereby agrees that the foregoing sum of money shall be used
exclusively for the purpose of paying for the costs of materials, and
construction and installation of the improvements required by the
municipality's subdivision ordinances. The undersigned further agrees that the
money held in an escrow account shall be paid out to the contractors installing
and constructing the required improvements only upon an order executed by the
subdivider and by an authorized officer of the municipality.
      The subdivider shall not withdraw from the escrow account any amount in
excess of 100% of the estimated cost of the improvements, but shall pay from
other sources any costs for such improvements which exceed 100% of the costs
estimated by the engineer.
      A sum equal to 25% of the estimated costs of improvements shall remain
with the escrow holder for a period of one year after all improvements are made
and completed.
      If after two years, all or any part of the required improvements are not
installed, constructed and maintained, according to the standards required in
the municipality's subdivision ordinance, the municipality shall notify in
writing the subdivider and the escrow holder of the defects and shall make
demand on the subdivider that the defects be corrected. If the defects are nor
corrected within 30 days, the municipality may correct the defects and charge
to the escrow holder the costs of correcting the defects.
      The escrow holder shall on receiving reasonable proof from the
municipality of the defect and that the municipality has incurred the cost of
correcting the defect, pay to the municipality from the escrow account the cost
of correcting the defect and the escrow holder shall be held harmless by the
parties by reason of the payment to the municipality.
      If, after one year after the city has accepted the improvements required
by its subdivision or finance, the required improvements remain substantially
free from latent defects, the municipality shall certify such fact to the
escrow holder and the escrow holder whall release to the subdivider any money
still held in the escrow account and the escrow holder shall be discharged of
its obligations to the municipality.
      ______________________________________
       (Authorized Signature)
      2.   The escrow agreement may contain such additional provisions as the
parties deem necessary.
   C.   Irrevocable Letter Of Credit:
      1    The subdivider shall file with the city an irrevocable letter of
credit from a duly chartered state or national bank or savings and loan
institution which letter shall contain provisions substantially similar to the
required in the escrow agreement.
      2.   The form of the irrevocable letter of credit shall be substantially
as follows:
      Name of Bank
      Address
   Irrevocable Letter Of Credit
      To: Name of Municipality            Date
      Municipal Council               Letter of Credit No.:
      Gentlemen:
      We hereby establish our irrevocable letter of credit in your favor for
the account of _______________________ (insert name of subdivider, subdivider's
address) up to the aggregate amount of $____________ (insert amount available
by your drafts) drawn at sight on __________________ (insert name of bank,
address of bank) accompanied by _______________ (here insert terms which give
municipality control over payments). The terms would ordinarily read:
      A statement signed by an officer of _________________ (name of
municipality) dated not later than ______________ (insert estimated completion
date plus a couple of months leeway) as follows:
      We certify that the on site improvements related to the ______________
(insert name of subdivision) have not been completed in accordance with
municipal ordinances and that this drawing represents the amount necessary to
complete those on site improvements.
      We hereby agree with drawers, endorsers and bona fide holders that all
drafts under and in compliance with the terms of this credit will be duly
honored upon presentation and delivery of documents as specified to the drawee
or drawn and presented for negotiation on or before __________________ (insert
completion date above set forth) at our bank.
      Very truly yours,
      _______________________________
      (Authorized Bank Officer Signature)
   D.   Deposit With City: The subdivider shall deposit with the city a sum
equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the costs of the required
improvements not installed, constructed or accepted by the city. The subdivider
shall have the right to draw against the account with the city all sums to one
one hundred percent (100%) of the total account, which shall be paid to the
order of persons installing, constructing or maintaining the improvements. The
city shall hold the additional ten percent (10%) to guarantee that the
improvements are installed, constructed and maintained until acceptance by the
city. The city may, after making written demand on the subdivider in a manner
required above, install, construct or repair the improvements and pay such
costs from the subdivider's account. The city shall refund any sums remaining
in the subdivider's account after the city council accepts the improvements.
   E.   Corporate Assurance:
      1.   In lieu of the methods outlined in subsection A through D of this
section, the city may accept a corporate assurance accompanied by audited
financial statements, from a subdivider, whose company's net assets are worth a
minimum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00). The audited financial
statements shall be reviewed by the city auditor prior to any acceptance by the
city of the corporate assurance form. Acceptance of a corporate assurance in
lieu of the other methods outlined shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
The corporate assurance shall be in a form acceptable to the city.
      2.   In the event the city accepts the corporate assurance, the
subdivider shall submit audited financial statements on an annual basis
thereafter for approval by the city until the improvements are complete. If at
any time the city deems itself insecure after review of the audited financial
statements, the city shall send notice to the subdivider that the city has
rejected the audited financial statements and require the subdivider to provide
another method to guarantee the improvements pursuant to this section. (Ord.
80-4, 6-18-1980; amd. Ord. 93-27, 10-27-1993; Ord. 99-27, 10-20-1999; Ord.
2019-20, 11-13-2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-5-5: RELEASE:
The city is authorized from time to time, at the request of the subdivider or
his successors in interest, to release of record from the burden of the
covenant and lien aforesaid all lots and parcels of land or portions thereof
for which the covenant and agreement has been fully performed by any of the
methods of guarantee above set forth in section
10-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 80-4, 6-18-1980; amd. Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019;
Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-5-6: ORDERLY DEVELOPMENT REQUIRED:
Whenever the subdivider shall develop a subdivision, such development shall be
in an orderly manner and in such a way that the required improvements will be
continuous and all of the improvements will be made available for the full,
effective and practical use and enjoyment thereof by the purchaser, grantee,
assignee, transferor or leasee of any of the lands subdivided within the time
hereinbefore or in phases specified. (Ord. 80-4, 6-18-1980; amd. Ord. 2019-20,
11-13-2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-5-7: SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION DESIGN STANDARDS:
Subdivision improvements and construction design standards shall be as
specified in the construction design standards adopted by the city and on file
in the city office.
(2007 Code; amd. Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
10-5-8: SUBDIVISION GRADING:
   A.   Compliance: All grading shall comply with most recent adopted version
of the international building code including appendix J, and:
      1.   Retaining walls shall be installed between lots where there is an
elevation change greater than three and one-half feet (3.5') in height, unless
special circumstances require an alternative design. All designs shall be
approved by a city designated official; and
      2.   Retaining walls shall be installed at the time of the lot
development; unless bonded for as per section
10-5-4 of this chapter; and
      3. If bonded for, then all walls shall be installed before the issuance
of building permits for the homes.
   B.   Permit Requirement: It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge, alter,
repair or demolish any retaining wall without a building permit. The
application, submittal, permitting and inspection requirements for retaining
walls shall be as specified in the adopted building code and other city codes
and ordinances.
   C.   Definitions:
 
RETAINING WALL: A wall not laterally supported at the top; that resists lateral
                soil load and other imposed loads.
 
   D.   Design And Construction:
      1.    Retaining wall systems, including rockery walls (as outlined in
section
10-5-9 of this chapter), shall be designed and certified by a professional
engineer licensed to practice in the state of Utah for all loads as specified
in the building code and in keeping with nationally recognized standards.
Designs shall be based upon sound engineering and geotechnical principles; and
      2.   All engineering shall be reviewed through the building department of
the city prior to installation; and
      3.   All special inspections shall comply with chapter 17 of the
international building code.
   E.   Appeals: Any person or entity aggrieved by any decision or order of the
building official under this chapter may appeal the decision in accordance with
set procedures and timelines.
   F.   Conflicts: Where there is a conflict between this chapter and any other
code or ordinance of the city, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
(Ord. 2008-22, 6-11-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-
2024)
10-5-9: ROCKERY WALLS:
   A.   This section provides the minimum requirements for the design and
construction of rockery walls. Rock material shall meet the minimum
requirements of the "Rock Wall Construction Guidelines", as adopted by the
Associated Rockery Contractors, dated August 15, 2000 edition, unless other
materials are specifically pre-approved by the geotechnical engineer.
   B.   Definitions:
 
ROCK:         A natural solid mineral matter occurring in large masses or
              fragments.
ROCKERY WALL: A system of stacked rocks constructed to retain soil or rock and
              include rock faced slopes.
 
   C.   Permit Requirement: Rockery walls three feet high and greater, as
measured from the ground surface to the top of the uppermost rock layer shall
be subject to the provisions of this section and shall require a permit issued
by the Washington City Public Works Department prior to construction unless the
wall was included and approved on the engineered construction drawings for the
subdivision.
   D.   Documents Required: The following documentation shall be submitted at
the time of application for a permit:
      1.   A dimensional drawing that identifies the location of each rockery
wall with respect to the property lines, easements, streets, other rights of
way, existing construction, required setbacks (as noted below), and drainage
features shall be clearly identified on the drawings.
      2.   A cross section of the wall showing the minimum rock size for each
lift, maximum wall height, reinforcing, backfill specifications, drainage,
slope of adjacent ground, embedment, cuts and batter.
      3.   Engineering analysis and design is required for all rockery walls
three feet (3') and greater in height, measured from the furthest point on the
bottom to the furthest point on the top of the proposed rockery wall.
   E.   Site Conditions: The following specific site conditions shall be
considered for each wall design and noted on the drawings submitted:
      1.   Future structures and landscaping.
      2.   Location of utilities and utility easements. The city reserves the
right to deny a permit for a wall within, or over, a utility easement.
      3.   Location of existing or future utility installations within eight
feet (8') of the base and top of the wall.
      4.   Data showing the subgrade soil conditions within eight feet (8') of
the wall.
      5.   Type of fill material to be replaced or removed.
      6.   The drawings shall note the drainage for surface water within eight
feet (8') of the wall and all walls shall be designed assuming wet conditions.
      7.   The drawings shall note the subsurface water conditions within eight
feet (8') of the wall.
      8.   The drawings shall note the keyway/foundation depth and width,
      9.   The drawings shall note the slope conditions and surcharge loads.
      10.   Maintenance and service access shall be shown on the drawings.
   F.   Construction: All construction shall be done on private property and
not from any public roads or right of ways. No walls will be permitted inside
of, or upon any utility easement. The construction of all rockery walls shall
adhere to the following:
      1.   Monitoring: All phases of the rockery wall construction shall be
monitored by the geotechnical engineer employed by the owner/contractor to
verify that the nature and quality of materials being used are appropriate and
that the construction is in accordance with the approved engineered design. The
geotechnical engineer shall verify to the city in writing that the materials
and construction of the rockery wall as built is in accordance with the
engineered design after construction is complete.
      2.   Fill Compaction: Where the rockery wall(s) is constructed in front
of a fill, the fill shall be placed and compacted in a manner that will provide
a competent fill mass as noted in the drawings. All fills shall consist of
quality fill material meeting the geotechnical engineer's recommendations as
noted on the approved drawings and/or report.
      3.   Compaction Testing: Density tests to verify compaction shall be
taken at random locations. At least two (2) tests per one hundred feet (100')
of wall length and per two feet (2') of backfill shall be taken. In critical
locations, the geotechnical engineer may request additional monitoring. The
testing shall be conducted by a certified technician under the direction of the
geotechnical engineer.
      4.   Fill Construction Reinforcement: All fill placed behind rockery
walls shall be reinforced as recommended by the geotechnical engineer.
      5.   Rock Selection: The rocks used in the rockery wall should be of a
generally cubical, tabular or rectangle shape. Rounded rocks should not be used
and internal void spaces in the facing should be kept to a minimum. Prior to
being placed, all rock shall be inspected and approved by the geotechnical
engineer. The rock source shall be pre-approved by the geotechnical engineer.
Rocks shall be placed to decrease in size with increasing wall height. Rocks
shall be placed to bear on good flat to flat surfaces. The long dimension of
the rocks shall extend back toward the cut/fill face. Rocks shall bear on at
least two (2) or more other rocks. The contractor shall have sufficient space
and stockpile material available to select from among a number of rocks for
each space in the rockery wall to be filled.
      6.   Rock Placement: Rocks shall be placed as recommended by the
geotechnical engineer. A keyway (one foot (1') minimum) as recommended by the
geotechnical engineer shall be constructed into unyielding soil.
      7.   Drainage: A rock drainage filter or geosynthetic filter fabric shall
be installed between the rear face of the rockery wall and soil face being
protected. The drainage design shall consider adjacent conditions and potential
for water and erosion, and shall be constructed as directed by the engineer.
      8.   Surface Drainage: Surface drainage shall be directed away from the
rockery wall face to a positive and permanent discharge well away from, and
beyond the rockery wall. The surrounding site shall be graded such that water
cannot flow over the top of the wall.
      9.   Steepness Of Walls: The steepness of the wall shall not exceed one
(1) horizontal to six (6) vertical. Specific recommendations from the engineer
are required and shall be noted on the drawings.
      10.   Slopes: Slopes above and below rockery walls shall not exceed two
(2) horizontal to one (1) vertical
      11.   Rock Stockpiles: Rock and other material shall not be stockpiled in
or on public roads or right of ways.
   G.   Limitations:
      1.   Height: The height of any single rockery wall shall not exceed eight
feet (8'), or as limited by the international building code, whichever is most
restrictive.
      2.   Alignment: Walls shall be in continuous alignment without abrupt
changes in direction.
      3.   Terminations, Intersections And Radii: Terminations, intersections,
and radii of rockery walls shall be included in the engineering analysis.
      4.   Corner Lots: Corner lots require additional engineering and permits
for setbacks, sight distance standards and public utility easements.
   H.   Setbacks:
      1.   Minimum Setbacks: The setback from a rockery wall to a building or
structure shall meet all setback requirements as outlined in the international
building code, foundation clearance from slopes, or the setback from a rockery
wall shall be a minimum of the height of the rockery wall itself, whichever is
most restrictive/greater.
      2.   Separate Rockery Walls Considered As One Wall: For height and
setback restrictions, separate rockery walls shall be considered as one wall,
unless separated by a horizontal distance greater than the vertical height of
the lower wall. The distance shall be measured from the outside of the
foundation of the structure to the exposed face of the rockery wall. This
provision applies to buildings or structures at the low and high side of the
wall.
      3.   Terraced Rockery Walls: Multiple rockery walls, designed as terraced
retaining walls, shall be separated a minimum distance of one-half (½) the
height of the lower rockery wall to another rockery wall. The height of an
upper wall shall not exceed the height of a lower wall. The total combined
height of all rockery walls shall not exceed eight feet (8').
      4.   Rockery Walls In Utility Easements: Rockery walls shall not be
constructed within side or rear yard utility easements without prior written
permission in a form acceptable to the city from each affected utility.
Notwithstanding any written permission, the city reserves the right to deny a
permit for a rockery wall within, or over, any utility easement.
   I.   Structural Analysis: All structural analysis shall be in accordance
with adopted building codes of the city and in accordance with this section.
The structural analysis shall also adhere to the following:
      1.   Factor Of Safety; Seismic Forces: The minimum factor of safety for
sliding and over-turning of each rock in a rockery wall shall be two (2). This
shall include load combinations with seismic forces.
      2.   Analysis Provisions: The following analysis provision shall apply:
         a.   The maximum unit weight of the rocks used in the design of a
rockery wall shall be one hundred fifty five (155) pcf unless field verified by
special inspection.
         b.   The maximum coefficient of friction between rocks in a rockery
wall shall be 0.5.
         c.   Surcharge load shall be taken into consideration in the analysis.
         d.   Specifications shall be provided to clearly define acceptance
criteria for rock materials.
   J.   Inspections: Construction of rockery walls shall be supervised and
inspected by a qualified geotechnical engineer employed by the owner/
contractor. Supervision and testing shall be at a frequency specified by the
geotechnical engineer, and shall include all phases of construction.
      1.   Schedule Required: A schedule for the continuous or periodic
supervision and inspection of construction shall be specified on the
construction documents and all such supervision and inspections shall be
verified in writing.
      2.   Final Compliance Report Required: Upon completion of the wall, the
geotechnical engineer shall submit a final compliance report to the city. The
report shall include a description of the rock wall, including type of rock,
size of rock, rock placement, embedment, inclination, property line setbacks,
separations, and height of the wall. The report shall provide a professional
opinion as to the compliance with all of the design recommendations and
acceptance of the construction. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-04,
2-14-2024)
10-5-10: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor or lesser offense, as
determined by the city prosecutor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. (Ord. 2019-20, 11-13-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-04, 2-14-2024)
TITLE 11
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE
AND OBJECTIVES
SECTION:
11-1-1: Statutory Authorization
11-1-2: Findings Of Fact
11-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
11-1-4: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
11-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state has in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-701 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
of its citizenry. (1989 Code § 18-111)
11-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities,
and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are
inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage
also contribute to the flood loss. (1989 Code § 18-112)
11-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions to specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
   H.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions. (1989 Code § 18-113)
11-1-4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this title includes methods and provisions
for:
   A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   B.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas. (1989 Code § 18-114)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Definitions
11-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this title shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to
give this title its most reasonable application.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the
area of special flood hazard.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated areas of special flood
hazard designated as zone A.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. This term also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is
principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure either:
      1.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
      2.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement"
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
   B.   The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. (1989 Code § 18-121)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Lands Applicable
11-3-2: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
11-3-3: Compliance
11-3-4: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
11-3-5: Interpretation
11-3-6: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
11-3-1: LANDS APPLICABLE:
This title shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city. (1989 Code § 18-131)
11-3-2: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in its flood insurance rate map (FIRM), dated July 1, 1987,
is adopted by reference and declared to be part of this title. The FIRM is on
file at Washington City offices, 111 North 100 East, Washington, UT 84780.
(1989 Code § 18-132)
11-3-3: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended or
altered without full compliance with the terms of this title and other
applicable regulations. (1989 Code § 18-133)
11-3-4: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This title is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this title and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (1989 Code §
18-134)
11-3-5: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation of this title, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (1989 Code § 18-135)
11-3-6: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this title is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This title does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas of special flood hazard will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This title shall not create liability on the part of the city, any
officer or employee thereof, or the federal emergency management agency for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this title or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder. (1989 Code § 18-136)
CHAPTER 4
ADMINISTRATION; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Development Permit
11-4-2: Designation Of Zoning Administrator
11-4-3: Duties And Responsibilities Of Zoning Administrator
11-4-1: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in section
11-3-2 of this title. Application for a development permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the zoning administrator and may include, but not be limited
to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials and drainage facilities; and the location of the
foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
   A.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
   B.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
   C.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 11-5-3B of this title; and
   D.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. (1989 Code § 18-141)
11-4-2: DESIGNATION OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
title by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with
its provisions. (1989 Code § 18-142)
11-4-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
Duties of the zoning administrator shall include, but not be limited to: (1989
Code § 18-143)
   A.   Permit Review:
      1.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this title have been satisfied.
      2.   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
      3.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the areas of
special flood hazard. For the purpose of this title, "adversely affects" means
damage to adjacent properties because of rises in flood stages attributed to
physical changes of the channel and the adjacent overbank areas.
         a.   If it is determined that there is no adverse effect and the
development is not a building, then the permit shall be granted without further
consideration.
         b.   If it is determined that there is adverse effect, then technical
justification (i.e., a registered professional engineer's certification) for
the proposed development shall be required.
         c.   If the proposed development is a building, then the provisions of
this title shall apply. (1989 Code § 18-144; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Use Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with section
11-3-2 of this title, the zoning administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source in order to administer sections
11-5-2 and
11-5-3 of this title. (1989 Code § 18-145)
   C.   Information Obtained And Maintained:
      1.   Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures.
      2.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
         a.   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure has been floodproofed; and
         b.   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection
11-4-1C of this chapter.
         c.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this title. (1989 Code § 18-146)
   D.   Alteration Of Watercourses:
      1.   Notify adjacent communities and the state division of comprehensive
emergency management prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification of the federal emergency management
agency.
      2.   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished. (1989 Code § 18-147)
   E.   Interpretation Of FIRM Boundaries: Make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). (1989 Code § 18-148)
CHAPTER 5
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
SECTION:
11-5-1: Policy For Protection Of Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
11-5-2: General Standards
11-5-3: Specific Standards
11-5-1: POLICY FOR PROTECTION OF AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The city hereby adopts a policy of attempting to leave all areas of special
flood hazard in an undeveloped fashion in order to allow such areas to
accommodate flood flows without undue damage to public and private facilities.
Where development in special flood hazard areas is determined to be acceptable,
the following standards shall apply. (1989 Code § 18-151)
11-5-2: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
(1989 Code § 18-152)
   A.   Anchoring:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and capable
of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads.
      2.   All manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement and capable of resisting the
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. Methods of anchoring may include, but are
not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement may be:
         a.   Over the top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners of
the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate
locations, with manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50') long requiring
one additional tie per side;
         b.   Frame ties provided at each corner of the home with five (5)
additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less
than fifty feet (50') long requiring four (4) additional ties per side;
         c.   All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a
force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds; and
         d.   Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
(1989 Code § 18-153)
   B.   Construction Material And Methods:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      3.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding. (1989 Code § 18-154)
   C.   Utilities:
      1.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      2.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
      3.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding. (1989 Code § 18-156)
   D.   Subdivision Proposals:
      1.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
      2.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
      3.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
      4.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least fifty (50) lots
or five (5) acres (whichever is less). (1989 Code § 18-157)
   E.   Encroachments: Any proposed development shall be analyzed to determine
effects on the flood carrying capacity of the areas of special flood hazard as
set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title. (1989 Code § 18-158)
11-5-3: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in subsection 11-4-3B of this title, the following
standards are required: (1989 Code § 18-159)
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. (1989 Code § 18-160)
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to the level
of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
      1.   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to passage of water. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review
structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall
certify that the design methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice.
      2.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings
or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      3.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be
provided to the official set forth in subsection 11-4-3A3b of this title. (1989
Code § 18-161)
CHAPTER 6
EROSION HAZARD ZONE
SECTION:
11-6-1: Statutory Authorization
11-6-2: Findings Of Fact
11-6-3: Statement Of Purpose
11-6-4: Methods Of Reducing Bank Erosion Losses
11-6-5: Definitions
11-6-6: Establishment Of Erosion Hazard Zones
11-6-7: Revisions To Erosion Hazard Zones
11-6-8: Development Within Erosion Hazard Zones
11-6-9: Penalties For Noncompliance
11-6-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The Legislature of the State of Utah has in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-
701 et seq., delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses. A significant portion of flood
losses are a result of bank erosion damage. Therefore, the City Council of
Washington City, Utah, does ordain as follows. (Ord. 2009-24, 12-9-2009)
11-6-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The erosion hazard areas of Washington City are subject to periodic
period of flooding which result in erosion damage, loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
and extraordinary public expenditures for erosion protection and relief, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These erosion hazard areas are created by the cumulative effect of
large flood events, the presence of erosive soils in the existing banks, the
intrusion of dense brushy vegetation (tamarisk) within the channel and a lack
of adequate bed grade control, thereby resulting in the frequent shifting of
the river active channel and bank erosion. (Ord. 2009-24, 12-9-2009)
11-6-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to bank erosion
in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly bank erosion protection
projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with bank
erosion and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
erosion hazard zones;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of property within erosion hazard zones in such a manner as to
minimize future blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
erosion hazard zone. (Ord. 2009-24, 12-9-2009)
11-6-4: METHODS OF REDUCING BANK EROSION LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and
provisions for:
   A.   Establishing erosion hazard zone delineations for floodplain management
and land use regulation purposes;
   B.   Permitting proposed development within erosion hazard zones only if it
is protected from erosion by structural measures and can be shown to have no
adverse impact on adjacent properties;
   C.   Adopting river management policies that support preservation of the
natural river systems, promote land uses that are compatible with a natural
river system, and limit construction of structural improvements inside the
erosion hazard zone, except to protect existing structures needed of public
safety such as bridges and existing buildings, or where the channel threatens
to move outside of the established erosion hazard zone;
   D.   Requiring a special use permit to regulate all development within the
erosion hazard zones. (Ord. 2009-24, 12-9-2009)
11-6-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this ordinance it’s most reasonable application.
 
                           Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
                           estate, including but not limited to, buildings or
DEVELOPMENT:               other structures, subdivisions, mining, dredging,
                           filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
                           operations or storage of equipment or materials.
                           An area where the hazard associated with the natural
                           process, either sudden or gradual, by which material
EROSION HAZARD ZONE (EHZ): from river banks are moved away causing a river
                           channel to move laterally as denoted by detailed
                           engineering analysis. (Ord. 2009-24, 12-9-2009)
 
11-6-6: ESTABLISHMENT OF EROSION HAZARD ZONES:
Erosion Hazard Zones (EHZ) are delineated on the adopted Washington City
Erosion Hazard Boundary Maps on file at the City Office. (Ord. 2009-24, 12-9-
2009)
11-6-7: REVISIONS TO EROSION HAZARD ZONES:
   A.   An adopted EHZ cannot be revised unless a detailed erosion hazard
analysis is prepared by a professional engineer with experience in river
mechanics, sediment transport, riverine erosion, hydraulics, hydrology and
geomorphology and submitted to the Floodplain Administrator including the
elements outlined below:
      1.   Historical Analyses:
         a.   Historical analysis of horizontal channel change:
            (1)   Quantify maximum long-term channel movement by comparing
channel position on rectified historical (oldest available) and modern (most
recent) aerial photographs and/or historical survey data.
            (2)   Quantify maximum single event channel movement by comparing
channel position on a sequence of rectified historical and modern aerial
photographs and/or historical survey data.
            (3)   Identify trends of channel movement (direction, scale, and
type) related to the current or historical channel pattern that may affect
future channel movement.
            (4)   Identify changes in channel pattern during the period of
historical record. Determine whether channel pattern changes are cyclical or
evolutionary, and relate pattern changes to the potential future channel
movement.
            (5)   For streams with limited historical data, expand the study
reach to adjacent stream reaches or adjacent watercourses (spatial data
substitutes for temporal data) to identify regional rates of historical channel
movement. Where regional rates of channel movement are significantly different
from historical channel movement in the project reach, the regional rates
should be used to estimate future erosion potential, or a physical reason for
the differences is required.
            (6)   Identify land use changes and human impacts to watercourse,
as well as the historical channel response to those changes. Relate the
potential for future land use changes and human impacts to future channel
changes.
            (7)   Catalogue the record of past floods by magnitude and relate
the observed historical channel changes to the flood series. Where no flood
records exist, examine rainfall records or flood series from adjacent
watercourses to identify periods of likely flooding or drought.
            (8)   Relate the observed historical scale of channel change to the
magnitude and frequency of historical floods, as well as to a potential future
flood series that might occur during the design life of the proposed
development.
         b.   Historical analysis of vertical channel change
            (1)   Quantify past bed elevation changes by comparing historical
and modern topographic mapping, field observations, and channel elevations
shown on structure as-built plans.
            (2)   Identify long-term degradation or aggradation trends in the
project reach indicated by the historical record.
            (3)   Relate observed changes in elevation to historical watershed
changes, natural riverine processes, and manmade changes to the river system.
            (4)   Predict future channel elevation changes and the anticipated
channel response given past trends and likely future watercourse and watershed
changes.
      2.   Geomorphic and Geologic Mapping and Analyses:
         a.   Delineate Holocene and Pleistocene surfaces and landforms.
Surficial geologic mapping for many parts of Utah is available from the Utah
Geological Survey (http://geology.utah.gov/). Detailed soils mapping may be
available in published soil surveys by the Soil Conservation Service or U.S.
Forest Service. References to publications describing procedures for mapping
geomorphic surfaces are provided elsewhere.
         b.   Subdivide Holocene surfaces by age, topography, and surficial
characteristics to constrain long-term rate of lateral movement in modern
geologic time. Map the extent and describe the physical characteristics of each
Holocene surface.
         c.   Conduct subsurface investigations using test pits or borings to
quantify physical differences between Holocene surfaces such as resistance to
erosion, clay content, degree of carbonate cementation, induration, sediment
size, bedding, degree of soil development, color, provenance, or other
characteristics.
         d.   Use geomorphic mapping to calibrate the minimum long-term rate of
lateral movement within the stream corridor, and maximum magnitude of channel
movement within different time periods represented by the Holocene surfaces.
         e.   Identify and map the extent and lithology of bedrock outcrops.
Identify physical barriers to lateral channel movement.
         f.   Describe modern geomorphic setting relative to local historical
geology and channel evolution to determine trends of expected future channel
change.
         g.   Examine a longitudinal profile of the stream to identify knick
points, convexities, or other slope irregularities relative to the position of
the proposed development. Predict changes in channel profile and discuss the
implications of profile changes on potential lateral and vertical erosion.
      3.   Field Investigation:
         a.   Describe and document channel and bank conditions in reach, at
minimum using appropriate field data collection methodologies.
         b.   Identify and document stream characteristics indicative of active
or recent lateral erosion. Provide photographs of diagnostic features.
         c.   Identify and document stream characteristics indicative of
resistance to lateral erosion. Provide photographs of diagnostic features.
         d.   Identify and document stream and floodplain characteristics
indicative of potential, historical, or active channel avulsions. Provide
photographs of diagnostic features.
         e.   Conduct stream classification analysis to identify the scale of
erosion potential by analogy to similar stream types.
         f.   Apply bank stability indexes based on field parameters. A variety
of bank stability indexes have been published.
         g.   Identify local bank failure mechanisms. Relate observed bank
failure mechanisms to flow hydraulics & sediment transport analysis results.
         h.   Identify evidence of long-term degradation or aggradation near
the proposed development site or in adjacent stream reaches.
         i.   Identify evidence of bed sediment movement, armoring,
imbrication, and scour for use in verifying the results of sediment transport
and scour analyses.
         j.   Identify archaeological evidence to help identify the age of
geomorphic surfaces.
      4.   Hydraulic Modeling:
         a.   Perform inundation mapping using HEC-RAS or other hydraulic
models to determine the relative magnitude and frequency (recurrence interval)
of floodplain inundation and inundation of Holocene geomorphic surfaces. Relate
the inundation frequency to avulsion potential and definition of channel bank
stations.
         b.   Determine channel and floodplain hydraulic data, such as
velocity, depth, and stream power, for a range of flood frequencies to
determine thresholds of channel and floodplain erosion, and for use in sediment
transport analyses. Plot changes in channel velocity and other hydraulic
variables versus stream distance to identify trends and discontinuities, and to
identify channel choke points and flow expansion areas that may impact the
lateral erosion potential.
         c.   Map overbank flow patterns at various flow frequencies, and
identify overbank flow concentration areas to identify possible avulsive flow
paths.
         d.   Determine bankfull discharge for use in applying regime and
hydraulic geometry equations.
      5.   Sediment Transport and Engineering Analysis:
         a.   Estimate sediment transport competence and size range of
transported material at various flow frequencies. Relate transport competence
to bed material gradations observed in the streambed and banks.
         b.   Estimate local scour at a range of flow frequencies and rates and
predict the impact of such scour on bank stability and lateral erosion.
         c.   Estimate armoring potential to whether vertical scour limit
exists in channel at a range of flow frequencies. If armoring is likely, revise
scour estimates accordingly and estimate the potential impacts of armoring on
the potential for lateral erosion.
         d.   Apply equilibrium and stable slope equations to estimate long-
term degradation or aggradation potential. Relate equilibrium slope predictions
to the observed longitudinal profile and potential armoring. Predict long-term
scour by comparing the estimated equilibrium slope and the existing channel
slope, considering natural or man-made grade control features that may serve as
hinge points for channel slope adjustments.
         e.   Apply bank resistance methodologies such as allowable velocity,
tractive force, and tractive shear to determine susceptibility of banks and
surfaces to lateral erosion or avulsion.
         f.   Apply regime and hydraulic geometry equations to determine
direction or potential for future channel adjustments in the main channel width
and depth.
         g.   Perform sediment continuity analysis to identify localize
sediment deficits or surplus and relate to areas of expected erosion and
deposition. Consider potential changes in predicted sediment deficit and
surplus due to channel pattern migration and lateral erosion.
         h.   Consolidate results of engineering and sediment transport
analyses to identify stable and unstable stream reaches and the expected
direction and magnitude of future channel changes.
      6.   Computer Modeling of Lateral Erosion:
         a.   Computer models have not advanced to the point of being able to
accurately predict single event or long-term lateral channel movement.
Therefore, computer modeling shall not be included in the scope of analysis for
a detailed erosion hazard analysis without prior approval by the Floodplain
Administrator. Sediment transport computer models have some utility for
identifying reaches of sediment deficit or sediment surplus, comparing relative
differences between management alternatives, or predicting the expected
direction of vertical channel changes.
      7.   Erosion Hazard Zone Map:
         a.   Based on the results of the methodologies and analyses outlined
above, the erosion hazard zone shall be delineated on a map.
      8.   Report:
         a.   An engineering report shall be prepared summarizing the
methodologies used to support the erosion hazard delineation, the assumptions
and limitations of those methodologies, the results of the analysis, and the
applicable time frame for the erosion hazard zone delineation. The report shall
include photographic and other documentation supporting the analyses and
conclusions. An engineer’s certification shall be provided with the erosion
hazard analysis report. (Ord. 2009-24, 12-9-2009)
11-6-8: DEVELOPMENT WITHIN EROSION HAZARD ZONES:
   A.   All new development proposals, including subdivisions, located within
an erosion hazard area shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
   B.   Development within the adopted EHZ may occur only if an engineering
analysis of the potential impacts of the development on adjacent properties and
the watercourse system sediment balance is completed. Note that, in general, it
is assumed that any channelization or other forms of structural erosion control
will impact adjacent parcels and will have negative cumulative impacts on the
watercourse that will require mitigation. It is the developer’s responsibility
to demonstrate that any such impacts are minimal, justified, and consistent
with the local jurisdiction’s regulatory objectives. The engineering analysis
should consist of the following elements:
      1.   Regulatory Floodplain/Floodway Impacts. Hydraulic modeling of the
pre- and post-project channel and floodplain conditions must be submitted and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator to document the following:
         a.   Floodplain:
            (1)   Changes in the 100-year water surface elevation must be less
than one foot within the property limits and:
            (2)   No changes in the 100-year water surface elevation may occur
on adjacent properties.
         b.   Floodway.
            (1)   No changes in the regulatory floodway elevation are
permitted, either within or adjacent to the proposed project limits.
      2.   Stream Stability and Sedimentation Impacts. Engineering analyses
must be submitted to document that no adverse impacts occur on adjacent
properties due to the proposed structural measures. It is recommended that the
applicant’s engineer meet with local floodplain management staff prior
beginning any analyses to discuss and review the engineering methodologies to
be used to evaluate sedimentation impacts.
      3.   Statement of Findings. An engineering report shall be prepared
summarizing the methodologies used to support the impact analysis, the
assumptions and limitations of those methodologies, and the results of the
analysis. The report shall include all computations and other documentation
supporting the analyses and conclusions. An engineer’s certification shall be
provided with the impact analysis report. The report shall include the
engineer’s professional opinion that when the erosion protection measures, if
any, are implemented, the proposed development will not be adversely affected
by erosion and that the erosion protection measures, if any, will not adversely
affect reaches or development upstream, downstream, and across river.
   C.    All development shall meet all applicable provisions of the
international building code with regard to wall and footing setbacks for
slopes, grading, drainage and compaction of fills.
   D.   All development shall provide for the perpetual inspection and
maintenance of the erosion protection, if any, at no cost to the City or other
public agency.
   E.   All development shall provide a maintenance and access easement to any
erosion protection. Access to erosion protection, if any, shall be located and
constructed so as to minimize flood damage.
   F.   New development shall obtain necessary Section (404) permit from the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, and Stream Alteration permits from the
office of the Utah State Engineer prior to any construction activity at no cost
to the City;
   G.   New development shall hold the City harmless from all claims resulting
from erosion or any other flood related damage to development within an Erosion
Hazard Zone by executing a “Flood and Erosion Hazard Disclaimer of Liability
and Agreement” and by placing a “Notice of Hazard” on the final plat if
applicable.
   H.   All development proposals including subdivisions shall have public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed so as to minimize flood damage.
   I.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided each lot or building pad
for all subdivision proposals and other development.
   J.   All development proposals including grading shall comply with the
recommendations of the Virgin River Master Plan prepared by Tom Moody, Natural
Channel Design, October, 2007. Copies are available from the public works
department.
   K.   All development including grading within the EHZ requires a Floodplain
Development Permit approved by the Floodplain Administrator. (Ord. 2009-24, 12-
9-2009)
11-6-9: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a Class B misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not more than $1,850.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or
both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of
Washington from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation. (Ord. 2009-24, 12-9-2009)
